                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DOES PLANNING REGULATION PROTECT INDEPENDENT RETAILERS?

                                             Raffaella Sadun

                                          Working Paper 19797
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19797


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2014




This paper is a revised version of Chapter III of my PhD thesis. I wish to thank John Van Reenen for
his invaluable advice. I am grateful to Emek Basker, Sharon Belenzon, Marianne Bertrand, Nick Bloom,
Jim Dana, Peter Davies, Rachel Griffith, Haike Harmgart, Jonathan Haskel, Marco Manacorda, Steve
Machin, Guy Michaels, Henry Overman, Steve Pischke, Steve Redding, Mark Schankerman, Philip
Schmidt-Dengler, and participants in seminars at Columbia, Harvard, Kellogg, LSE, MIT, Wharton,
Yale, and the ZEW “Workshop on the Retail Industry” for their useful comments. Disclaimer: This
work contains statistical data from the Office of National Statistics (ONS), which is Crown copyright
and reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and Queens Printer for Scotland. The
use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation
to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Raffaella Sadun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Does Planning Regulation Protect Independent Retailers?
Raffaella Sadun
NBER Working Paper No. 19797
January 2014
JEL No. K2,L10,L51,L81

                                              ABSTRACT

Regulations aimed at curbing the entry of large retail stores have been introduced in many countries
to protect independent retailers. Analyzing a planning reform launched in the United Kingdom in the
1990s, I show that independent retailers were actually harmed by the creation of entry barriers against
large stores. Instead of simply reducing the number of new large stores entering a market, the entry
barriers created the incentive for large retail chains to invest in smaller and more centrally located
formats, which competed more directly with independents and accelerated their decline. Overall, these
findings suggest that restricting the entry of large stores does not necessarily lead to a world with fewer
stores, but one with different stores, with uncertain competitive effects on independent retailers.


Raffaella Sadun
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rsadun@hbs.edu
I. Introduction

         Planning regulations are often used to curb the entry of large out of town retail stores—also

known as “big-boxes.” These policies, which are widely adopted across OECD countries (Ennis

2008; Pilat 1997), find their justification in the need to prevent the possible negative externalities

generated by big-boxes on local communities (e.g. congestion, damages to the environmental

décor) and, in particular, to protect the survival of smaller retailers and the amenities they

provide—such as personalized and local service—from new sources of competitive pressure.1

         In recent years, entry regulations have been severely criticized for their possible effects on

the efficiency of the retail sector. Constraining the entry of big-boxes, it has been argued, could

reduce economies of scale, and slow down the introduction of IT innovations complementary with

large surfaces (Basker, Klimek, and Pham 2010; Holmes 2001; McKinsey Global Institute 1998;

Schivardi and Viviano 2011). Furthermore, entry regulations could also hinder the reallocation of

resources and employment between and within firms, which appear to be a major driver of

productivity growth in the retail sector.2



1
    For example, WalMartwatch, an interest group that challenges Wal-Mart expansion across the

United States, reports on its website: “You can stop superstore sprawl with one sentence. Just

amend      your    zoning     code    to     place   a       limit   on   the   size   of   buildings”

(http://walmartwatch.com/battlemart/go/cat/zoning_regulations, retrieved on August 10th 2008).
2
    Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2006) document that between firms reallocation accounts for

90% of the impressive labor productivity growth experienced by the U.S. retail sector between

1990 and 2000, and that most of the reallocation dynamics are from small to large retail

establishments.



                                                         1
         In spite of the wide interest generated by this debate, relatively little empirical evidence

exists on the actual cost and benefits associated with planning regulations. In particular, the idea

that restricting the entry of large retail stores can effectively change the nature of retail competition

in favor of independent stores has received limited empirical investigation.3 This is primarily

dictated by the institutional nature of planning policies, which tend to show very little variation

within countries and over time, and are thus often indistinguishable from other country

characteristics.

         In this paper, I analyze the effects of planning regulations on independent retailers in the

United Kingdom exploiting a recent reform, which induced significant heterogeneity in the entry

constraints faced by large retail stores both over time and across geographies. The reform was

introduced in 1996 with the explicit aim to protect “town center vitality” from the alleged draining

effects of large out-of-town retail stores. The new planning guidelines raised the entry constraints

on stores in edge-of-center or out-of-center locations not already included in local development

plans, and on all retail developments above 2,500 square meters. Crucially, the implementation of

the new planning rules was left to the judgment of Local Authorities, which represent the lowest

level of local government in the U.K.. This setting generated a great deal of heterogeneity in the



3
    Bertrand and Kramarz (2002) and Viviano (2008) analyze the employment effects of planning

regulations in the French and Italian sectors, but do not focus explicitly on the interactions

between large stores and independent retailers. Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Krizan (2010) estimate

the effects of big-box entry on mom-and-pop stores in the Washington D.C. area, but do not

consider the role of planning regulations. See Section II for further details on the existing

literature.



                                                       2
restrictiveness of the planning policy both over time and across geographies, thus offering the

unique opportunity to study the impact of the new entry restrictions within a single country.

       Using detailed planning data across 303 English Local Authorities between 1993 and 2003,

I show that the reform coincided with a significant decline in retail planning grants over time, and

substantial heterogeneity in the number of grants across Local Authorities. While variation in

grants can be partly traced back to observable differences in demand across Local Authorities, it

also appears to vary according to local political factors. In particular, Local Authorities with a

greater fraction of Conservative councilors tended to approve fewer grants, even when a rich set of

time varying controls and Local Authority fixed effects is controlled for. This finding reflects the

political weight of middle-class homeowners and small retailers in the Conservative party, which

were more likely to be concerned about the possible competitive generated by big boxes, as well as

about the downgrading effect they were feared to have on property values due to increased

congestion and impact on environmental décor.

       To evaluate the employment effects of the planning reforms, I match the number of

planning grants given in the Local Authority with yearly employment data on retail establishments

drawn from previously untapped census data on between 1998 and 2004. The main finding of the

paper is that independent retailers were actually harmed by the creation of entry barriers against

large shops. Instead of simply reducing the number of new large stores entering a market, entry

regulations created the incentive for large retail chains to invest in smaller and more centrally

located formats, which competed more directly with independents and accelerated their decline.

The analysis shows that a one standard deviation decrease in the number of planning grants given

in a Local Authority coincided with a 1.7% increase in the employment growth of small chain

formats, and a 0.48% decrease in the employment growth of independent retailers. Furthermore,



                                                     3
the increase in the employment growth of small chain formats is directly and negatively correlated

with the employment growth of independent retailers.

       A possible concern with these results is that the number of granted applications may proxy

for unobserved factors correlated with retail employment growth, but different from the

restrictiveness of the regulatory policy. I address these concerns in three steps. First, I use a

placebo experiment to show that planning grants have no correlation with the employment growth

of the manufacturing sector, and they therefore do not appear to proxy for unobserved factors

correlated with general employment growth at the Local Authority level. Second, I show that the

results are robust to richer empirical specifications, including a larger set of demand controls and

Local Authority specific employment trends. Third, I analyze the employment effects of the

planning grants with an instrumental variable (IV) approach, which isolates the variation in

planning grants determined by entry regulation from that determined by local demand conditions.

The IV strategy is similar to the one adopted by Bertrand and Kramarz (2002), in which the

instruments exploit the fact that the concession of planning grants was managed by elected

politicians, whose decisions were influenced by the electorate attitude towards large stores rather

than possible unobserved shocks to retail employment. Reassuringly, the IV results confirm the

relationships described above. The IV results on the employment effects of planning grants on

small formats and independents are largely robust to a number of checks, including the use of

alternative functional forms in the implementation of the IV strategy, the use of alternative timing

assumption for the planning restrictions, the inclusion of a richer set of time varying control

variables and the use of national instead of local election results as instruments.

       The economic magnitude of the estimates is far from negligible. According to the baseline

OLS and IV estimates, respectively, the planning reform accounts for between 4% to up to 22% of



                                                       4
the increase in the employment of small formats opened by large chains, and 6% up to 26% of the

decline in employment experienced by independent retailers between 1998 and 2004. Finally, the

results suggest that the effects of planning on both small formats and independent stores operate

primarily via the extensive margin, i.e. entry of small chain formats and exit of independent stores.

       Overall, these findings suggest that the effects of planning regulations interact with the

store strategies of large retail chains. In this setting, restricting the entry of large stores does not

necessarily lead to a world with fewer stores, but one with different stores, with uncertain

competitive effects on independent retailers.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an overview of the

existing literature. Section III describes the basic features of the U.K. planning regime and the

1996 reform. Section IV shows basic summary statistics data on the industry and its evolution over

time, including the shift made by retail chains towards small formats. Section V focuses on the

econometric modeling and the identification strategy and Section VI presents the main results.

Section VII concludes.



II. Literature Review

       The paper is related to several strands of the literature. The employment effects of planning

regulations were first investigated by Bertrand and Kramarz (2002). Exploiting cross sectional and

time series variation in the implementation of the French planning policy, they find that a more

lenient approach towards planning regulation is associated with significant retail employment

growth. Similar to this paper, Bertrand and Kramarz corroborate the OLS result with IV estimates,

using instruments based on local political preferences. This paper differs from Bertrand and

Kramarz in that it adopts the same identification strategy to investigate in much more detail the



                                                       5
mechanisms though which planning affects retail employment, and in particular the reaction of

large retail chains to the new entry barriers. Viviano (2008) investigates the employment effects a

recent reform, which introduced significant heterogeneity in planning restrictiveness across Italian

regions. She uses a difference in differences approach to show that entry regulations have a

negative and sizeable impact on employment growth, including small retail trade shops, but the

analysis does not explore the sources of employment growth, or the mechanism behind the

employment effects of planning policies.4

         Although this paper provides the first analysis of the effects of the recent U.K. planning

changes on independent retailers, other studies have looked at their impact on different economic

outcomes. Smith (2006) combines a random households survey with a dataset of store

characteristics to investigate the effect of the planning reform on consumer and producer welfare.

He concludes that the U.K. planning reforms imposed suboptimal store characteristics on both

consumers and firms, forcing them to focus on small instead of middle-sized stores, which is

entirely consistent with some of the findings presented in this paper. More directly related to this

paper is Griffith and Harmgart (2008), investigating the effect of planning regulation on the U.K.

market structure, namely on the changes in the composition of the U.K. retail industry between

large out-of-town and small chain stores. Using a structural model of retail competition, they show



4
    Using similar data, Schivardi and Viviano (2011) show that entry regulations across Italian

regions are also associated with higher profit margins and lower productivity of incumbent firms.

Furthermore, they also show a negative effect of planning regulations on ICT investments and

food prices. Unfortunately this analysis is not replicable in this context due to the absence of

productivity data for the vast majority of retail firms included in the U.K. Census.



                                                      6
that planning regulation has a statistically significant impact on the number of firms operating in a

region, although the effects are halved once observable differences across Local Authorities in

population density, employment, and distance from town centers are taken into account.

Reassuringly, the main results and the economic magnitudes presented in the current paper are

robust to the inclusion of these additional fixed and time varying controls in the regressions.

Furthermore, while this paper takes into explicit consideration potential biases arising from the

endogeneity issues surrounding the entry of large supermarkets, these are largely ignored in

Griffith and Harmgart. Cheshire and Hilber (2008) look at the economic impact of planning

constraints, which apply specifically to office spaces. Using a method proposed by Glaeser,

Gyourko, and Saks (2005), they provide evidence for the existence of a “regulatory tax” on the

rental price of office spaces, which they quantify to be an “order of magnitude greater than the

peak observed in the most restricted sector, in the most restricted markets in the United States

(Cheshire and Hilber 2008, F215).” The Cheshire and Hilber study also highlights the political

economy determinants of planning policy, inasmuch as business control makes a significant

difference to the tightness of regulatory constraints on office building. More recently, Cheshire,

Hilber, and Kaplanis (2011) adapt the same identification strategy proposed in this paper to

estimate the effects of planning regulation on retail productivity. Their results—based on a small

cross sectional dataset of English chain stores—show the presence of significant and negative

effects of regulation on firm productivity, due to the emergence of smaller retail formats and the

suboptimality of retail locations induced by the regulatory restrictions.

       Finally, this paper is related to the growing literature looking at the competitive effects of

Wal-Mart and K-Mart stores on local competitors across U.S. counties. The studies conducted so

far using county level data have produced mixed results. Basker (2005), for example, finds that



                                                      7
Wal-Mart is associated with an overall positive effect on retail employment immediately after

entry, which is halved after five years, when some small and medium retail establishments close.

Using a different IV approach and Wal-Mart entry data, Neumark, Zhang, and Ciccarella (2008)

find a negative effect of Wal-Mart entry (−2% to −4%) on total retail employment and on payrolls

per worker (−3.5%). Jia (2008) looks at the effect of Wal-Mart and Kmart entry on small discount

retailers using a fully structural approach, and finds that Wal-Mart expansion from the late 1980s

to the late 1990s explains about fifty to seventy percent of the net negative change in the number

of small discount retailers. More recently, these initial findings have been refined through the use

of more disaggregated data. Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Krizan (2010), for example, use a very rich

dataset providing location, product, and employment information for the population of retail stores

active in the Washington D.C. Metropolitan area to show that the impact of big-box entry on other

retailers (including mom-and-pop stores) is characterized by considerable heterogeneity. More

specifically, negative employment effects can be found only for stores that operate in the

immediate area and same detailed industry of the new big-box. Ellickson and Grieco (2011) use a

full census of the supermarket industry to investigate the impact of Wal-Mart entry in the grocery

sector and show that the effects on competitors are highly localized (within a three mile radius of

distance from the location of Wal-Mart entry). With respect to this literature, this paper provides

the first explicit estimates of the big-box effect in a European context. This is of interest, as the

interactions between big-boxes and independent stores might be differ in a context—such as the

one prevalent in Europe—of higher agglomeration and density.




                                                     8
III. Planning Reforms in the United Kingdom



III.A. The U.K. Planning Policy: Overview

         Similarly to other countries, in the United Kingdom, new developments need to comply

with environmental and urban design considerations, which are described in general planning

guidelines.

         While the broad characteristics of the planning regime remained fairly constant over time,

the attitude vis-à-vis big-box stores significantly changed towards the first half of the 1990s. Until

the late 1980s, the liberalizing efforts of Mrs. Thatcher’s government determined a laissez faire

approach towards large retail stores, which coincided with a strong wave of retail decentralization

and a significant increase in big-box openings. However, in the early 1990s planning policies

registered a drastic change. The main concern driving these changes was that large and peripheral

retail stores were draining activities away from town centers, and allegedly causing their socio-

economic decline. Therefore, in order to “sustain and enhance the vitality and viability of town

centers,” new entry regulations were introduced in 1993 and, more significantly, in 1996.

         The new planning guidelines imposed specific entry constraints on stores in an edge-of-

center or out-of-center locations not already included in local development plans. The new

regulations required new out-of-town developments to comply with the “sequential test” (i.e. the

proof that no other central location was suitable for the new shop) and the “test of need” (i.e. the

proof that the new development was “needed” to meet local demand conditions).5 Furthermore, the



5
    The Competition Commission (2000) interpreted the sequential test and the test of need in the

following way: “Developers proposing new supermarkets outside town, district, or local centers,



                                                      9
planning reform required the admissibility of these new developments had to be judged upon their

impact on centers within their catchment area, including their effects on economic growth,

employment, and the existence of local shops and services.6 These criteria had to be applied to all

major retail developments, defined as being above 1,000 square meters.7 Since large retail stores

are generally located out-of-town, the new guidelines implicitly introduced additional costs for all

large supermarkets. Taken together, with these changes “guidance evolved from a position in



where the proposal is not in accordance with an up-to-date development plan strategy that is

consistent with national planning guidance, must demonstrate that: (a) there is a ‘need’ for the

retail floor space proposed; and (b) there are no more central sites that are suitable or available for

developing such a store, after having been flexible about format, scale, design, and amount of car

parking required in a genuine attempt to fit into the center (p. 269).”
6
    The emphasis on employment and local shops and services was explicitly introduced in a

clarification of the planning policy issued in 2005. “Local authorities should, where appropriate,

seek to protect existing facilities which provide for people’s day-to-day needs and seek to remedy

deficiencies in local shopping and other facilities to help address social exclusion” (ODPM 2005,

p. 19).
7
    The 1,000 square meters threshold is a lower bound for the concept of “large store” by industry

standards, For example, Tesco—the leading supermarket chain in the United Kingdom—classifies

large and medium stores as follows: Hypermarkets, 64,000 (5,946 square meters); Superstores,

31,000 square feet (2,880 square meters); Metro, 11,800 square feet (1,096 square meters). Small

convenience stores (Express) are on average 2,100 square feet (195 square meters). See

www.tescocorporate.com/images/Tesco%20PLC%2030-mar-05.pdf (accessed August 2008).



                                                      10
which out-of-center development was acceptable to one in which it should be seen as a last resort”

(Competition Commission 2000, p. 266).

         The reform generated a significant shock to the planning system, adding non-trivial

monetary and non-monetary costs to the application process. For example, the Barker Review

(2006) reports that applications for large retail stores cost an average of £70,000, and in a recent

inquiry conducted on the U.K. Grocery market, the Competition Commission (2000) reports an

average cost of £50,000, with application delays for the major supermarkets varying from a

minimum of 4 months to a maximum of 24 months.

         Unsurprisingly, the reforms coincided with a stark reduction in the number of planning

applications submitted for the opening of large retail stores. A study commissioned by the U.K.

Government (ODPM 2004) documents that the number of planning applications for major retail

developments experienced a drastic fall in the immediate aftermath of the 1996 planning reform,

from an average of approximately 1,400 annual grants between 1990 and 1995, to an average of

1,160 grants between 1996 and 2001, with an overall 16% decline in the number of grants between

the two sub-periods.

         While the 1996 reform created a discontinuity in the restrictiveness of the entry regulations

over time, it also generated cross sectional heterogeneity by assigning the responsibility for the

implementation of the new central guidelines to Local Authorities. Local Authorities represent the

lowest level of local government in the United Kingdom, and their boundaries generally coincide

with well-defined socio-geographic entities (a town, or a city and its surroundings), with the major

exception of London, which is subdivided into 32 Boroughs.8 With the new regime, Local



8
    In some areas, there is a county council responsible for some services within a county, with



                                                      11
Authorities became responsible for the determination of planning applications in the area under

their jurisdiction (an activity defined as development control), within the national guidelines set by

the central government planning policies and regional or local development plans. While some

minor forms of development would not need planning permission, Local Authorities became

responsible for determining approval of major applications. The decision had to be based on

widespread consultation with interested parties, including those likely affected by the development

in the local areas. Typically, the application for a grant would also be preceded by significant pre-

application discussions between developers and local authorities, as well as local communities. 9

Overall, the reforms thus made the number of applications granted by Local Authorities a function

of both local demand conditions, which generated the number of potential entrants in the market,

and the activity of locally elected councilors and planning officials, which determined the extent to

which central entry regulations were binding in the Local Authority and, therefore, the selection of

the actual entrants. I analyze the actual micro level variation in planning outcomes both over time

and across geographies in the next section.



several district councils responsible for other services, including planning. The units analysed in

this paper are thus district councils. See Appendix for more details on the structure of the British

Local Government system.
9
    The Secretary of State retained the power to decide over appeals presented with regards to

planning applications refused or not determined within a given period of time, but in 2004/2005

this involved only about 3% of all planning applications. The Secretary of State also had the power

to also “call-in” particularly controversial applications. In 2005/2006 about 50 call-ins decisions

were issued. More details on the planning system can be found in Appendix.



                                                     12
III.B. The UK Planning Policy: Micro Level Analysis



Planning Data

          To analyze the implementation of the regulatory guidelines at the local level, I use official

planning data drawn from the applications database maintained by the Office of the Deputy Prime

Minister (ODPM)—the institution in charge of overseeing planning matters in England until

2006.10 The ODPM provided access to the list of all retail applications11 processed between 1993

and 2003, classified by type of development, relevant Local Authority, and year. The planning

application data employed in the analysis refers to all “Major Developments”, which include all

large retail sites above 1,000 square meters. Unfortunately, the ODPM data does not provide the

exact location of the development within a Local Authority, or the brand name of the applicant.

This lack of information constraints the empirical analysis to Local Authority aggregates, and

requires the assumption that Local Authorities behave as fairly independent markets.12



10
     Planning data for Scotland and Wales was not available for analysis. The ODPM was rebranded

as the “Department for Communities and Local Government” in 2006, when the Deputy Prime

Minister became a minister without portfolio and his office had purely secretarial functions.
11
     The data refers to the use classes A1 (Shops: including grocery shops, Shops, post offices, travel

agents, hairdressers, funeral directors, internet cafés, dry cleaners) and A3 (Restaurants and cafés:

including use for the sale of food and drink for consumption on the premises).
12
      For this reason, Local Authorities for which the independence assumption is obviously

inappropriate are excluded from the analysis. These are the 32 small and adjacent Local



                                                       13
       In what follows, planning restrictiveness is inferred from the number of planning

applications for major retail developments granted by the Local Authority in any given year after

the planning reform was introduced. Using the number of grants instead of the share of

applications granted is justified by the documented importance of pre-application discussions

between Local Authorities and potential applicants (Competition Commission 2000). This implied

that the share of applications granted was actually very high (on average 80% of the submitted

planning applications were granted) in the period under consideration. In this context, using the

share of applications granted may potentially underestimate the stringency of the planning regime.

       The main summary statistics describing the planning data at the Local Authority level,

together with basic information on the Local Authorities included in this analysis, are reported in

Table 1. On average, over the period 1993–2003 Local Authorities approved only 2.6 large stores

openings per year (or 0.022 applications per ‘000 people), with 22% of the sample granting zero

applications in a given year. Consistently with the discussion presented in Section III.A, the

number of planning grants experienced a sharp decline immediately after the introduction of the

1996 planning reform. Figure 1—which plots the evolution of retail planning grants over time

using Local Authority level data—reveals that this decline cannot be attributed to a declining trend

pre-dating the 1996 reform.



Authorities (Boroughs) representing London, and Local Authorities with a population of more

than 400,000 people, whose complexity is not likely to be captured by the aggregated data. This

corresponds to the exclusion of all Local Authorities in the 99th percentile of the distribution of

population across Local Authorities (Birmingham, Bradford, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, and

Sheffield).



                                                    14
          The data also shows considerable variation in planning activity across Local Authorities.

Figure 2 maps all Local Authorities with available data according to the average number of major

planning applications they granted between 1993 and 2003, with darker colors denoting areas with

more intense activity. The two subsections below explore two types of factors driving the cross

sectional heterogeneity in planning grants: demand drivers and political influence.



Demand Drivers

          Table 2 analyzes the role of demand drivers in accounting for the variation of retail

planning grants across Local Authorities, looking at the correlation between planning grants and

basic demographic and socio-economic variables across the Local Authorities between 1993 and

2004.13 This reveals that major retail grants are more likely in more populated areas (column 1),

and in Local Authorities with a higher fraction of urban areas (column 2). In terms of

demographics and income differences, Local Authorities with a younger population (expressed as

the fraction of people below 15 years old, column 3), lower average income (column 4, not

significant) and a lower percentage of college graduates (column 5), are characterized by a higher

number of planning grants. When all the demographic and socio-economic variables are included

in the regressions, they all retain similar magnitudes and significance levels (column 6), with the

exception of the variable describing the fraction of urban areas within the Local Authority, which

turns negative and insignificant.

          These patterns are compatible with the notion that large stores—which focus their activity



13
     All the regressions reported in Table 2 include year dummies to control for countrywide shocks,

and standard errors are clustered at the Local Authority level.



                                                     15
on the convenience of their offer—tend to target price sensitive consumers. On the other hand,

they could also reflect the fact that poorer Local Authorities might be more willing to accept large

retail developments for regeneration purposes.14 When included together (as in column 6), these

controls explain 17% of the observed variance in planning grants, against the 0.07% explained by

year dummies alone, while Local Authority fixed effects and time dummies account for 48% of

grants’ variance.



Political Influence

          As discussed above, the 1993 and 1996 reforms delegated to locally elected councilors the

implementation of the entry regulations, thus generating a potentially important link between

political power in the Local Authority and planning grants.

          In order to analyze the importance of political considerations in the implementation of the

regulatory guidelines, I focus in particular on the relationship between the share of seats assigned

to Conservative councilors and the number of planning grants conceded at the Local Authority

level. More than any other party in the United Kingdom, Conservatives have traditionally been

associated with a strong opposition towards big-boxes, also defined as Nimby-ism (Not in My

Backyard).15 This opposition finds its roots primarily in the political weight of middle-class



14
     The option of using planning as a regeneration tool was explicitly stated in the 1996 national

planning guidelines (PPG6 1996).
15
     This view is broadly confirmed by the results of a recent survey commissioned by the Saint

Consulting Group (a private group focusing on planning issues). The survey shows that the

majority of people opposing new developments in their local areas voted Conservative. Moreover,



                                                      16
homeowners and small retailers in the Conservative party, which were more likely to be concerned

about the possible competitive generated by big boxes,16 as well as about the downgrading effect

they were feared to have on property values due to increased congestion and impact on

environmental décor. Others (Greed, 2000) mention the importance of more opportunistic

considerations for the Nimby attitude of Conservative politicians in the early 1990s, such as the

need to capture the Green vote (at the time 15% of voters were voting Green and this was seen as a

serious threat to retaining a Conservative majority).17

          The relevance of the Conservative party shares for the concession of retail planning grants

can be empirically analyzed combining ODPM planning data with the British Local Election

Database (BLED),18 which provides candidate-level information on the outcomes of all local



Conservative voters tended to oppose convenience food stores and supermarkets more than any

other party (Saint Consulting 2009).
16
     According to the British Election Study, in the 2001 general election small business owners

(including retailers) were three times more likely to vote Conservative than any of the two other

major parties. Small business owners accounted for 5.85% of all Conservative votes, against the

1.84% of Labor and 1.91% of Liberal Democrat votes. The British Election Study follows the

“Goldthorpe-Heath” classification, which provides a total of eleven different socio-economic cells.

The cell “Small proprietors, with Employment” is the one including independent retailers and

where the difference between the Conservatives and the other parties is starkest.
17
     Bertrand and Kramarz (2002) discuss the support for entry regulations by Right wing parties in

France.
18
     The BLED data is described in the Appendix.



                                                      17
elections that have taken place in the United Kingdom between the late 19th century and 2003. For

the purposes of this paper, the data has been aggregated at the Local Authority level, and the

sample constrained to the 303 English Local Authorities that are at the base of the results

presented in the econometric section.

          Table 3 explores the relationship between Conservative and retail planning in the time

period 1993-2003 using Local Authority level aggregates. Column 1 shows the correlation

between the number of major retail applications granted by the Local Authority and a dummy

identifying Conservatives absolute majorities in the council (the regression controls for year

dummies). The correlation is very strong, with a coefficient of −0.669, significant at the 1% level.

Further analysis shows that even the relative majority dummy and the share of seats won by

Conservatives in the elections are associated with more restrictive planning outcomes (columns 2

and 3).19

          The negative correlation between planning grants and Conservative power could be driven

by specific demand characteristics of the Conservative electorate, such as differences in income or

skills. Therefore, column 4 includes the demand variables that were found to be significantly

associated with retail grants in Table 2.20 Including these extra controls lowers the point estimate



19
     The omitted category in columns (3)-(6) is the share of seats going to all other parties.
20
     These are the log of population (measured in 2001), the log of median hourly wages, the fraction

of urban and village areas, the percentage of people below 15 years, and the percentage of people

with a college degree (measured in 2001) in the Local Authority. Conservative majorities are more

likely in areas with higher median hourly wages and a higher percentage of college graduates,

while they are less likely in more populated and urban areas.



                                                        18
of the Conservative share, although the variable remains significant at the 1% level. A further

concern is that the correlation between planning outcomes and Conservatives could be driven by

unobserved trends at the Local Authority level. Columns 5 and 6 repeat the estimation including,

respectively, Local Authority fixed effects, and Local Authority trends. In both cases the point

estimate of the variable measuring Conservative shares is lower, but still significant at the 10%

level even in this demanding specification.



Summary

          In summary, the data shows considerable variation in planning grants both over time and

across Local Authorities in the post-reform years. While demand drivers are certainly an important

source of cross sectional heterogeneity in grants, there is also evidence that political considerations

– and in particular the political affiliation of the councilors in charge of implementing the planning

policy – affected the number of planning grants, and hence the entry of large retail stores.

          Section V exploits the local variation in planning grants and its political determinants to

explicitly estimate the employment effects of planning regulation in the retail sector, and discusses

in detail the identification challenges associated with this exercise. In the next section I provide a

brief overview of the employment data and the evolution of the retail sector in the post reform

period.



IV. Retail Employment in the Post Reform Period

          To evaluate the effects of planning regulation on retail employment, I match the planning

grants data described in Section III with employment data aggregated at the Local Authority level.

In this section I describe the data sources and definitions used in the analysis and provide a basic



                                                      19
overview of the industry and the changes experienced in the post reform period.



IV.A Sources and Definitions

           The employment data is drawn from previously untapped data files of the U.K. Census

(Interdepartmental Business Register, IDBR).21 The IDBR is the base of most micro level surveys

run in the United Kingdom (see the Appendix for details). The files provide information on the

exact location and employment of the population of every retail stores active in the United

Kingdom, for each year between 1998 and 2004. 22

           I focus the analysis on all stores classified under the industry code “Non specialized retail”

(SIC 521), which includes stores selling non-specialised food and/or beverages, newsagents, and

tobacconists. This sector alone accounts for 60% of total retail employment in the United

Kingdom, and the largest share of single-establishment firms. This is also the sector that was more



21
     This is a major difference with respect to Bertrand and Kramarz (2002), where retail region-time

specific employment aggregates were drawn from the French Labour Force Survey. Using store

level data is clearly needed in this context, since the focus is on specific type of retailers rather the

than broad employment aggregates.
22
     The store level data also provides zip codes, which can be matched to Cartesian coordinates and

potentially identify the precise location of the store relative to the town center. The main challenge

in pursuing this type of analysis is that the precise definition of U.K. town centers is still in its

experimental         phase,      and     limited      to        few   geographic      locations.     See

http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/projects/projectDetail.asp?ID=23 (accessed September 2011) for more

details.



                                                           20
likely to expand via large retail formats in the pre-regulation period (Haskel and Sadun 2011), and

thus more likely to be affected by the entry regulations described in Section III.

         In the census data every store is associated with a firm level identifier, which enables me to

distinguish between single and multi establishment firms, and to calculate total firm employment

using the sum of employment across all stores. This richness of information is especially important

in the context of this paper, for two reasons. First, this allows me to isolate the effects of planning

on independent stores, i.e. single establishment firms. Second, it also gives me the opportunity to

evaluate the effects of planning on the other firms competing with independents, and in particular

on the largest U.K. retail chains, which were much more exposed to the new planning restrictions

given their reliance on large stores (Haskel and Sadun, 2011). To explicitly consider the

heterogeneity of the effect of planning on different retail firms, in what follows I thus distinguish

between three firm types: large retail chains (multi establishment firms with more than 10,000

employees), small retail chains (multi establishment firms with fewer than 10,000 employees) and

independent retailers (single establishment retail firms).23




23
     The 10,000 employees cutoff was chosen to isolate the largest retail firms with sufficient

precision, without infringing the Census non-disclosure requirements. There are in total 69 firms

in the industry 521 that satisfy this requirement. Of these, only 33 have both large and small retail

formats (as defined using the 28 employees per store cutoff used to identify small formats). Tables

A2 and A3 in Appendix show that the main results discussed in the paper are robust to alternative

classification methods.



                                                      21
IV.B Changes in Store Formats and Employment in the Post-Reform Period

         To give some sense of the industry structure and the changes experienced in the sector

during the period under consideration, Table 4 shows basic summary statistics for firms and store

employment for two time periods, 1998, the first year in which the census data is available, and the

last available post reform year, 2004. The left side of the table focuses on number of employees

and stores for each type of firms in the two time periods, while the right side shows the size (in

terms of employees) of stores belonging to these firms at different points of the store distribution.

         Large retail chains account for the vast majority of employment in the sector (above 70%

in both 1998 and 2004), followed by small chains (15% on average between the two time periods)

and independents (10%). Large chains are also more likely to open larger stores (median store size

employment in 1998 was 33 for large retailers, vs. 17 for small chains and 2 for independent

retailers), and thus account for a much smaller fraction of stores (15%, vs. 17% for small chains ad

65% for independents).

         The data points to the remarkable heterogeneity in the growth of employment across the

three types of retail firms in the post reform period. Large retail chains experienced sustained

growth in employment (22%) between 1998 and 2004, while small retail chains and independents

declined sharply (-13.5% and -7.3% respectively). Interestingly, however, the growth of large

retail chains coincided with a dramatic decrease in the size of their stores. This is presented on the

right side of Panel A, which shows a sharp decline in the size of the stores belonging to these firms

(measured in terms of store level employees) at the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles of the store

distribution.24 The shift of U.K. retail chains toward smaller formats is in contrast with the relative



24
     In line with the results emerging form the census data, Griffith and Harmgart (2008) show that



                                                      22
stability in store size of small retail chains and independents (Panel B and C). This is also in clear

contrast with the retail chains development in other countries. For example, over the same time

period the average store size of national retail chains in the United States—where superstore entry

is largely unregulated—increased from 142 to 152 employees (Haskel, Jarmin, Motohashi, and

Sadun 2007).

         The shift towards small formats is an important factor to take into account when evaluating

the employment effect of planning regulations on independent retailers since - while standard big

boxes would be typically located in out of town locations - smaller store formats were much more

centrally placed and targeted towards occasional urban shoppers (Griffith and Harmgarth, 2008),

and thus much closer to the activity of independent retailers. Table 5 presents some data to

illustrate this point. The table is based on the population of stores belonging to retail chains with

more than 10,000 employees. First, I compute for each store a measure of the number of other

retail stores active in the same postcode in the 1998-2004 time period, distinguishing between

stores belonging to retail chains, and stores belonging to independent retailers. Second, I regress

this variable on a dummy taking value one if the store is a “small format”, i.e. if the average

employment between 1998 and 2004 is equal or lower than 28 full time employees, which is the

median number of employees of store belonging to large retail chains at the end of 2004.25 The



the number of small convenience stores opened by the top four U.K. retail chains grew

exponentially between 1997 and 2002, while the number of large supermarkets remained constant

or declined over the same time period.
25
     Appendix Table A2 shows that results are similar using other classification methods to define

small formats.



                                                     23
regression includes Local Authority fixed effects and the errors are clustered at the postcode level.

This analysis shows that, whereas small formats are much less likely to have stores belonging to

other retail chains in their vicinity (column 1, -1.04 stores, significant at the 1% level), they are

much more likely to be close to independent stores (column 2, +0.38 stores, significant at the 1%

level).26

         Overall, the data suggest that the post reform period coincided with a significant change in

the store strategy of large retail chains, namely the movement towards smaller and more centrally

located stores, and with a sustained decline in the employment of independent stores. In the next

section I will investigate the extent to which the planning reforms can account for these changes

using detailed micro level data.



V. Modeling the Impact of Planning on Retail Employment

         The stylized facts shown in the previous section beg a number of questions. First, did

planning cause the significant increase in small formats opened by the large U.K. retail chains?

Second, how did the reduction in the number of large stores opened and the growth of smaller

formats end up affecting independent retailers?

         As discussed in Section III, the U.K. reforms provide a unique setting to empirically

investigate these questions, exploiting variation in planning over time and across different Local



26
     The results are similar if instead of using the absolute number of independent stores in the

postcode I take as dependent variable the share of independent stores in the postcode. The

coefficient on the small format dummy in the same specification is 0.1038, significant at the 1%

level.



                                                     24
Authorities. I first describe the basic econometric set-up, and then discuss identification challenges

and possible ways to address them. Table A.1 in the Appendix provides the basic summary

statistics for the variables included in the regressions.



V.A Basic Econometric Model: From Big Boxes to Planning Grants

        I start from a primitive econometric model, where retail employment is a function of the

number of large retail stores—“big-boxes”—active in the Local Authority:



     Empijt=θBBjt+γXjt+βt+ αj+µjt                                                   (V.1)



     Since the implementation of the regulatory guidelines vary at the Local Authority level, I first

assign each retail store to a Local Authority based on a five digits postcode identifier, and then

compute employment aggregates at the Local Authority level, i.e. Empijt is the natural logarithm of

the sum of employment of all stores belonging to retail firm type i, in Local Authority j at time t.

BBjt is the number of big-boxes operating in Local Authority j at time t; βt are year fixed effects

common across all Local Authorities; Xjt is a vector of time-varying Local Authority

characteristics.

        In order to study the impact of regulation on the industry level changes discussed in Table

4, I consider three types of retail firms, each corresponding to a different i: large retail chains

(multi establishment firms with at least 10,000 employees); small retail chains (multi

establishment firms with less than 10,000 employees); and independent retailers (single

establishment retail firms). Furthermore, to investigate the role of regulation in determining the

shift towards smaller store formats for retail chains with more of 10,000 employees, I decompose



                                                       25
the employment growth of these firms between two types of store types: “Small Formats” – i.e. all

large chain stores with less than 28 employees - and “Large Formats” – all large chain stores with

more than 28 employees. This allows me to directly evaluate whether in areas with more

restrictive implementation of the planning reform experienced a more rapid increase of small store

formats.

         Year dummies are included in all regressions to capture aggregate economic shocks that

might affect retail employment. Since Local Authorities have very little discretion in setting their

own policy, with the notable exception of planning matters, year dummies should control for most

of the other policy changes that might have occurred over the period under study such as, for

example, minimum wage policies.27 Standard errors are clustered at the Local Authority level to

control for autocorrelation patterns of unknown form (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004).

Furthermore, all employment regressions are weighted by the share of population living in the

Local Authority to ensure representativeness of the results.

         The residual is composed by a constant (αj) and a time-varying local component (µjt). To

control for the αj—fixed factors that might affect the level of the retail employment aggregates in

the Local Authorities— I apply a first difference transformation to equation (V.1). This leads to

the following equation:



      ΔEmpijt=θΔBBjt+γΔXjt+Δβt+Δµjt                                                (V.2)




27
     The minimum wage was introduced on a national basis in the United Kingdom in 1999. See

Draca, Machin, and Van Reenen (2006) for details.



                                                     26
where ΔEmpijt is the logarithmic one year employment growth of firm type i in Local Authority j at

time t. In each period, the change in the number of big-boxes working in a Local Authority can be

expressed in net entry terms, i.e. ΔBBjt=BB_entryjt−BB_exitjt. Under the assumption that big-boxes

have negligible exit (i.e. BB_exitjt-1≈0) given their high entry costs,28 employment growth can be

expressed as a function of the number of big-boxes entering the Local Authority:



       ΔEmpijt=θBB_entryjt+γΔXjt+Δβt+Δµjt                                            (V.3)



         In what follows, I will assume that the number of big-boxes entering a Local Authority at

time t is assumed to be identical to the number of planning applications for large stores granted by

the Local Planning Authority some time s before the actual entry of the store. This assumption

rests on two specific aspects of the planning regulations discussed in Section III, and namely: a)

that the opening of a big-box requires a planning grant; and b) that planning grants are very likely

to be transformed into actual stores given the non-trivial monetary and non-monetary costs

associated with the planning process. Defining as s the time that is needed to build a big-box from

the moment the planning application has been granted, i.e. BB_entryjt=Grantsjt-s.

         An important consideration relates to the timing needed for a planning grant to be

transformed into an actual store. Since no further licenses are needed once the planning application



28
     This assumption is primarily dictated by the lack of precise exit data on large stores. Table 8,

column 8 includes a robustness check including a proxy for the exit of large retail stores as an

additional control in the regression and shows that the result are robust to the inclusion of this

control.



                                                      27
is obtained, s essentially corresponds to a construction lag.29 Although the precise delay will vary

from case to case, official government reports and the assumptions made by retail developers

suggest an average construction delay between one and two years.30 In the main specification of

the paper s is set to 2, although several robustness checks are presented to investigate the

importance of this assumption.

          These steps taken together lead to equation (V.4), which represents the baseline

specification used in the paper:



       ΔEmpijt=θGrantsjt-2+γΔXjt+Δβt+Δµjt                                                (V.4)



where the variable Grantsjt-2 represents the number of major planning grants conceded in the Local

Authority in year t-2.

          Finally, for independent retailers I also directly evaluate the impact of small formats on

their employment growth by estimating the following equation:



29
     Bertrand and Kramarz (2002), using a similar methodology for the French retail sector, allow for

a four-year period lag between a granted application and an actual entry of a store. In their case,

the longer lag is justified by the need to obtain a licence to run the store after the planning

application has been granted.
30
     I include robustness checks to verify the sensitivity of this timing assumption, which is derived

from ODPM (2004) and DTI (2004) reports. Similar construction lags have been estimated by the

specialist magazine Building, which reports in a cost model dated April 1993 an average

construction lag of 40 weeks (Davis Langdon and Everest 1993).



                                                      28
       ΔEmpindep jt=θΔEmpsmall formats jt +γΔXjt+Δβt+Δµjt                           (V.5)



where ΔEmpsmall      formats jt   represents the employment growth of all stores below 28 employees

belonging to retail chains with more than 10,000 employees.



V.B Identification

         A major challenge in the estimation of equation (V.4) relates to the endogeneity of

planning grants, since the same unobserved time-varying factors that influence retail employment

growth are likely to play a significant role in determining the demand for big-boxes opening in a

market, and therefore the number of planning applications submitted to the relevant Local

Authority. In other words, the Δµjt might be simultaneously correlated with both planning grants

and retail employment.

         I address this problem in three ways. First, I use placebo experiments to show that planning

grants have no correlation with the employment growth of the manufacturing sector, and therefore

do not appear to proxy for unobserved factors correlated with general employment growth at the

Local Authority level.

         Second, I include controls to account for demand differences across Local Authorities, i.e.

population growth, age, skills, income profile, and urban characteristics, which are significantly

correlated with the number of planning grants conceded at the Local Authority level in Table 2.31



31
     This might be relevant in explaining the employment growth of different types of retailers, as

well as the choice among alternative retail formats by large retail chains. For example, Griffith and



                                                         29
Along similar lines, I also experiment with alternative specifications including Local Authority

fixed effects to control for different trends in retail employment at the Local Authority level.

       Third, similar to the methodology first proposed by Bertrand and Kramarz (2002), I use the

shares of seats won by Conservative councilors in Local Authority elections to instrument for the

number of planning grants. This is a valid IV strategy under the assumptions that: a) the planning

behavior of local politicians is correlated with their party affiliation; and b) the changes in the

political composition of the Local Authorities are exogenous to the Δµjt shocks affecting retail

employment.

       The correlation between political affiliation – and namely Conservatives influence - and

planning grants was already discussed in Section III.B, where it was shown that Local Authorities

with more prominent Conservative presence were less likely to concede planning grants, even

conditional of a rich set of demand controls.

       With regards to point b), i.e. whether the political composition of the Local Authorities can

be treated as exogenous to the unobserved Δµjt driving the employment growth of independent

retailers, the main concern is that the political composition of the local council could be directly

determined by the retail employment growth. For example, when independent retailers are in

decline (or small formats are on the rise), they might be more inclined to vote Conservatives

councilors if they expect them to be more effective in blocking the entry of large stores, creating a

correlation between election outcomes and economic conditions.

       While this problem cannot be entirely ruled out, the practical relevance of this concern is



Harmgart (2008) emphasize the role of demand conditions in driving the increase in small formats

by the top UK grocery retailers.



                                                      30
alleviated by the fact that instrumentation strategy exploits changes in the political composition at

the time the grant was given, which is typically some time before the actual entry of the store (in

most specifications I assume a 2 year delay), and that therefore, a bias would exist if voters were to

base their political preferences on the basis of their expectations of independents employment

growth at least two years after the elections. Furthermore, for about half of the Local Authorities

in the sample elections were run “by thirds”, i.e. they would elect one third of their councilors in

each of the three years out of four which were not county election years. This is an additional

institutional factor that should in principle reduce the immediate influence of economic

considerations on local political representation.

         In practice, to show that the results are indeed robust to this issue, I show robustness

checks including controls for time varying socioeconomic characteristics of the Local Authorities

and the growth of total employment in the Local Authority. I also experiment with an IV strategy

where the main instrument is the share of Conservative votes won at national instead of local

elections. While this weakens the power of the instrument due to the less frequent political cycle

of national elections relative to local elections, it is useful inasmuch national election preferences

are less likely to be entirely determined by their influence on retail employment.

         Finally, a bias would arise in the IV estimates if councilors could affect the retail sector via

alternative channels. However, the power to set and collect a local property tax on non-residential

property (known as the U.K. business rate) at the Local Authority level was abolished in 1990,

when the central government decided to take this tax setting power away from Local Authorities

and to establish the Uniform Business Rate (UBR).32 Therefore, planning was effectively the only



32
     The reasons for the introduction of the UBR were essentially political. The Conservative



                                                       31
area of responsibility of Local Authorities that could affect businesses directly during the sample

(Duranton, Gobillon, and Overman 2006), and this leaves little space for alternative policy related

channels of influence.



VI. Results



VI. A. Main results

       Table 6 examines the effects of planning grants on retail employment using the simple

OLS specification of equation V.4, including as additional controls a set of year dummies and the

basic demand controls analyzed in Table 2 (log of population, percentage of people living in urban

areas, percentage of people below 15 years, log median hourly wages, percentage people with a

college degree).

       Column 1 starts by looking at the relationship between grants and the employment growth

of large retail chains (i.e. those with more than 10,000 employees). Grants are significantly

associated with positive total employment growth of these firms (coefficient 0.0029, standard error

0.0009). The relationship, however, is the result of a composition effect between large and small

formats, as columns 2 and 3 show: planning grants are associated with the positive and significant

employment growth of large formats (coefficient 0.0036, standard error 0.0010), and a significant

decline in the employment growth of small formats (coefficient -0.0059, standard error 0.0022).

These results provide prima facie evidence that the decline in the number of planning grants for



government feared that left-wing councils could frustrate its liberalising efforts by raising anti-

business taxes (Cheshire and Hilber 2008).



                                                   32
large supermarkets coincided with a substitution towards smaller chain stores.

       Given these findings, a question of interest is to what extent did the decline in planning

grants affect independent retailers? Note that the effect is a priori ambiguous. While on the one

hand fewer planning grants might have reduced the competitive pressures faced by independents

by slowing down the entry of big boxes (column 2), on the other hand this also seems to have

heightened the incentives to open smaller chain formats (column 3), which are geographically

closer to independents (Table 5, column 2) and thus potential substitutes. The net effect of

planning would then depend on the relative competitive pressure exerted by small formats vs. big

formats on independent retailers.

       The estimates suggest that reducing the entry of bog boxes negatively affected the

employment growth of independent retailers, and that this was directly related to the substitution

towards small chain formats. Column 4 shows that an additional planning grant is associated with

an increase in independents’ employment growth of 0.17% (standard error 0.0008). To verify the

direct relationship between small formats and independent retailers, Column 5 shows that a 1%

increase in the employment growth of small chain formats is associated with a 0.0135% decline in

the growth rate of independent retailers, although the coefficient is significant only at the 10%

level (standard error 0.0077). Finally, column 6 shows that the significant correlation between

planning grants and employment is confined to large retail chains and independents, but does not

extend to retail chains with fewer than 10,000 employees. This is not surprising, since these firms

are less likely to both switch from large to small formats (Table 4, Panel B) and to be affected by

the competition of small formats given their location (Table 5, column 1).




                                                    33
VI.B. Robustness on OLS Estimates

          In the simple specification of equation V.4, a possible worry is that the conditional

correlations between employment and planning grants may reflect unobservable local demand

correlates not captured by the basic set of covariates included in the regression. In this section, I

present a set of robustness checks to allay this concern. Before doing so, however, it is worth

noting that the unobservable demand factors would have to follow a very specific pattern of

correlation with the employment aggregates examined so far: positive association with both big

boxes and independent retailers; negative association with small chain formats; and no correlation

with small retail chains.

          The first check is a placebo test looking at the correlation between planning and the

employment growth of the manufacturing sector. This is a way to verify whether planning grants

might capture something beyond a local shock to large chains and independents, since

manufacturing employment should not be directly affected by retail planning grants. Reassuringly,

column 7 of Table 6 shows that planning grants are not significantly correlated with the growth of

manufacturing employment (coefficient -0.0008, standard error 0.0013).33

          Second, I test the robustness of the results to the inclusion of a richer set of controls for

local demand conditions. These checks focus in particular on the correlation between planning



33
     The sample in this specification drops to 1,478 observations due to the limited availability of the

specific version of the LFS employment data used to compute total employment in manufacturing

at the Local Authority level, which is available only between 1999 and 2003, and for 302 of the

303 Local Authority included in the baseline sample. The correlation between planning grants and

independents’ employment growth is still positive significant in this smaller sample.



                                                       34
grants and the employment growth of small retail formats (Table 6, column 3) and independent

retailers (Table 6, column 4). The results are shown separately for small retail formats in Table 7,

Panel A, and for independents in Table 7, Panel B.

         Column 1 in both panels starts by reproducing the baseline results of Table 6. Column 2

shows the results when the baseline specification is augmented with a richer set of demand and

demographic controls beyond the ones already included in the baseline specification.34 The

coefficient on planning grants remains significant at the 5% level and similar in terms of

magnitudes for both small format and independent retailers. Another concern is that the results

could be spuriously driven by unobserved trends in employment levels across Local Authorities

correlated with planning grants. Column 3 thus shows the robustness of the results to the inclusion

of Local Authority fixed effects: the correlations with planning grants remain positive and of

similar magnitude for both small formats and independent retailers even in this demanding

specification, although the significance level drops at the 10% level in both cases.

         Although the OLS results are reassuringly stable, they may still potentially suffer from

biases due to omitted unobservable variables. Hence, in order to investigate the causality of the



34
     These are the percentage of people working in manufacturing and retail, an interaction term

between log median hourly wage and a dummy equal to unity for any year after 1999 (this is to

capture the possible differential effects of the minimum wage introduction), and the log of the total

area (in hectares) covered by the Local Authority. All the added regressors are individually

insignificant, with the exception of the interaction post 1999*log median hourly wage, which is

negative and significant at the 5% level for both small formats and independent retailers.




                                                     35
relationship between planning grants and independents, I turn to the IV strategy described in

Section V.C, which instruments the number of planning grants with the share of seats won by

Conservative politicians in the Local Authority.

       In the first stage regression, the relationship between planning grants and the share of seats

won by Conservatives is negative and significant even in the subsample under examination. In a

first stage specification where I regress the number of planning grants given at t-2 on the share of

Conservative seats in the same time period (including the same set baseline controls of column 1)

the coefficient is -1.73 (standard error 0.5413), which implies that a one standard deviation

increase in the share of Conservative seats is associated with a 0.36 decrease in the number of

planning grants given in the same year. The power of the political instrument is confirmed by the

Kleinbergen-Paap F-test, which is beyond the 10 threshold suggested by Stock, Wright, and Yogo

(2002) to identify weak instruments problems.

       Column 4 shows the reduced form specification where I directly regress employment

growth on the share of Conservative seats. For both small formats and independent retailers the

relationship is significant and of the expected sign: an increase in the number of Conservative

seats is associated with positive employment growth for small formats, and negative employment

growth for independents. Finally, Column 5 presents the 2SLS estimates, where the number of

planning grants is instrumented with the share of Conservative seats in the Local Authority at time

t−2. The 2SLS estimates of the coefficient on planning grants are also supportive of the baseline

OLS findings. For small formats, a unit increase in the number of planning grants translates in a

3.55% reduction in employment growth (significant at the 5% level), while for independents this




                                                    36
translates in a 1.19% increase in employment (significant at the 10% level).35



VI.C. Magnitudes

          The OLS and IV estimates presented in Table 7 provide, respectively, a lower and an upper

bound for the effect of an additional planning grant for a major retail development on the

employment growth of small formats and independent retailers. In order to evaluate the economic

magnitude of these estimates, I look employment growth figures between 1998 and 2004, and see

how much of it can be accounted for by the change in the number of planning grants between 1996

and 2002 (where the different time period is to take into account the 2 year delay between

obtaining the planning grant and starting the retail activity assumed in the baseline regressions).

          Between 1996 and 2002, on average 0.44 fewer planning applications were granted every

year, the employment of small formats increased at an average yearly rate of 7% per annum, and

the employment of independent retailers declined at an average yearly rate of 2% per annum

(Table A1). According to the OLS specification with Local Authority fixed effects (Table 7, Panel

B, column 3), the decline in planning grants accounted for roughly 4% of the increase in the

employment of small formats (0.44*0.0065 divided by 0.07), and 6% of the decline in the

employment of independent stores between 1998 and 2004 (0.44*0.0027 divided by 0.02). The IV

estimates reported in Table 7, Panel B, column 6, suggest a stronger effect. With this specification,



35
     I also investigated the direct relationship between small chain formats and independent retailers

instrumenting the growth of small chain formats with the share of conservative seats in the Local

Authority. The first stage of this regression is reported in column 4, Table 7. The 2SLS estimate of

the small formats coefficient is -0.3345 (standard error 0.2030).



                                                      37
the estimated impact of the decline in planning grants would account for roughly 22% of the

increase in small formats employment (0.44*0.0355 divided by 0.07), and 26% (0.44*0.0119

divided by 0.02) of the decline in the employment of independent stores between 1998 and 2004.



VI.D. Margins of Adjustment

          To further characterize the effect of planning grants on the employment growth of small

formats and independents, Table 8 investigates in more detail differences across the employment

growth contributions of incumbents, entrants, and exitors. These employment components are

computed using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) method, which calculates the employment

growth rate of any independent store i within each Local Authority j at time t as:

                empijt − empijt −1
     g ijt =                                                                                 (VI.1)
                            xijt

                   empijt + empijt −1
where xijt =                            and empjtk is the employment of store k at time t in Local Authority j.
                               2

This growth rate is symmetric about zero, and lies in the closed interval [−2,2], with deaths (births)

taking value of −2 (2). By construction, total employment growth rate is the sum of the

contributions to employment growth from entrants, exitors, and incumbents (expanding and

contracting), as follows:

                 ( xijt %
ΔD jt =   ∑ && X         # g ijt                                                             (VI.2)
          i∈I jt '
                         #
                      jt $
          i∈D



where D={Entry, Exit, Expanding Incumbents, Contracting Incumbents} and Xjt represents total

average employment in Local Authority j at time t.

          I regress each growth component for each sub-sample against the planning grants variable,



                                                               38
using the same baseline IV specification of column 6, Table 7. Starting from small formats (Panel

A), the estimates suggest that planning primarily affected the entry margin of these stores

(coefficient 0.0571, standard error 0.0264), while the effects on exits, and incumbents’ contraction

and expansion is much weaker. At the same time, the positive effect of planning grants on

independents is mostly accounted for by a reduction of the exit component, while the effects on

incumbents and entrants are smaller and non-significant.

         Overall, these results suggest that planning had significant and opposite effects on the

extensive margin for both small formats and independents, while the effects on incumbents were

much milder. These differential effects are consistent with the idea that the heightened regulation

on big boxes resulted in the creation of new small formats stores. They also suggest that the

positive effect of planning grants on independents was not driven by general positive spillovers

created by big-boxes on surrounding stores, which would result in a more general expansion of

incumbents and accelerated entry.36



VI.E. Robustness of the IV Estimates

         Overall, the IV estimates confirm the result found with the simple OLS, i.e. planning grants

are associated with a negative effect on the growth of small chain formats, and with a positive

effect on the employment growth of independent retailers. Table 9 presents further robustness

checks on the IV results, for both small chain formats and independent retailers (column 1 reports



36
     For example, Gould et al. (2005) document that anchor stores in shopping malls generate

externalities to other stores by attracting customers to the mall, and that this is reflected in the

contracts underwritten by the other tenants.



                                                     39
the baseline specification of Table 7, column 5).

       The first set of checks relates to concerns related to the timing assumption adopted to

translate planning grants into proxies for the entry of large supermarkets. Column 2 looks at the

relationship between independents’ growth and the number of planning grants conceded between

t−1 and t−3, using as instruments the sum of Conservative share of seats over the same time

periods. The coefficient on this entry measure remains positive and significant at the 5% for small

formats and at the 10% level for independents, albeit substantially smaller in magnitude with

respect to the baseline estimates shown in column 1. To test the sensitivity of the results with

respect to the assumption that only grants accepted in t−2 enter at time t, column 3 analyzes the

relationship between log employment and the stock of retail major applications granted between

1993 (the first year of the planning data sample) and t−2, including in the regression a full set of

Local Authorities dummies (the political instruments are built analogously). In this specification

the coefficient on planning grants remains positive and significant at the 5% level for small

formats, but falls just below the 10% significant level for independents (coefficient 0.0045,

standard error 0.0028). Finally, estimating the regression using two years averages to reduce the

possible impact of measurement error in both the entry and the employment variables generates

very similar estimates to the baseline in terms of both magnitudes and precision for both small

formats and independents (column 4).

       Second, a potential problem associated with the use of local elections results as instruments

for planning is that voting might be endogenously determined by economic conditions in the Local

Authority. To address this concern, column 5 reports the 2SLS regression augmenting the

specification with a time varying variable capturing the growth of overall employment in the Local

Authority. Column 5 shows that this does not affect the magnitude and significance level of the



                                                    40
baseline estimates. Column 6 addresses the possibility that both political results and retail

employment could be affected by the entry of big box stores in neighboring Local Authorities,

including as an additional control a variable summing the number of planning grants conceded in

all neighboring Local Authorities at t-2. While the inclusion of this variable does not alter the

baseline findings, it is interesting to notice that neighboring planning grants are uncorrelated with

the growth of small chain formats, and negatively and significantly correlated with the growth of

independent retailers. One way to interpret this result is that the competitive effect arising from the

entry of big boxes in neighboring Local Authorities is not offset by the decline in the growth of

small chain formats, and thus overall planning grants have an negative effect on the employment

growth of independents. Column 7 checks the robustness of the results to the assumption implicit

in the econometric model that big box stores have infrequent exit events. In order to build a proxy

for big box exit, I use the full panel data on the universe of stores classified in sector 521, and

build an indicator taking value one for the exit of stores above the employment threshold of 150

employees (this corresponds to all stores beyond the 99th percentile in the distribution of stores

belonging to chains with more than 10,000 employees).37 The inclusion of this variable does not

alter the magnitude and significance level of the baseline estimates.

          Finally, to address the concern that local election results might be determined by local

employment dynamics, I experiment with an IV strategy where the number of planning grants is

instrumented with the share of conservative votes in national elections rather than local elections.

This reflects the logic that national election preferences are less likely to reflect specific concerns

pertaining to local retail employment patterns. The shortcoming of using national rather than



37
     This variable has mean .27, median 0 and standard deviation .59.



                                                      41
electoral result is the loss of power in the first stage regressions: whereas partial local elections

happened almost on an yearly basis in about half of the Local Authorities included in the sample

(see the Appendix for details), there were only two general elections in the period under

consideration, 1997 and 2001.38 The first stage of this regression confirms the presence of a

negative relationship between the number of planning grants and the share of votes won by

conservatives in the national elections, but the relationship is only significant at the 10% level

(coefficient -3.283, standard error 1.744), and the F-test is below the Stock and Yogo threshold.

With this caveat in mind, using national elections as instruments for planning grants in the second

stage generates a coefficient that is almost double of that obtained using local election results as

instruments (0.0729, standard error 0.0399) for small chains. The coefficient is still positive but

about half of the baseline case and below conventional significance levels (coefficient 0.0049,

standard error 0.0070) for independent retailers.



VII. Conclusion

         I investigate the employment effects of planning regulations using a recent reform

introduced in the United Kingdom, which substantially affected the cost of opening large retail

stores. The key results of the paper are as follows. First, regulating the entry of big-boxes triggered

a significant change in the store strategy of large U.K. retailers, which substituted large stores with

smaller in-town formats. Second, because of this substitution, planning regulation ended up

harming independent retailers, by bringing more competition to their closer proximity. According



38
     I interpolate the election results in non-election years in order to include these years in the

analysis.



                                                      42
to the results shown in the paper, the decline in planning grants generated by the regulatory

reforms accounted for between 4% and 22% of the employment growth experienced by small

formats, and 6% and 26% of the employment decline experienced by independent retailers over

the time period 1998 and 2004.

         This paper provides several contributions. First, this is one of rare empirical studies of

regulation that can rely on within country and time series variation, which allows identifying the

effects of regulatory policies abstracting from countrywide characteristics and concomitant

regulations. Second, the paper provides for the first time direct evidence on the effects of planning

regulation on firm strategies, and in particular on the choice between different store formats. Third,

the paper highlights the importance of carefully considering counterfactual in the design of

regulatory policies: restricting the entry of large stores does not necessarily lead to a world with

fewer stores, but one with different stores, with uncertain competitive effects on independent

retailers. This point is relevant also outside the context of the U.K. economy, and especially in the

United States, where prominent chains such as Wal-Mart and Safeway have started to invest in

small and urban formats.39 Finally, the paper also has implications for the definition employed by



39
     Tesco first introduced small chain formats in the United States in 2007 with the “Fresh and

Easy” brand. This move was followed by the decision made by Wal-Mart to open its “Marketside”

small-format community grocery stores. These formats involve the creation of neighborhood

grocery stores primarily in suburban but also in urban neighborhoods. Interestingly, Wal-Mart’s

decision has been interpreted as a way to win the permission to open in markets that have been

traditionally opposed to the typical Wal-Mart big-boxes, such as the Bay Area in California. For a

more recent coverage of Wal-Mart decision to enter with smaller urban formats in regulated areas



                                                     43
regulators in assessing market size and potential competitive effects of mergers between firms

operating according to different store formats. For example, the substitutability between large and

small chain stores suggested by this paper is at odds with the market definition adopted by the

U.K. Competition Commission in several of its retail inquiries over the past ten years. In these

reports, the Competition Commission has generally preferred to consider the large and small retail

formats as two distinct markets (Competition Commission 2000). This choice has played a crucial

role in determining the feasibility of several takeovers of minor retail chains operating small stores

by major retail chains operating large retail stores.

          There are several issues surrounding these results that are worth exploring further. First,

the short run effects of entry regulations may change in the long run, or impact differentially

central and peripheral independents. Second, while this paper focuses primarily on employment

effects, large retail stores may also have an impact on the type of activity chosen by independents,

for example shifting their activity towards a more specialized retail offer. Third, while the

simplicity of the reduced form estimates allow for the use of a clean identification strategy,

structural models of firm entry and differentiation would allow to estimate with finer precision the

complex interaction between regulation, chain stores, and independents suggested in this paper.40



such as New York City see Bustillo (2011).
40
     For example, Datta and Sudhir (2010) estimate a structural model using U.S. store and regulation

data to illustrate the idea that planning regulation can induce firms to differentiate via the choice of

alternative retail formats. Ridley, Sloan, and Song (2010) present a simple extension of the Salop

(1979) model to show that an increase in the fraction of zoned areas within a specific market

increases competition in non-zoned locations by forcing retailers closer together.



                                                        44
More generally, structurally identified model would be able to pursue an evaluation of the overall

welfare implications of planning policies, which are deliberately absent from this paper but are

first order importance for both economists and policy makers. These are clearly important issues to

address, which are left for future research.




                                                   45
References

Barker, Kate, “Barker Review of Land Use Planning: Final Report—Recommendations,”

       (December 2006). http://www.hm-

       treasury.gov.uk/media/3/A/barker_finalreport051206.pdf. Accessed August 2008.

Basker, Emek, “Job Creation or Destruction? Labor Market Effects of Wal-Mart Expansion,”

       Review of Economics and Statistics 87:1 (2005), 174–183.

Basker, Emek, Shawn D. Klimek, and Van H. Pham, “Supersize It: The Growth of Retail Chains

       and the Rise of the ‘Big Box’ Retail Format,” SSRN eLibrary (May 10, 2010). Available at

       SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1240860. Accessed August 2010.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust

       Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:1 (2004),

       249–275.

Bertrand, Marianne and Francis Kramarz, “Does Entry Regulation Hinder Job Creation? Evidence

       from the French Retail Industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117:4 (2002),

       1369–1413.

Bustillo, Miguel, “Wal-Mart Tries to Recapture Mr. Sam’s Winning Formula,” Wall Street

       Journal (Online) (February 22, 2011).

       http://search.proquest.com/docview/853011421?accountid=11311. Accessed September

       2011.

Cheshire, Paul C. and Christian A. L. Hilber, “Office Space Supply Restrictions in Britain: The

       Political Economy of Market Revenge,” Economic Journal 118:529 (2008), F185–F221.

Cheshire, Paul, Christian A. L. Hilber, and Ioannis Kaplanis, “Our System of Land Use Planning

       Can Often Have Damaging Impacts on Retail Productivity,” British Politics and Policy at



                                                   46
       LSE (Blog Entry) (11 July 2011). http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/38040/. Accessed September

       2011.

Competition Commission, “Supermarkets: A Report on the Supply of Groceries from Multiple

       Stores in the United Kingdom,” (October 2000). http://www.competition-

       commission.org.uk/rep_pub/reports/2000/446super.htm#full. Accessed August 2008.

Datta, Sumon and K. Sudhir, “Does Reducing Spatial Differentiation Increase Product

       Differentiation? Effects of Zoning on Retail Entry and Format Variety,” SSRN eLibrary

       (December 9, 2010). Available at: http://ssrn.com/paper=1722949. Accessed September

       2011.

Davis Langdon and Everest, “Cost Model: Supermarkets,” Building (April 1993).

       http://www.building.co.uk/data/cost-model-supermarkets/1025793.article. Accessed

       August 2011.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and

       Employment Reallocation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107:3 (1992), 819–863.

Draca, Mirko, Stephen J. Machin, and John M. Van Reenen, “Minimum Wages and Firm

       Profitability,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1913; CEP Discussion Paper No. 715 (January

       2006). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=877892. Accessed September 2011.

DTI Retail Strategy Group, “The Retail Development Process and Land Assembly: Volume 2 -

       Appendices,” (February 2004). http://www.dti.gov.uk/files/file17959.pdf. Accessed August

       2008.

Duranton, Gilles, Laurent Gobillon, and Henry G. Overman, “Assessing the Effects of Local

       Taxation Using Microgeographic Data,” CEP Discussion Paper no. 748 (August 2006).

       Available at: http://ssrn.com/paper=952769. Accessed August 2011.



                                                  47
Ellickson, Paul B. and Paul L.E. Grieco, “Density Versus Differentiation: The Impact of Wal-Mart

       on the Grocery Industry,” Simon School Working Paper Series no. FR 11-18 April 22,

       2011). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1819268. Accessed September 2011.

Ennis, Sean, “Land Use Restrictions as Barriers to Entry,” OECD Competition Policy Roundtables

       (2008). http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/34/37/41763060.pdf. Accessed August 2008.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan, “Market Selection, Reallocation, and

       Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s,” Review of Economics and

       Statistics 88:4 (2006), 748–758.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks, “Why Is Manhattan So Expensive?

       Regulation and the Rise in Housing Prices,” The Journal of Law and Economics 48:2

       (2005), 331–369.

Gould, Eric D., B. Peter Pashigian, and Canice J. Prendergast, “Contracts, Externalities, and

       Incentives in Shopping Malls,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87:3 (2005), 411–422.

Greed, Clara, Introducing Planning (London; New Brunswick, NJ: Athlone Press, 2000).

Griffith, Rachel and Heike Harmgart, “Supermarkets and Planning Regulation,” CEPR Working

       Papers no. DP6713 (February 2008).

Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and C. J. Krizan, “Mom-and-Pop Meet Big-Box: Complements or

       Substitutes?” Journal of Urban Economics 67:1 (2010), 116–134.

Haskel, Jonathan, Ron S. Jarmin, Kazuyuki Motohashi, and Raffaella Sadun, “Retail Market

       Structure and Dynamics: A Three Country Comparison of Japan, the UK and the US,”

       LSE/Ceriba mimeo (July 2007). https://editorialexpress.com/cgi-

       bin/conference/download.cgi?db_name=res2008&paper_id=734. Accessed August 2008.

Haskel, Jonathan and Raffaella Sadun, “Regulation and U.K. Retailing Productivity: Evidence



                                                    48
       from Microdata,” Economica (2011). http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0335.2011.00903.x.

       Accessed September 2011.

Holmes, Thomas J, “Bar Codes Lead to Frequent Deliveries and Superstores,” The RAND Journal

       of Economics 32:4 (2001), 708–725.

Jia, Panle, “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the

       Discount Retailing Industry,” Econometrica 76:6 (2008), 1263–1316.

McKinsey Global Institute, “Driving Productivity and Growth in the U.K. Economy,” (October

       1998). http://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/reports/pdfs/ukprod/ukprod.pdf. Accessed August

       2008.

Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Stephen Ciccarella, “The Effects of Wal-Mart on Local Labor

       Markets,” Journal of Urban Economics 63:2 (2008), 405–430.

Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM), “Policy Evaluation of the Effectiveness of PPG6,”

       (January 2004).

       http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/planningandbuilding/pdf/148199.pdf.

       Accessed August 2008.

Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM), “Planning Policy Statement 6: Planning for Town

       Centres (PPS6),” (March 2005).

       http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/planningandbuilding/pdf/147399.pdf.

       Accessed August 2011.

Pilat, Dirk, “Regulation and Performance in the Distribution Sector,” OECD Economics

       Department Working Papers no. 180 (January 1997).

       http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/121136556730. Accessed August 2008.

Ridley, David B., Frank A. Sloan, and Yan Song, “Retail Zoning and Competition,” (March 12,



                                                 49
       2010). http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~dbr1/research/zoning-competition.pdf. Accessed

       September 2011.

Saint Consulting, “2009 UK Saint Index—Headline Results,” (2009). http://tscg.biz/the-saint-

       index/canada-and-uk. Accessed September 2011.

Salop, Steven C., “Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods,” The Bell Journal of

       Economics 10:1 (1979), 141–156.

Schivardi, Fabiano and Eliana Viviano, “Entry Barriers in Retail Trade,” The Economic Journal

       121:551 (2011), 145–170.

Smith, Howard, “Store Characteristics in Retail Oligopoly,” The RAND Journal of Economics

       37:2 (2006), 416–430.

Stock, James H., Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo, “A Survey of Weak Instruments and

       Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Business and

       Economic Statistics 20:4 (2002), 518–529.

Viviano, Eliana, “Entry Regulations and Labour Market Outcomes: Evidence from the Italian

       Retail Trade Sector,” Labour Economics 15:6 (2008), 1200–1222.




                                                   50
                                           APPENDIX



1. The British Local Government



1.A. Structure

       The structure of local governments in England has experienced several changes over time.

In 1974, a two-tier administrative structure of counties and non-metropolitan districts was set up

across the whole of England and Wales, except for the Isles of Scilly, Greater London, and the six

metropolitan counties. Council functions were divided according to the level at which they could

be practiced most efficiently. In consequence, counties took on functions including education,

transport, strategic planning, fire services, consumer protection, refuse disposal, smallholdings,

social services, and libraries, whereas the districts (between 4 to 14 within each county area) had

responsibility for local planning, housing, local highways, building, environmental health, refuse

collection, and cemeteries. Responsibility for recreation and cultural matters was divided between

the two tiers. In the major urban areas such as London, West Midlands, Greater Manchester,

Merseyside, South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire and Tyne & Wear a partial reorganization in 1986

created a single tier of councils responsible for all the services listed above. These are called

London Borough Councils and Metropolitan District Councils.

       In the 1990s, the Central Government's view was that the two-tier model of service

provision was inefficient, and that County Councils were too distant from the needs of the

population they served. Therefore a Local Government Act in 1992 in England and special laws

enacted in 1994 for Scotland and Wales abolished County councils and transferred their functions

to district councils, with some of the smaller districts being merged. The newly created single-tier



                                                    51
councils were called Unitary Authorities, and had responsibility for all areas of local government.

Between 1995 and 1998, these were established in a number of areas across the country, especially

in medium-sized urban areas, while other areas retained a two-tier structure. Up until 2009, there

were 46 Unitary Authorities in England, and 34 shire Counties split into 239 non-Metropolitan

Districts, plus the 32 London Boroughs and the other 36 Metropolitan Districts, which retained

their own structure.

         Councilors represent geographical areas within a Local Authority (Wards) and serve for

four years before going up for reelection. In England, London Boroughs elect all their councilors

at once, every four years. Metropolitan Authorities elect one third of their councilors in each of the

three years out of four which are not county election years. In England until 2009, 18 out of the 46

Unitary Authorities and 88 of the other 239 non-Metropolitan districts elected their local councils

“by thirds”.



1.B. Local Planning Responsibilities and the Role of the Center41

         The planning system is articulated at the national level through the implementation of

central government planning policies; at the regional or local level through development plans;

and the site specific level though the determination of planning applications (development

control).

         England operates under a “plan-led” system, which implies that planning authorities must

determine planning applications in accordance with the statutory development plan, unless

“material considerations” indicate otherwise. Until 2004 (the last year included in the analysis of



41
     This section draws from Chapter 1, Barker Review (2006)



                                                     52
this paper), the plan-making system was based on Regional Planning Guidance (prepared by

informal regional bodies and government offices), structure plans (prepared by county councils)

and local or unitary plans (prepared by district authorities). The system was replaced with a more

centralized approach in 2004.

         Development control is the specific task assigned to local planning authorities. This is the

process through which planning applications are made for site-specific developments or a material

change of use of land or buildings. Some minor forms of development do not need planning

permission. For the other applications, the local planning authority determines whether to grant

approval, based on widespread consultation with interested parties, including those likely affected

by the development in the local areas. An important part of the process, especially for major

planning applications, is the pre-application discussions between developers and local authorities,

as well as local communities.

         If permission is refused, or if the local planning authority does not determine an application

within a specific time, the applicant has the right to appeal the Secretary of State and the Planning

Inspectorate will handle the appeal. In 2004/2005 about 3% of all planning applications were

appealed. A small number of planning applications will also be called-in each year and decided by

the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government. In 2005/2006 about 50 call-ins

decisions were issued.42



42
     Note that specific plans would exists for designated areas in the locality (e.g. World Heritage

Sites, Special protection Areas, etc.) These sites will receive different levels of protection

depending on their designation. There is a substantial proportion of designated land in England,

with only 8.3% of total land is considered urban.



                                                      53
       More generally, the role of the Secretary of State is summarized as follows in the Barker

Review:

          •   Making regulations, i.e. creation of statutory instruments to supplement the main

              planning legislation.

          •   Approval of some actions of local planning authorities, such as order of revocation

              or modification of planning permissions.

          •   Managing appeals of applications refused by local planning authorities, conditional

              grants or non-determinations within a given period.

          •   Powers of Directions, i.e. the ability to issue directions of a general and specific

              nature to planning authorities (e.g. call-in an application). This power is exercised

              sparingly, for example where a case gives rise to significant regional or national

              controversy.

          •   Advice and Guidance, i.e. issuance of Planning Policy Guidance Notes or

              Statements.



2. Data Sources



2.A UK Census Data

       The data on independent retailers is drawn from the Inter Departmental Business Register

(IDBR), which is at the base of most surveys run by the U.K. Census. The business register is

compiled using a combination of tax records on VAT and PAYE, including information lodged at




                                                   54
Companies House and Dun and Bradstreet. The IDBR captures two broad measures. First, it

measures the structure of ownership of businesses using three aggregation categories: Local Units,

Enterprises, and Enterprise Groups. A Local Unit is a single mailing address, so this is best

thought of a store. An Enterprise is a chain of local units/shops under common ownership. An

Enterprise Group is a group of enterprises under common ownership. Second, the IDBR holds

turnover and employment data for both stores and firms. This is based mostly on tax data (plus old

records from previous inquiries)—although generally the turnover data is deemed to be imprecise.

The Annual Register Inquiry (ARI) is designed to maintain the business structure information on

the IDBR. It began operation in July 1999 and is sent to large enterprises (over 100 employees)

every year, to enterprises with 20–99 employees every four years, and to smaller enterprises on an

ad hoc basis. The ARI currently covers around 68,000 enterprises, consisting of about 400,000

local units. It asks each enterprise for employment, industry activity, and the structure of the

enterprise, including having to report employment of its local units. The first available year for the

retail sample is 1997. However, this data is deemed to be imprecise and therefore the analysis

starts in 1998. The geographical location of the stores is obtained matching a five-digit postcode

with a dataset of geographical coordinates. I exclude from the sample stores that become part of

retail chain at some point of their life. This is done to minimize measurement error in the

independent store tag. The employment growth data is windsorized to the 1st and 99th percentile of

the growth distributions (by retail type) to reduce the influence of extremely small or large

variations in employment. This change involves a total of 36 observations, relative to 31 Local

Authorities. The results shown throughout the paper are robust to the exclusion of these

observations.




                                                     55
2.B ODPM Applications Database

         The data on major planning applications and grants were obtained from the Office of the

Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM)—recently abolished. The ODPM was the main institution in

charge of overseeing planning issues in England. For this purpose, the department kept detailed

records of all the planning activity taking place across the country. The data used in this analysis

was obtained upon a simple telephonic request. It includes all major (above 1,000 square meters)

applications submitted and approved across all English Local Authorities between 1993 and 2003,

classified under the category “Retail, distribution, and servicing.” The data is anonymized and

available only at the Local Authority-year level. The yearly number of major retail applications is

windsorized to the 1st and 99th percentile of its distribution to reduce the influence of extreme

application values. This change involves a total of 21 observations, relative to 13 Local

Authorities. The results shown throughout the paper are robust to the exclusion of these

observations.



2.C British Local Elections Database

         The British Local Elections Database (BLED) is a unique source of information of local

election results in Great Britain. It contains more than 150,000 individual election results since the

1973 wholesale local reorganization. The results are provided at the candidate level, and can be

aggregated at the ward and at the Local Authority level via geographical identifiers.43



43
     Councils are divided into electoral divisions—known in district councils as “wards,” and in

county councils as “electoral divisions.” Each ward can return one or more members—multi-

member wards are quite common. There is no requirement for the size of wards to be the same



                                                     56
       The aggregation is simplified by the fact that there is no proportional representation, i.e.

the candidates that receive the most votes in the elections win. The variable used in the baseline

regressions is the share of seats won by each party in the elections. In councils where the election

takes place every four years, this variable coincides with the overall share of seats controlled in the

council. In councils that elect a third of their councilors every year, this variable will only be

proportional to the total share of seats in the council. The results are virtually identical using an

estimate of the council composition. The only difference is that this introduces measurement error,

since for some Local Authorities—which have experienced discrete jumps in the number of

councillors—the estimate is particularly noisy.



2.D Additional Data

       The core retail data is complemented by additional sources (Census 1991 and 2001, Annual

Survey of Hours and Earnings, Labour Force Survey), which provide basic information on socio-

economic characteristics—such as population, income, and retail land prices—proxying for time

varying demand characteristics.



3. Robustness of the Results to Alternative Definitions of Small Formats

       Table A2 and A3 in Appendix show robustness of the main results of the paper using

alternative classification methods to identify “small formats”. The idea is to study the growth of



within a district, so one ward can return one member, and another ward can return two.

Metropolitan borough wards must return a multiple of three councillors, while until the Local

Government Act 2003 multiple-member county electoral divisions were forbidden.



                                                      57
smaller stores that were opened by retail chains as a consequence of the new and more restrictive

planning restrictions on big boxes. I identify firms exposed to planning regulation in two ways.

The first method (which is the main used in the paper) isolates stores belonging a certain

employment threshold (25, 28, 30 and 35 employees) and belonging to firms with at least 10,000

employees. These criteria are based on data (Haskel and Sadun, 2011) showing that very large

retail firms typically open large stores. The second alternative method uses the same store level

employment cutoffs, but considers stores belonging to any retail firm with at least one store with

minimum 150 employees.

         Table A2 investigates the relationship between a variable measuring the total number of

independent stores in the postcode, and a dummy taking value one if the store is defined as a small

formats. The specification is identical to the one used in Table 5, column 2, include local authority

fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the postcode level. Column 1 reports the coefficient

on the dummy variable, while column 2 reports the robust standard error. Small formats are more

likely to be surrounded by independent stores relative to larger stores independently of the exact

definition used. The coefficient on the small format dummy ranges from 0.3104 (where a store is

defined as a small format if it belongs to a retail chain of at least one store with 150 employees,

and has up to 28 employees) to 0.4469 where a store is defined as a small format if it belongs to a

retail chain at least 10,000 employees, and has up to 35 employees), both significant at the 1%

level.

         Table A3 investigates the relationship between the employment growth of small formats

and the number of planning grants given in the local authority. The specification is identical to the

one used in Table 7, Panel A, column 6, and estimated via 2SLS using the share of Conservative

seats in the Local Authority as instruments for planning grants. Column 1 reports the coefficient



                                                     58
on the planning grant variable, while column 2 reports the robust standard error. Small formats are

more likely to be surrounded by independent stores relative to larger stores independently of the

exact definition used. The coefficient on planning is negative regardless of the precise definition

for small formats, but it is generally precisely estimated only when the constraint on the parent

firm having at least 10,000 employees is binding. This is consistent with the idea that regulation

altered the entry strategy between large and small formats only of very large retail chains, i.e.

those with at least 10,000 employees. When significant, the coefficient on planning grants ranges

between -0.0170 (where a store is defined as a small format if it belongs to a retail chain of at least

one store with 150 employees, and has up to 35 employees) to -0.0430 (where a store is defined as

a small format if it belongs to a retail chain at least 10,000 employees, and has up to 35

employees).




                                                      59
Figure'1')'Planning'grants'over'Time
Figure'2')'Average'Number'of'Planning'Grants'across'English'Local'Authorities'(1993)2003)




Notes: The map shows the average yearly number of planning grants given by 354 different English Local
Authorities>between>1993>and>2004.>Source:>ODPM>data.
Table*1*B*Planning*Grants*at*the*Local*Authority*Level:*Summary*Statistics
                                                                        Standard*
                                              Mean         Median
                                                                        Deviation
Planning*Grants*for*Major*Retail*
                                               2.6            2               3.2
Developments
Share*of*Major*Retail*Planning*
                                               0.84           1               0.27
Applications*Granted

Average*Population*(person)                  129,993       107,450           93,805


Population*Density*(person*per*ht)             9.5            4.5             10.8

Notes: The planning statistics are based on official planning data provided by the
ODPM. The averages are computed across 303 English Local Authorities, observed
between 1993 and 2003. Major planning applications refer to retail development
above 1,000 square meters. The share of applications granted is computed as
numberLofLapplicationsLgranted/numberLofLapplicationLdecidedLinLaLgivenLyear.
Table&2&(&Demand&Drivers&of&Planning&Grants
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)

Dependent&Variable:&Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&Developments

Ln(Pop)                                   2.265***                                                         2.230***
Log&Population                             (0.255)                                                          (0.290)
%Urban                                                1.967***                                               -0.240
Percentage&urban&areas                                 (0.338)                                              (0.352)
%Young                                                            36.918***                                16.704**
Percentage&people&below&15&years                                   (8.150)                                  (7.316)
Ln(W)                                                                             -0.206                   -1.298**
Log&median&hourly&wages                                                          (0.690)                    (0.651)
%College                                                                                     -6.036***     -3.282**
Percentage&people&with&a&college&degree                                                        (1.695)      (1.601)
Observations                               3,318        3,318        3,318        3,318         3,318        3,318
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is the
number of major retail applications (above 1,000 square meters) granted by Local Authorities. All regressions include
year dummies. The time period is 1993-2003. All estimates are based on 303 English Local Authorities. Errors are
clusteredOatOtheOLocalOAuthorityOlevel.OSources:OODPM,OCensusO2001,OLFS,OASHE.
Table&3&(&Political&Drivers&of&Planning&Grants
                                             (1)           (2)        (3)                   (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
Dependent&Variable:&Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&Developments
Abs&Maj&Con                              !0.669***
Dummy&Conservative&Absolute&Majority       (0.175)
Rel&Maj&Con                                            !0.719***
Dummy&Conservative&Relative&Majority                     (0.177)
Sha_CON                                                           !1.868***              !1.370***    !1.713***   !0.864*      !0.686*
Share&of&seats&won&by&Conservative&Party                            (0.476)                (0.375)      (0.420)   (0.470)      (0.402)
Sha_LD                                                                                                   !0.738
Share&of&seats&won&by&Liberal&Democrats                                                                 (0.473)
Sha_Other                                                                                                !0.866
Share&of&seats&won&by&Other&Parties                                                                     (0.601)
Observations                                       3,318         3,318       3,318        3,318          3,318     3,318        3,318
Controls                                             (             (           (            a               a        a             a
Lacal&Authority&fixed&effects                                                                                       Yes           Yes
Local&Authority&trends                                                                                                            Yes
Omitted&group                                     Other8         Other8     All8other8   All8other8    Labour8    All8other8   All8other8
                                                 absolute8      parties'8   parties'8    parties'8     party's8   parties'8    parties'8
                                                 majorities8    relative8    shares       shares        share      shares       shares
                                                  and8no8      majorities
                                                 absolute8
                                                 majorities
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is the number of major
retail applications (above 1,000 square meters) granted by Local Authorities. The time period is 1993–2003. All estimates are based on
303 English Local Authorities. Errors are clustered at the Local Authority level. All columns include year dummies. Control “a” includes
the log of population), the fraction of urban and village areas, the log median hourly wage, the percentage of people below 15 years,
and the percentage of people with a college degree (NSV 3 or 4, measured in 2001) in the Local Authority. Column (4) includes Local
Authority fixed effects and (5) includes Local Authority trends. All regressions weighted by the share of population in the Local
Authority.8Sources:8ODPM,8BLED,8Census82001,8LFS,8ASHE.
Table&4&(&The&UK&Retail&Industry:&Composition&and&Changes&Over&Time

Panel&A:&Large&Chains&(multiestablishment&firms&with&more&than&10,000&Employees)
                                                 Total&
                                  Total&
                                             Number&of&     Store&size&distribution&(employees)
                              Employment
                                                Stores
                                                               25th&                     75th&
                                                                           Median
Year                                                        Percentile                Percentile
1998                           804406.30       8481.00        18.00         33.00       114.00
2004                           983094.00      10611.00        15.00         28.00        92.00
%&Change&1998&to&2004           22.21%         25.11%        ,16.67%       ,12.12%     ,19.30%

Panel&A:&Small&Chains&(multiestablishment&firms&with&less&than&10,000&Employees)
                                                 Total&
                                  Total&
                                             Number&of&      Store&size&distribution&(employees)
                              Employment
                                                Stores
                                                                25th&                     75th&
                                                                            Median
                                                             Percentile                Percentile
1998                           198609.30      10681.00          6.00         17.00       30.00
2004                           171796.00       8815.00          6.00         18.00       32.00
%&Change&1998&to&2004           ,13.50%       ,17.47%          0.00%         5.88%       6.67%

Panel&C:&Independent&stores&(single&establishment&firms)
                                                Total&
                                  Total&
                                             Number&of&      Store&size&distribution&(employees)
                             Employment
                                               Stores
                                                                25th&                    75th&
                                                                           Median
Year                                                         Percentile               Percentile
1998                           129736.30     38388.00           2.00         2.00        4.00
2004                           120181.00     35322.00           2.00         2.00        4.00
%&Change&1998&to&2004           ,7.37%        ,7.99%           0.00%        0.00%       0.00%
Notes: The summary statistics reported in this table are computed from store level IDRB data for
theGsectorG"NonGSpecializedGRetail"G(SICG521),G1998GandG2004.
Table&5&(&Store&density&and&Small&Formats

                                                          (1)                      (2)
Dependent&Variable:&                           Number&of&chain&stores& Number&of&independent&
                                                  in&the&postcode       stores&in&the&postcode
Dummy&Small&Format                                   !1.0362***               0.3811***
Dummy=1&if&store&has&fewer&than&28&                    (0.1745)                 (0.0391)
employees&and&belongs&to&a&large&chain&
(>10,000&employees)
Observations                                             12559                         12559
Local&Authority&Fixed&Effects                             Yes                           Yes
Notes: The sample for these regressions is the set of all stores belonging to retail chains with at least
10,000 employees. The dependent variable in column 1 is the number of stores in the same postcode
belonging to retail chains, the dependent variable in column 2 is the number of stores in the same
postocde belonging to independent retailers. Stores are identified as "small formats" is they have less
than 28 employees. All columns include Local Authority fixed effects, standard errors clustered at the
postcodeNlevel.NAllNregressionsNestimatedNbyNOLS.
Table'6'N'Planning'Grants'and'Retail'Employment
Dependent'variable:'Employment'Growth'(Local'Authority'aggregate)
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)                      (4)           (5)                (6)             (7)
Type'of'Firms                              Large'Retail'Chains                            Independents               Small'Retail'   Manufacturing
                                                                                                                       Chains
                                                    Large'         Small'
Type'of'Stores                      All'stores     formats        formats           All'stores       All'stores       All'stores        All'plants


Planning'Grants'for'Major'
Retail'DevelopmentstN2             0.0029***      0.0036***     (0.0059***           0.0017**                           0.0024            (0.0008
                                    (0.0009)       (0.0010)       (0.0022)           (0.0008)                          (0.0027)          (0.0013)
Employment'growth'of'small'
formats                                                                                              (0.0135*
                                                                                                     (0.0077)
Ln(Pop)                            (0.0147***    (0.0188***      0.0246**            (0.0000          0.0049            0.0140            0.5771
Log'Population                       (0.0051)      (0.0057)      (0.0119)            (0.0050)        (0.0045)          (0.0148)          (0.7037)
Observations                           1764          1764          1764                1764            1764              1764              1478
Controls                                 a             a             a                   a               a                 a                 a
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is the one year log employment
growth of all stores belonging to large retail chains (column 1), stores belonging to large retail chains above 28 employees (column 2), stores
belonging to large retail chains with less than 28 employees (column 3), independent retailers (columns 4 and 5), small retail chains (column 6),
manufacturing (column 7). The time period is 1998–2004. All estimates are based on 303 English Local Authorities. Errors are clustered at the
Local Authority level. All columns include year dummies. Control “a” includes the log of population, the fraction of urban and village areas, the log
median hourly wage, the percentage of people below 15 years, and the percentage of people with a college degree (NSV 3 or 4, measured in
2001)TinTtheTLocalTAuthority.TAllTregressionsTweightedTbyTtheTshareTofTpopulationTinTtheTLocalTAuthority.
Table&7&(&&Planning&Grants&and&Employment&Growth&of&Small&Formats&and&Independent&Retailers:&Robustness&Checks
Panel&A:&Dependent&variable:&Employment&Growth&of&Small&Formats&(Local&Authority&aggregate)


                                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)
Estimation&method                        OLS                OLS                OLS                OLS                2SLS
Planning&Grants&for&Major&
Retail&Developmentst(2               !0.0059***          !0.0055**           !0.0065*                             !0.0355**
                                       (0.0022)           (0.0022)           (0.0038)                              (0.0171)
Share&of&Conservative&Seatst(2                                                                 0.0614**
                                                                                               (0.0262)
Ln(Pop)                                0.0246**           0.0233*            !0.1312            0.0114             0.1091**
Log&Population                         (0.0119)           (0.0130)           (0.7052)          (0.0108)            (0.0512)
Observations                             1764               1764               1764              1764                1764
Controls                                   a                  b                  a                 a                   a
Local&Authority&Fixed&Effects                                                   Yes
Kleinbergen(Paap&rk&Wald&F&statistic                                                                                10.215


Panel&B:&Dependent&variable:&Employment&Growth&of&Independent&retailers&(Local&Authority&aggregate)


                                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)
Estimation&method                        OLS                OLS                OLS                OLS                2SLS
Planning&Grants&for&Major&
Retail&Developmentst(2                 0.0017**          0.0018**            0.0027*                               0.0119*
                                       (0.0008)          (0.0008)            (0.0015)                              (0.0066)
Share&of&Conservative&Seatst(2                                                                 !0.0205**
                                                                                                (0.0093)
Ln(Pop)                                !0.0000             0.0013             0.3025             0.0035            !0.0291
Log&Population                         (0.0050)           (0.0051)           (0.2781)           (0.0044)           (0.0190)
Observations                             1764               1764               1764               1764               1764
Controls                                   a                  b                  a                  a                  a
Local&Authority&Fixed&Effects                                                   Yes
Kleinbergen(Paap&rk&Wald&F&statistic                                                                                10.215
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns of Panel A is the
one year log employment growth of all stores belonging to large retail chains with less than 28 employees. The dependent
variable in all columns of Panel B is the one year log employment growth of all independent retailers. The time period is
1998–2004. All estimates are based on 303 English Local Authorities. Errors are clustered at the Local Authority level. All
columns include year dummies. All columns estimated by OLS, except for column 6, which is estimated by 2SLS (planning
grants are instrumented with the share of seats won by Conservative councilors in the Local Authority at time t!2). Control
“a” includes the log of population, the fraction of urban and village areas, the log median hourly wage, the percentage of
people below 15 years, and the percentage of people with a college degree (NSV 3 or 4, measured in 2001) in the Local
Authority. Control "b" includes "a", plus the percentage of people working in manufacturing and retail, an interaction term
between log median hourly wage and a dummy equal to unity for any year after 1999 (this is to capture the possible
differential effects of the minimum wage introduction), and the log of the total area (in hectares) covered by the Local
Authority.All\regressions\weighted\by\the\share\of\population\in\the\Local\Authority.
Table&8&(&Margins&of&Adjustment
Panel&A:&Dependent&variable:&DHS&decomposition&of&the&Employment&Growth&of&Small&Formats&(Local&Authority&aggregate)
                                                        (1)              (2)                 (3)                  (4)
Estimation&method:&2SLS
                                                                                         Incumbents'&        Incumbents'&
Growth&Margin&                                         Entry             Exit             Expansion           Contraction



Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&Developmentst(2        !0.0571**              0.0096               !0.0049             !0.0052
                                                         (0.0264)             (0.0142)             (0.0043)            (0.0033)
Ln(Pop)                                                  0.1460*               !0.0297              0.0193             0.0184*
Log&Population                                           (0.0798)             (0.0417)             (0.0129)            (0.0096)
Observations                                               1759                 1759                 1759                1759
Controls                                                     a                    a                    a                   a

Panel&B:&Dependent&variable:&DHS&decomposition&of&the&Employment&Growth&of&Independent&retailers&(Local&Authority&aggregate)
                                                        (2)              (3)                  (4)                  (5)
Estimation&method:&2SLS
                                                                                        Incumbents'&         Incumbents'&
Growth&Margin&                                         Entry             Exit            Expansion            Contraction



Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&Developmentst(2          !0.0087            !0.0264*               0.0024              !0.0013
                                                         (0.0089)            (0.0141)              (0.0029)            (0.0022)
Ln(Pop)                                                   0.0391              0.0794*               !0.0074             0.0045
Log&Population                                           (0.0263)            (0.0413)              (0.0090)            (0.0064)
Observations                                               1763                1763                  1763                1763
Controls                                                     a                   a                     a                   a

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The time period is 1998–2004. All estimates are based on 303
English Local Authorities. The dependent variables are the different components of employment growth of small formats (Panel A)
and independent retailers (Panel B), computed using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) formula. All columns include year dummies.
Control “a” includes the log of population, the fraction of urban and village areas, the log median hourly wage, the percentage of
people below 15 years, and the percentage of people with a college degree (NSV 3 or 4, measured in 2001) in the Local Authority.
Errors are clustered at the Local Authority level. All regressions estimated by 2SLS using the share of seats won by Conservative
councilors in the Local Authority at time t!2 to instrument for the number of planning grants at t!2 as in Table 7, column 5. All
regressionsXareXweightedXbyXtheXshareXofXpopulationXinXtheXLocalXAuthority.
Table&9&(&Robustness&on&IV&Estimates
Panel&A&(&Small&Formats

Experiment                               Baseline&IV    Cumulate&     Employment&       2&years&    Control&for& Control&for& Control&for& Use&national&
                                                         grants       in&levels&and&   averages       total&     major&grants& exit&of&    elections&in&
                                                                           Local&                  employment&       in&         large&         IV
                                                                        Authority&                 growth&in&LA neighboring&    stores
                                                                      Fixed&Effects                                 Local&
                                                                                                                 Authorities
Estimation&method:&2SLS
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&
Developmentst(2                          !0.0355**                                                   !0.0376**      !0.0340*      !0.0340**     !0.0729*
                                          (0.0171)                                                    (0.0184)      (0.0178)       (0.0169)     (0.0399)
Sum&of&Planning&Grants&for&Major&
Retail&Developments&between&t(3&
and&t(1                                                 !0.0116**
                                                         (0.0052)
Sum&of&Planning&Grants&for&Major&
Retail&Developments&between&1993&
and&t(2                                                                !0.0143**
                                                                        (0.0067)

Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&
Developmentst(2,&2&years&average                                                       !0.0319*
                                                                                       (0.0170)
Total&Employment&Growth                                                                                0.0514
                                                                                                      (0.0412)
Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&
Developmentst(2,&neighboring&Local&
Authorities                                                                                                          !0.0004
                                                                                                                     (0.0008)
Number&of&exiting&stores&with&more&
than&150&employeest                                                                                                               !0.0288**
                                                                                                                                   (0.0116)
Ln(Pop)                                   0.1091**       0.1147**        !0.9197       0.0978**        0.0675       0.1088**       0.1123**     0.2183*
Log&Population                            (0.0512)       (0.0524)       (0.8292)       (0.0491)       (0.0517)      (0.0503)       (0.0512)     (0.1226)
Observations                                1764           1747           2050            887           1764          1764           1764         1757
Controls                                      a              a              a              a              a             a              a            a
Kleinbergen(Paap&rk&Wald&F&statistic       10.215         10.029         16.565          9.596         8.897          9.351         10.354       3.339

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The time period is 1998–2004. All estimates are based on 303 English Local
Authorities. Panel (A) refers to all stores belonging to large retail chains (more than 10,000 employees) with less than 28 employees, Panel (B) refers to
independent retailers. The dependent variable in columns 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 is the log yearly employment growth. The dependent variable in column 3 is
log employment in levels. The dependent variable in column 4 is a two year average of the employment growth. All columns include year dummies.
Control “a” includes the log of population, the fraction of urban and village areas, the log median hourly wage, the percentage of people below 15 years,
and the percentage of people with a college degree (NSV 3 or 4, measured in 2001) in the Local Authority. Errors are clustered at the Local Authority level.
All regressions estimated by 2SLS using as an instrument for major planning grants the share of seats won by Conservative councilors in the Local
Authority at time t!2 (or transfomations analoguous to the ones made to planning grants), except for column 8, where the instrument is the share of votes
going to the Conservative party in national elections (interpolated between election years). All regressions are weighted by the share of population in the
LocalXAuthority.
Table&9&(&Robustness&on&IV&Estimates
Panel&B&(&Independents


Experiment                               Baseline&IV    Cumulate&     Employment&       2&years&    Control&for& Control&for& Control&for& Use&national&
                                                         grants       in&levels&and&   averages       total&     major&grants& exit&of&    elections&in&
                                                                           Local&                  employment&       in&         large&         IV
                                                                        Authority&                 growth&in&LA neighboring&    stores
                                                                      Fixed&Effects                                 Local&
                                                                                                                 Authorities
Estimation&method:&2SLS
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&
Developmentst(2                           0.0119*                                                     0.0128*        0.0134*      0.0117*        0.0049
                                          (0.0066)                                                    (0.0070)       (0.0072)     (0.0065)      (0.0070)
Sum&of&Planning&Grants&for&Major&
Retail&Developments&between&t(3&
and&t(1                                                  0.0036*
                                                         (0.0021)
Sum&of&Planning&Grants&for&Major&
Retail&Developments&between&1993&
and&t(2                                                                  0.0045


                                                                        (0.0028)
Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&
Developmentst(2,&2&years&average                                                       0.0120*
                                                                                       (0.0067)
Total&Employment&Growth                                                                              /0.0214*
                                                                                                     (0.0128)
Planning&Grants&for&Major&Retail&
Developmentst(2,&neighboring&Local&
Authorities                                                                                                         /0.0006**
                                                                                                                     (0.0003)
Number&of&exiting&stores&with&more&
than&150&employeest                                                                                                                0.0036
                                                                                                                                  (0.0045)
Ln(Pop)                                   /0.0291         /0.0289        0.1281         /0.0286       /0.0122        /0.0279      /0.0296       /0.0096
Log&Population                            (0.0190)       (0.0197)       (0.3441)       (0.0192)       (0.0174)       (0.0191)     (0.0192)      (0.0197)
Observations                                1764           1747           2051            887           1764           1764         1764          1757
Controls                                      a              a              a              a              a              a            a             a
Kleinbergen(Paap&rk&Wald&F&statistic       10.215         10.029         16.565          9.596         8.897           9.351       10.354        3.339
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The time period is 1998–2004. All estimates are based on 303 English Local
Authorities. Panel (A) refers to all stores belonging to large retail chains (more than 10,000 employees) with less than 28 employees, Panel (B) refers to
independent retailers. The dependent variable in columns 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 is the log yearly employment growth. The dependent variable in column 3 is
log employment in levels. The dependent variable in column 4 is a two year average of the employment growth. All columns include year dummies.
Control “a” includes the log of population, the fraction of urban and village areas, the log median hourly wage, the percentage of people below 15 years,
and the percentage of people with a college degree (NSV 3 or 4, measured in 2001) in the Local Authority. Errors are clustered at the Local Authority level.
All regressions estimated by 2SLS using as an instrument for major planning grants the share of seats won by Conservative councilors in the Local
Authority at time t/2 (or transfomations analoguous to the ones made to planning grants), except for column 8, where the instrument is the share of votes
going to the Conservative party in national elections (interpolated between election years). All regressions are weighted by the share of population in the
LocalXAuthority.
Table&A1:&Additional&Summary&Statistics
                                                                            Standard&
Variable                                               Mean       Median
                                                                            Deviation
Planning&Grantst=2                                     2.45          2        2.86
Share&of&Conservativest=2                              0.31         0.3       0.22
Population&Growth&1991–2001                            0.01        0.01       0.01
Fraction&of&population&below&15&years                  0.19        0.19       0.01
Hourly&wage&(£)                                        7.97        7.76        1.3
Fraction&of&population&with&a&college&degree&in&2001   0.18        0.18       0.05
Fraction&of&Urban&Areas                                 0.7        0.74       0.27
Fraction&of&Village&Areas                              0.15         0.1       0.16
Notes: These summary statistics refer to the estimation sample (1,815 observations, 303
LocalBAuthorities,B1998–2004).BSources:BIDBR,BODPM,BBLED,BCensusB1991BandB2001,BASHE.
Table&A2:&Independent&stores&density&and&Small&Formats&using&&alternative&ways&to&identify&small&formats
Dependent&Variable:&Number&of&Independent&stores&in&the&postcode
Firm&Classification&Method                               Store&Employment&         Estimation& Coefficient&on&dummy& Standard&           N
                                                         Threshold&from&"Small& method         Small&Format          Error
                                                         Formats"
(1)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <28                       OLS         0.3811***             (0.0391)            12559
(2)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <25                       OLS         0.3762***             (0.0377)            12559
(3)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <30                       OLS         0.3857***             (0.0383)            12559
(4)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <35                       OLS         0.4469***             (0.0392)            12559
(5)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <28                       OLS         0.3104***             (0.0331)            12559
(6)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <25                       OLS         0.2936***             (0.0317)            12559
(7)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <30                       OLS         0.3298***             (0.0334)            12559
(8)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <35                       OLS         0.3873***             (0.0350)            12559
Notes: Each line corresponds to a different regression. The sample for the regressions in rows 1 to 4 is the set of all stores belonging to retail
chains with at least 10,000 employees. The sample for the regressions in rows 5 to 8 is the set of all stores belonging to retail chains with at
least one store with 150 employees. The dependent variable in all rows is the number of stores in the same postcode belonging to independent
retailers. The definition for small formats varies in each row as noted. All columns include Local Authority fixed effects, standard errors clustered
at&the&postcode&level.&&All&regressions&estimated&by&OLS.




Table&A3:&Correlation&between&small&formats&and&planning&grants&using&alternative&ways&to&identify&small&formats
Dependent&Variable:&&One&year&Employment&Growth&of&Small&Formats
Firm&Classification&Method                               Store&Employment&        Estimation& Coefficient&on&                Standard&   N
                                                         Threshold                method      Planning&grants&(tJ2)          Error
(1)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <28                      IV          G0.0355**                      G0.0171     1764
(2)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <25                      IV          G0.0300*                       G0.0169     1760
(3)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <30                      IV          G0.0352**                      G0.0175     1764
(4)   At&least&10,000&Employees                          <35                      IV          G0.0430**                      G0.0171     1764
(5)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <28                      IV          G0.0029                        G0.0095     1764
(6)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <25                      IV          G0.0004                        G0.0095     1764
(7)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <30                      IV          G0.0101                        G0.0099     1764
(8)   At&least&one&store&with&more&than&150&employees    <35                      IV          G0.0170*                       G0.0096     1764

Notes: Each line corresponds to a different regression. The dependent variable in all regressions is the yearly log growth of small retail formats.
The definition of small formats varies in each row as noted. The time period is 1998–2004. All estimates are based on 303 English Local
Authorities. Errors are clustered at the Local Authority level. All columns include year dummies, the log of population, the fraction of urban and
village areas, the log median hourly wage, the percentage of people below 15 years, and the percentage of people with a college degree (NSV 3
or 4, measured in 2001) in the Local Authority. All regressions estimated by 2SLS (planning grants are instrumented with the share of seats won
by&Conservative&councilors&in&the&Local&Authority&at&time&tG2).&All&regressions&weighted&by&the&share&of&population&in&the&Local&Authority.
