NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND RISK MANAGEMENT AT UNPROTECTED BANKS:
NATIONAL BANKS IN THE 1890S
Charles W. Calomiris
Mark Carlson
Working Paper 19806
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19806

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

We thank Stijn Claessens, Luc Laeven, and seminar participants at the Board of Governors, at the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Cleveland, and New York, at Columbia University, at Tilburg University,
at Dartmouth’s Tuck School, and at Erasmus University for comments. Ianni Drivas provided valuable
research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board, the International Monetary Fund, or their staffs. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Charles W. Calomiris and Mark Carlson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Governance and Risk Management at Unprotected Banks: National Banks in the
1890s
Charles W. Calomiris and Mark Carlson
NBER Working Paper No. 19806
January 2014
JEL No. G21,G32,N21
ABSTRACT
Managers’ incentives may conflict with those of shareholders or creditors, particularly at leveraged,
opaque banks. Bankers may abuse their control rights to give themselves excessive salaries, favored
access to credit, or to take excessive risks that benefit themselves at the expense of depositors. Banks
must design contracting and governance structures that sufficiently resolve agency problems so that
they can attract funding from outside shareholders and depositors. We examine banks from the 1890s,
a period when there were no distortions from deposit insurance or government interventions to assist
banks. We use national banks’ Examination Reports to link differences in managerial ownership to
different corporate governance policies, risk, and methods of risk management. Formal corporate governance
is lower when manager ownership shares are higher. Managerial rent seeking via salaries and insider
lending is greater when managerial ownership is higher, and lower when formal governance controls
are employed. Banks with higher managerial ownership target lower default risk. Higher managerial
ownership and less-formal governance are associated with a greater reliance on cash rather than capital
as a means of limiting risk, which we show is consistent both with higher adverse-selection costs of
raising outside equity and with greater moral-hazard with respect to risk shifting.

Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Mark Carlson
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
mark.a.carlson@frb.gov

1. Introduction
Incentives of managers may conflict with those of shareholders or creditors, particular at
highly leveraged and opaque institutions such as banks. Agency problems arise both with respect
to the outright transfer of resources (e.g., excessive salaries or subsidized access to credit), as well
as implicit transfers related to risk management practices (transfers from creditors to stockholders
through risk shifting). Bankers must design contracting and governance structures that sufficiently
resolve agency problems so that they can attract funding from minority shareholders and
depositors. Examining how banks resolve those conflicts in today’s banking environment is
complicated by government regulation of capital structure and corporate governance practices, and
by protections, such as deposit insurance, too-big-to-fail policies, and a lender of last resort, which
can distort incentives. To investigate the endogenous emergence of corporate governance
mechanisms that limit rent seeking and credibly manage risk, we look at banks from the 1890s, a
period when there was no deposit insurance, no lender of last resort, and virtually no government
interventions to save banks. We do so using national banks’ Examination Reports, a detailed but
seldom used resource that provides considerable information about banks’ ownership structures,
governance structures, tools for managing risk and levels of risk. This information allows us to link
differences in ownership structure (especially the extent of managerial ownership) to differences in
corporate governance policies, risk outcomes, and banks’ approaches to risk management.
The simplest class of agency problems revolves around the transfer of resources to insiders
who maintain operational control over the bank. Bank managers with sufficient control rights may
pay themselves excessive salaries or give themselves access to credit on subsidized terms. For a
sample of East Asian firms in the mid-1990s, Claessens, Djankov, Fan, and Lang (2002) find that
concentrated management ownership increases firm value when ownership and cash flow rights
are aligned, but in cases where managers enjoy greater control rights than cash flow rights,
managerial ownership concentration is value-destroying.
1

Control rights can also give rise to agency problems with respect to risk management. In
general, managers who have large stakes in the performance of their banks may prefer to take less
risk in order to preserve their own financial wealth or their firm-specific human capital (see the
discussion in Demsetz, Saidenberg, and Strahan 1997; Laeven and Levine 2009). In some cases,
particularly in the presence of safety net subsidies, diversified outside equity holders with sufficient
stakes in banks may seek to incentivize managers to take more risk and may employ pay schemes
that reward risk taking (see Laeven and Levine 2009; Cheng, Hong and Scheinkman 2013; Bai and
Elyasiani 2013). Anginer, Demirguc-Kunt, Huizinga and Ma (2013) study an international sample of
banks for 2003-2011 and find that stronger formal governance tends to be associated with lower
bank capital ratios, and that managers with large stakes tend to be choose higher bank
capitalization ratios.1 For samples of publicly traded firms more generally, Holderness, Kroszner
and Sheehan (1999) find that, in 1935 and 1995, higher managerial ownership is associated with
lower risk.
At the same time, the literature has found that management controlled banks may become
risk loving in some states of the world. One agency problem results from the difference in risk
preferences between equity and debt holders, which in the presence of limited liability, gives rise to
moral hazard problems. In some states of the world -- especially in the wake of losses that reduce
net worth and increase leverage -- bankers with substantial equity stakes and control rights will
prefer to increase asset risk at the expense of debtholders (this problem – modeled by Jensen and
Meckling 1976, Myers 1977, and Merton 1977 – is known as “risk shifting” or “asset substitution”).2

They found, however, that in 2006, the payoff of risk reversed this effect for managers with sufficiently large
stock option wealth. Like Anginer, Demirguc-Kunt, Huizinga and Ma (2013), Saunders, Strock and Travlos
(1990) find variation over time in the extent to which higher managerial ownership is associated with more
of less risk taking. Saunders et al. find that during the period 1979-1982 greater managerial ownership was
associated with higher risk, which they attribute to the deregulatory environment. Consistent with that
interpretation, Bruno and Claessens (2010) show that legal regimes that are excessively strict can be value
destroying; better corporate governance combined with more flexible legal environments can lead to
superior outcomes through the ability to undertake value-creating risk.
2 In sufficiently bad states of the world, bankers may also choose to commit fraud and abscond (Calomiris and
Kahn 1991).
1

2

Moral-hazard issues can be mitigated through various measures, including short-term debt
contracting; a first-come, first-served rule for bank liquidation; and actions by bankers that credibly
signal good risk management, including the maintenance of a minimum amount of cash assets
(Calomiris and Kahn 1991, Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova 2013). If bank debt holders are protected
by deposit insurance or other guarantees, however, moral hazard can be exacerbated because bank
debt holders lose their incentive to monitor and control banks’ risk taking (Calomiris, Heider and
Hoerova 2013). Gorton and Rosen (1995) argue that, when faced with a declining industry,
managers may boost profits to hide poor prospects from shareholders.
These agency issues have received additional attention after the recent financial crisis.
Many of studies, in addition to those cited above, have debated the extent to which corporate
governance and manager incentive schemes influenced how banks fared during the crisis (Acharya
et al. 2009; Berger, Imbierowicz, and Rauch 2012; Ellul and Yeramilli 2010; and Fahlenbrach,
Prilmeier and Stulz 2012; Senior Supervisors Group 2008; Mehran, Morrison and Shapiro 2011).
Although the nature of conflicts of interest between bankers and their funding sources
differ between outside equity and debt, there is also considerable overlap in the usefulness of
corporate governance tools for addressing many aspects of conflicts of interest that are common to
both types of outside funding sources. For example, the presence of outside directors, or the
“bonding” of management, should mitigate the risk of defalcation, which benefits both outside
stockholders and debtholders. Furthermore, as we show in our modeling of risk management, when
risk management requires costly effort by bank managers, the moral-hazard problem of risk
shifting can arise between inside equity owners (managers) and all non-managerial sources of
funds (equity holders and debt holders), not just creditors.
Corporate governance policies of banks should arise endogenously, in part to reduce the
costs related to the two sets of conflicts of interest in risk taking – that is, the conflict between
shareholders and debtholders, and the conflict between managers and shareholders.
3

Understanding how governance policies respond to such conflicts, and what effects ownership
structure and governance policies have on risk taking, is highly challenging in the current
regulatory environment, where policies such as deposit insurance, too-big-to-fail (TBTF) bailouts,
and legal restrictions on controlling ownership interests in banks, which remove the disciplinary
incentives of debtholders and limit the ability of equity holders to concentrate ownership (on the
effects of TBTF, for example, see Acharya, et. al 2009).3
To improve our understanding of how ownership structure affects corporate governance,
and how ownership structure and corporate governance affect banks’ risk management, we
examine the links among ownership, governance, and risk management during a period prior to the
establishment of a regulatory safety net for banks. During the National Banking Era (1863-1914),
government protection was absent, and the latitude for voluntary governance decisions by banks
was great. We observe large cross-sectional differences in the ownership structure of national
banks, as well as great variation in their choices for organizing corporate governance. Banks also
structured their portfolios very differently, and displayed important differences in their
management of risk – indicated by balance sheet differences and the patterns of bank failure during
the panics of this era, especially the severe Panic of 1893. Cross-sectional differences in ownership,
governance choices, portfolios and risks, under a common and relatively laissez-faire regulatory
environment, makes national banks’ experiences in the 1890s an ideal laboratory for examining
how manager ownership and board oversight are related to rent seeking, portfolio choice, and
failure risk, in an environment free of many of the regulatory distortions that affect those decisions
today. Another advantage of focusing on cross-sectional variation among national banks is that
their business models were quite similar (in contrast to today’s banking system, in which small
banks focus on lending and deposit taking, while global universal banks undertake a much wider
range of activities for a quite different customer base).
The so-called separation of banking and commerce places special constraints on who is permitted to
exercise a controlling interest in a bank.
3

4

Corporate governance in the historical U.S. banking context has been the subject of
numerous prior studies. One of the most important themes of that literature, which is not present in
other contexts, has been the connection between stock ownership and lending. In today’s banks,
there are strict limits on loans to officers and directors, and it is considered inappropriate to
provide better terms to loans offered to officers, directors or other large stockholders. Historically,
in the “unit” banking system of the United States, where banks were local, single-office enterprises,
banks acted as “loan clubs” for insiders, who were often large shareholders with significant formal
or informal control rights. Generally, the empirical literature has taken a benign view of insider
lending, arguing that it facilitated value creation and risk management because insiders had strong
incentives to screen and monitor one another (Lamoreaux and Glaisek 1991; Lamoreaux 1994;
Meissner 2005; Haber and Maurer 2007; Pearson and Taylor 2012; Hansmann and Parglender
2012; Freeman, Pearson and Taylor 2012). Bodenhorn (2013) finds that bank value increases with
the number of individual blockholders, but declines with the number of institutional blockholders –
that is, blockholders who are not part of the loan club. According to this evidence, loans clubs
increased the value of bank stock because insiders valued preferential access to lending that was
attached to their blockholding status.4
National banks, which were first chartered during the Civil War, operated alongside statechartered banks. Although national banks were chartered under the same charter rules throughout
the United States, like state-chartered banks they operated as single office (unit) banks. As we will
show, national banks, like the state-chartered banks studied by Lamoreaux, Bodenhorn and others,
engaged in large amounts of insider lending. Thus, it is important to take into account the effects of
ownership and governance rules on this aspect of bank behavior.
Interestingly, 19th century corporate chartering rules often employed voting rights rules that reduced the
voting power of large shareholders, largely to reduce concentration of control over corporations. Although
these departures from one share-one vote rules were common for many firms, they were less common for
banks (Hilt 2008). This may have reflected the desirability of encouraging insider blockholding, as well as the
relative absence of the political consequences of control over a bank once banks became chartered freely
(roughly around the second quarter of the 19th century).
4

5

The data we use come primarily from national banks’ Examination Reports, a source which,
to our knowledge, has been little used, and never used for quantitative analysis of the questions we
address here. These Reports provide very detailed pictures of the banks and the bank examiners’
views about them. They describe the equity ownership of managers and of Board members (and
identifies whether managers are on the Board). There is substantial heterogeneity with respect to
ownership structure among the national banks in our sample. Some managers own a considerable
portion of the shares of the bank, while in other cases the managers own only a small fraction. We
also have information about a variety of corporate governance measures that could be used to
provide oversight of bank managers, such as the frequency of board meetings, the number of
outside directors on the board, and whether there was an independent loan review committee that
included outside directors. We also know whether the managers were required to post surety
bonds, which protected other equity holders in the event of fraud. The reports also provide a fairly
detailed picture of the balance sheet, as well as containing the examiner’s assessments of various
measures of asset quality, forward-looking expectations of loss, and qualitative evaluations. Thus,
we are able to examine the relationship between ownership and governance choices, as well as the
impact of both on risk preferences at the bank. The richness of the data permits us to provide an
integrated picture of the linkages among ownership, governance, and financial stability.
For our analysis, we gather data from 206 banks from 37 fairly large cities located mainly in
the Western and Southern parts of the United States. Those regions saw the greatest financial
turmoil and the highest rates of bank failure during the Panic of 1893. By selecting all the national
banks from 37 similar cities in these regions we intend to construct a sample of reasonably
comparable national banks, in terms of their economic environment and lending activities. We
combine the information in the Examination Reports with standard balance sheet data from the Call
Reports, as well as other location-specific controls, drawn from various censuses and other sources.
We examine the banks’ situations in the early 1890s, just prior to the Panic of 1893.
6

This panic is a useful moment to focus upon because it brought the most severe distress for
banks of any of the crises during the National Banking Era. That episode resulted in the highest
numbers of bank failures of any of the crises, and was one of three episodes during the National
Banking Era that witnessed a suspension of convertibility in New York. Although most of the banks
in our sample avoided failure, there was enough failure risk during this episode to provide
substantial observable cross-sectional variation – something that is absent during most of the
National Banking Era.
We look first at the interplay between ownership and governance by gauging the extent to
which the structure of ownership affects banks’ choices of corporate governance policies. We
report some regressions in which managerial ownership is treated as an exogenous variable, and
others in which it is assumed to be endogenous. We instrument managerial ownership using
managerial turnover events. The patterns we observe are robust across specifications: All five of
the formal corporate governance policy choices we consider are mutually positively correlated with
one another, and each of them is negatively correlated with the degree of managerial ownership.
We interpret this as evidence that managerial ownership concentration is a substitute for formal
governance tools in resolving conflicts of interest between managers and the sources of outside
funding for the bank.
Next we can see how ownership and governance – taking into account the endogeneity of
governance to ownership structure – affects rent seeking behavior, which is captured by
managerial salaries and loans to managers. We find that managers’ salaries relative to assets tend
to be higher when they own a greater portion of outstanding stock, reflecting their greater ability to
extract rents. Interestingly, the total proportion of loans made to insiders is not affected by the
structure of ownership or governance, but ownership and oversight have a strong impact on who
receives those insider loans. When managers have greater equity ownership, more inside loans are

7

allocated to them; when outside directors exercise greater oversight in corporate governance, a
greater proportion of the inside loans are received by them.
We also connect ownership structure and corporate governance choice to banks’ risk
preferences and their balance sheet choices. In particular, we can observe how ownership and
governance affected bank portfolio structure, performance and failure probabilities during the
Panic of 1893. Building the analysis out in this way provides a rich perspective on the connections
among ownership, governance, rent seeking, and risk choices.
Our results on risk taking indicate that managers who own a greater proportion of the
bank’s stock take less risk according to any measure of risk we employ. For example, with respect
to forward-looking measures of risk, managers with large equity stakes in their banks are less likely
to rely upon high-cost “borrowed funds” and are also less likely to be involved in real estate
lending. Both activities were perceived by contemporaries as riskier and such perceptions are
generally borne out in the Panic. Ex post measures of risk – the proportion of troubled loans, the
estimated probability of bank failure, or the forecasted losses anticipated by the bank’s examiner –
paint a similar picture; greater management stakes are associated with lower default risk. We view
these results as consistent with the idea that managers with a larger share of their wealth invested
in the bank were more risk–averse in their risk management practices. Banks with lower
managerial stakes, and consequently with more formal governance policies, tended to undertake
greater levels of risk. That finding is consistent with outside directors, who represent the interests
of all equity holders, as preferring a slightly higher level of risk.
The preference for lower risk appears to have been beneficial during the Panic of 1893 as
we find that banks with higher manager ownership were less likely to fail. This affect is due largely
to how these banks structured their balance sheets as when additional balance sheet controls are
included, the direct effect of manager ownership concentration is reduced.

8

Finally, we investigate how banks differed in the financial structures they chose to manage
risk. Banks seeking to reduce the risk of default on their debts that is traceable to risks of default on
their loans can use two alternative risk management tools in combination: a higher cash-to-asset
ratio (on the asset side of the balance sheet), or a higher equity-to-asset ratio (on the liability side of
the balance sheet). We find that banks with higher managerial ownership concentration relied
more on cash assets, and less on equity, to control bank default risk. This finding is consistent with
the view that high managerial ownership, and informal governance, make bank managers’ behavior
less observable and less controllable. It is harder to observe and control risk management at banks
without formal governance structures. Similarly, it is harder for outsiders to observe the level of
risk in such banks. Under these circumstances, banks will suffer from greater asset substitution
risk, and greater adverse-selection problems (if they were to attempt to raise additional sources of
outside equity). Greater asset substitution risk will tend to lead banks to rely more on cash as a
means of signaling good risk management practices (Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova 2013). Greater
adverse-selection problems raise the cost of equity finance, and thus also lead to a greater weight
on cash in controlling default risk. Given the paucity of equity offerings in our sample, we think the
asset substitution channel is more likely to be the important one.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an illustrative model of ownership,
governance, and asymmetric information. Section 3 discusses the data sources and the sample.
That section also explains the construction of our corporate governance measures and the variables
we use as indicators of rent seeking and risk preferences. The baseline analysis is contained in
Section 4 while a variety of robustness checks are presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.

Section 2. A Model of Endogenous Asymmetric Information
We begin with the simplest possible model of corporate governance choice, where the
assets of the bank consist entirely of loans and the financing of the bank consists only of stock. We
9

relax these assumptions subsequently, and show that the central implications of the model – that is,
that higher managerial wealth tends to reduce the reliance on formal corporate governance – also
hold when we allow for deposit financing and the holding of cash assets.
A banker is endowed with wealth (E) and lending opportunities (a given number of
profitable potential loans that he might undertake). Each loan is normalized to be of identical,
unitary size. The number and amount of loans made, X , is between 0 and Xmax. For simplicity, we
assume that the bank holds only loans and is financed entirely by equity provided by the banker
and outside investors (there is no bank debt). The manager’s equity share of the bank, m, is
therefore E/X. When we add deposit liabilities and cash assets to the model – as in Calomiris,
Heider and Hoerova (2013) – the main conclusions of the model are the same, but additional
conclusions follow with respect to the role of cash in incentivizing good risk management.
Interestingly, in this framework, cash plays an important role in incentivizing good risk
management whether or not outsider financing is in the form of debt or equity. This warrants
emphasis: unlike the discussion of Jensen and Meckling (1976), the problem of risk shifting in this
model is a conflict between the insider/manager and all outside funding sources, not just debt
holders.5 In the simplified model, bank managers face incentives to increase risk in valuedestroying ways (so-called “asset substitution” or “risk shifting”) even though debt finance is
absent. Minority shareholders, like creditors, have an interest in ensuring proper risk management
In the model presented here, the outside equity investor either becomes an insider by being invited to
participate in governance, or remains uninvolved in governance knowing that the banker will invest in risk
management due to a sufficiently high level of m (the banker’s proportion of ownership). As we discuss
further below, and as Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova (2013) show, in this model, the optimal contract for
investors who remain outsiders (and therefore are not able to control risk management) would be senior
deposits in a bank with cash reserves as well as loans. The key differences in assumptions between that
model and the simplified one presented here are the availability of a single large outside investor (assumed
here) and the possibility of establishing oversight of risk management by that outside investor. Calomiris,
Heider and Hoerova (2013) assume that outside investors are fragmented. Their solution to incentivecompatible risk management entails the use of deposits and cash reserve holdings. In a small bank, with a
single large outside investor, and the possibility of direct monitoring of the banker by that outside investor,
depositor withdrawal threats and idle cash holdings are not necessary to achieve efficient risk management.
The Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova (2013) model captures the role of deposits and reserves in bank
corporate governance, while the model presented here highlights the relationship between the banker and a
large outside equity investor, which is not considered by Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova (2013).
5

10

by bank managers, which can either be achieved through higher managerial stakes in the bank or
formal corporate governance.
Outside equity is provided by a single outside investor. The outside investor and the banker
are risk-neutral and have identical reservation returns of R, which represents the gross return they
could earn on an alternative to lending. The loan opportunities of the banker are worth pursuing,
but only if the banker invests his own effort in risk management. One can think of this investment in
risk management as the banker’s continuing performance of due diligence, monitoring, and
enforcement of loan covenants. Risk management effort is privately costly to the banker; it entails
disutility equal to BX. With risk management, loans earn a certain return of Y > R. Without risk
management, loans earn Y with probability p and 0 with probability (1-p). Without risk
management, loans are not worthwhile investments because pY < R.
The observability of risk management depends on the corporate governance environment
chosen. If the banker chooses to include the outside investor in the governance of the bank, then
risk management is observable and contractible. If the banker chooses not to include the outside
investor in the governance of the bank, then risk management is a matter of private information
only observed by the banker.
The banker’s “salary” (S) is a form of rent extraction, which is endogenous to the corporate
governance choice of the banker. If the banker does not include the outside investor in the
governance of the bank, then he will set his salary such that the outside investor receives only the
reservation return R. If the banker includes the outside investor in the governance of the firm, then
he must share the rents from lending above R with the outside investor. The precise degree of that
sharing should reflect, in a more realistic model of the market for outside funding, the competition
among outside investors to supply funds to the bank. In our model, we simply assume, without loss
of generality, that the banker and outside investor split the rents evenly when the outside investor
is included in corporate governance.
11

As we will show, in equilibrium, because risk management is privately costly to the banker,
without outside investor involvement in corporate governance, the banker will have to limit the
size of the bank to X*. With outsider involvement in corporate governance, the banker can set the
size of the bank to Xmax. Thus, the banker trades off the benefit of greater rents that come with
larger bank size (which is only feasible if he includes the outside investor in the governance of the
bank, and shares the rents from lending with the outside investor) against the cost of sharing the
rents of lending with the outside investor.
X* is determined by the incentive-compatibility constraint for the banker to invest in risk
management in the absence of the involvement of the outside investor in governance. Without
outsider involvement, the banker will choose to invest in risk management only if the payoff to him
from doing so exceeds the payoff from not doing so. This is captured by the expression:
(1)

SX + m(YX – SX) – BX > p[SX + m(YX – SX)].

Recall that m=E/X. X* is the maximum feasible level of X at which this equation is satisfied
(that is, where the equation is satisfied as an equality, where the banker is indifferent to investing
in risk management). X* also implies a unique minimum value of m*.
(2)

m* = E/X* = {[B/(1-p)] – S}/ (Y – S).

As this expression shows, the critical values of m* and X* depend on S. S will be chosen to
transfer all rent to the banker, leaving the outside investor earning only the reservation level of
return, R. In other words, S is chosen by the banker to satisfy the following expression, which is the
participation constraint for the outside investor:
(3)

(X – E)R = (1 – m)(YX – SX).

This expression reduces to S = Y – R.
Thus, the condition determining the critical value of m* can be rewritten as:
(4)

m* = {[B/(1-p)] – (Y – R)}/ R.

12

This expression can be used to perform comparative static analysis of m* with respect to different
values of p, Y, and R. In particular, it can be shown that a higher Y implies a lower value of m*.
Intuitively, when rents are higher, the banker is able to credibly pledge to invest in risk
management, without oversight, with a lower minimum managerial stake m*.
Whether the banker will choose not to include the outside investor in governance (and
operate the bank at the level of X*) or to include the outside investor in governance (and operate
the bank at Xmax) depends on how much the banker receives under each of those alternatives. Recall
that, if the outside investor is included in corporate governance, he will split the rents with the
banker, and therefore, both the banker and the outside investor/director will each earn an identical
“salary” of S = (Y – R)/2.
If the following condition is satisfied, the banker will earn more by choosing to include the
outside investor in governance and operate the bank at Xmax:
(5)

ER + Xmax(Y – R)/2 > ER + X*(Y – R).

So long as Xmax > 2X*, this condition is satisfied. Note that, in any comparative static calculation, Y
affects the governance decision only indirectly through the positive effect of Y on X* (i.e., dX*/dY >0,
implying that, ceteris paribus, higher Y makes it less likely that outside investor’s will be invited to
participate in governance).
The above model has clear implications for corporate governance decisions and their
consequences. Depending on the size of rents per loan, and the number of loans available to the
banker, he will decide whether to run the bank with no outside oversight or to include the outside
investor in oversight. If the outside investor is included in oversight, then “asymmetric information”
and “asset substitution risk” will be eliminated, and the banker’s salary will be lower, as he is forced
to share rent with the outside investor.

13

Section 2.1. Adding Cash Assets and Deposits To the Model
The model can be extended to allow bankers to choose to hold cash in a credible and
observable form. If cash assets are added to the model without also allowing for senior deposit
claims, cash holdings serve no purpose. To see why, consider the effect on equation (1) of bank cash
holdings, C. Because cash is riskless, the banker will receive, in addition to the payoffs described in
equation (1), an amount mC irrespective of whether the banker undertakes risk management. Thus,
cash has no effect on the banker’s risk management effort.
As Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova (2013) point out, however, outsider financing via equity
is not generally the optimal contract under these circumstances. By giving outsiders a senior claim
on the cash flows of the bank, the banker ensures that when risk is not managed properly, and
when low payoffs occur, outsiders will receive all of the cash, not just (1-m)C. Thus when outsider
financing is partly in the form of deposits, and bankers are able to hold cash, bankers are able to
commit to proper risk management by holding a sufficient amount of cash assets. Deposits and cash
affect risk management because, unlike outside equity financing, deposit financing does not dilute
the upside of the banker’s profit, and unlike outside equity holders, deposits receive all of the
bank’s cash assets when the banker chooses not to invest in risk management and the bad outcome
occurs (with probability 1-p).
A fully realistic model (which would have to be much more complicated that either the
framework presented here, or that of Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova 2013) could allow for both
deposits and outside equity sources of funding. For example, with a more continuous distribution of
bank earnings outcomes, one could derive two forms of outside financing by assuming that
depositors are relatively risk-averse small investors who desire fixed claims, but that a single, large
investor, who is less risk-averse, is willing to provide outside equity financing. In that setup, we
conjecture that the same two basic results derived above and in Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova
(2013), respectively, will hold: (1) bankers that limit the amount of their risky lending relative to
14

their own equity interest in the bank, will be able to attract both depositors and an outside equity
investor without establishing formal corporate governance protections, and (2) bankers that
choose not to establish formal corporate governance protections can expand the amount of risky
lending in which they can engage, and thereby increase the rents they derive from banking, by
raising much of their outside financing in the form of senior debt and holding sufficient cash assets.
In other words, this framework implies that bankers that choose not to engage in formal corporate
governance will tend to rely less on equity in their financing, and will hold a larger fraction of their
assets in cash. In our empirical results, we will test, and confirm, these predictions.

Section 3. Data
We gather a variety of information on individual banks using the Call Reports and the
Examination Reports. In this section, we describe the data sources and the definitions of the
variables used in this study.

Section 3.1 The Sample
Our sample contains 206 banking institutions, which consists of all the national banks
located in 37 cities. As national banks (i.e., those chartered by the federal government), these
institutions were subject to the same set of rules and regulations regardless of where they were
located. Beneficially for our purposes, all the banks were unit, or single office, banks which makes it
easier to control for differences in local economic conditions. National banks were required to
provide information to the Comptroller of the Currency, their primary regulator, several times a
year. One method was through the Call Report, which contains information on the banks’ balance
sheets and was filed about five times a year. The second method of providing information about
themselves consisted of Examination Reports filed by examiners who visited each bank once or
twice a year. To be included in our sample, the banks needed to have provided information for the
15

September 1892 Call Report and to have had at least one Examination Report completed prior to
May 1893 (the onset of the Panic). Those are the Reports that provide the information used for the
analysis.6
The cities include many of the larger ones in the Western and Southern parts of the United
States.7 A number of them were designated as “reserve cities” for purposes of regulatory cash
reserve requirements. Deposits held at banks in reserve cities could count as part of a “country”
bank’s legal reserve and these deposits often served as part of the regional payment system (see
James 1978 for further detail). Some of the other cities, even though they were not technically
reserve cities, were important enough regionally that other banks held deposits there. Thus, many
of the banks in our sample played important roles as intermediaries in interbank markets.
Nevertheless, our sample includes a number of banks from smaller cities as well.

Section 3.2. Data Sources
The Examination Reports provide a wealth of information.8 The most vital material
contained in the Examination Reports for our purposes is the detailed information regarding the
extent of ownership by the bank’s management and its board, as well as the information about
corporate governance practices. The Examination Report lists all the bank directors and major
officers (President, Vice-President, Cashier), the number of shares held by these individuals, and
any loans to these individuals. Salaries of the officers were noted and whether the officers were
required to put up a surety bond, which would provide insurance against fraud. The examiner also

Two banks file the September 1892 call report but close prior to May 1893. For these institutions, we use
the examination report nearest closure, so long as it was filed at least [four] months prior to closure.
7 The cities are: Birmingham, AL; Mobile, AL; San Diego, CA; Los Angeles, CA; Denver, CO; Pueblo, CO;
Indianapolis, IN; Des Moines, IA; Dubuque, IA; Lexington, KY; Louisville, KY; New Orleans, LA; Minneapolis,
MN; Rochester, MN; St. Paul, MN; Stillwater; MN; Kansas City, MO; St. Joseph, MO; Helena, MT; Lincoln, NE;
Omaha, NE; Albuquerque, NM; Fargo, ND; Cincinnati, OH; Portland, OR; Knoxville, TN; Memphis, TN;
Nashville, TN; Dallas, TX; El Paso, TX; San Antonio, TX; Salt Lake City, UT; Spokane, WA; Tacoma, WA;
Milwaukee; WI; Racine, WI; and Cheyenne, WY.
8 Calomiris and Carlson (2013) provide a detailed summary of the contents of the Examination Reports. See
also Robertson (1995) for more information on the examination process.
6

16

commented on whether the board exercised any oversight of the officers, such as by maintaining an
independent discount and examining committee to review its loans, or through the frequency of its
board meetings.
The Examination Reports also considered a variety of aspects of the balance sheet beyond
what was covered by the Call Report. That information included additional quantitative detail
about the loan book, such as the amount of loans that were demand or time loans, the amount of
loans secured by real estate, and the amount secured by other collateral.9 There was also
information on the bank’s liabilities including additional detail on whether the bank borrowed from
other banks (a form of higher-interest, short-term “hot” money).
Finally, the examiner provided information on the performance of the bank, which
combined hard facts about the bank with their own judgments. Specifically, the examiners
evaluated the quality of the loan book by listing the volume of slow and overdue loans and
providing an estimate of expected losses on the banks’ assets – which included loans, as well as
other assets. The examiners also noted the amount and date of the most recent payment of
dividends, as well as whether funds that were retained would cover current and future losses or
build up the bank’s net worth.
In our analysis, for most of our balance sheet data, we use information from the September
1892 Call Report. The Call Report at this time provides considerable detail about the balance sheet.
While some additional information is available on the Examination Report, the Call Report has the
advantage of providing data for all the banks at the same point in time, which reduces concerns
about spurious differences due to seasonal or other time-related factors.

Although real estate lending was “prohibited” by national banks, national banks nonetheless found ways to
lend against real estate. A loan made without real estate as collateral could become collateralized by real
estate if the creditworthiness of the borrower deteriorated.
9

17

We also include a number of variables related to the economic environment in which the
bank operated. These include county level variables from the various censuses, such as population
and the share of income from agriculture.
All variables, their definitions, and their sources appear in Table 1. Summary statistics for
these variables appear in Table 2.

Section 3.3 Ownership and Governance Variables
The individuals most responsible for running the bank were its senior managers, in
particular the president, vice-president, and cashier (essentially, the chief operating officer of the
bank). They played a large role in making loans and arranging the funding of the bank, including
whether the bank borrowed from other banks via short-term, higher-interest “borrowed” money.
These individuals tended to own shares in the bank and were frequently also on the board of
directors (the President of the bank was always on the Board, and the others typically were, too). A
key variable in our analysis is the share of the bank’s stock owned by the officers of the bank. We
focus, in particular, on the fraction of outstanding bank shares owned by the president, vicepresident, and cashier.10 The average portion of shares owned by these three officers, as reported
in Table 2, was 25 percent. The histogram in Chart 1 provides a better indication of the distribution
of managerial ownership. At most banks in the sample, ownership by the managers is fairly
modest; the three top managers owned less than 6 percent of outstanding shares for about 30
percent of the sample. There are also cases of significant ownership concentration; the top three
managers owned at least half the outstanding shares in nearly 10 percent of the sample.

We obtain the number of outstanding bank shares by dividing bank capital by 100 (as bank capital was
typically carried at book value based on share prices of $100 per share). In a few cases the examiner
indicated the number of shares outstanding and these reports confirm that our procedure is correct. In a few
other cases the examiner reported that the value of capital had previously been written down and shares
revalued. We believe that we have made all the appropriate corrections for these write-downs.
10

18

The behavior of the managers could be constrained by the Board of Directors. Boards
ranged in size from 4 members to 23 members. Some Board members owned significant stakes in
the bank. Others were prominent businessmen that might provide business to the bank.11 A
histogram of ownership by outside directors is shown in Chart 2. The average portion of shares
owned by outside (non-officer) directors was 15 percent but it reached as high as 57 percent.
Presumably, the larger the portion of shares owned by the outside directors, the more they could
influence the behavior of managers. The ownership by all other individuals is shown in chart 3. As
can be seen from this chart, individuals who are neither managers nor bank managers own a
majority of the shares in about two-thirds of the banks in our sample.
There were also other ways that the board could exert control over managers. One way was
by maintaining an active independent discount committee containing at least one outside director
to review and approve loans proposed by the managers. Such a committee was maintained by 60
percent of banks. Another way of exerting control was by meeting frequently. Boards that met
infrequently, such as semi-annually, presumably had little influence on the managers. The board
met monthly or more frequently in nearly two-thirds of the banks in our sample. In cases where
the managers comprised a significant portion of the board, there was presumably little independent
oversight; when outside directors dominated the board, they could presumably exert more control.
In our sample, the median portion of the board that consisted of outside directors was 71 percent;
we create an indicator variable equal to one when the portion of directors are outsiders is above
the median and is zero otherwise. Our measures of the reliance on independent directors, of the
existence of a loan review committee, and of the frequency with which it met are similar to other
measures used to analyze corporate risk management in modern financial institutions, such as the
“active board risk committee” of Ellul and Yerramilli (2010).

11

For instance, a Mr. Proctor and a Mr. Gamble served on the board of the Citizens National in Cincinnati.

19

Another way of influencing bank management was requiring bank managers to post surety
bonds. These bonds would offer the directors (or receiver) a way of recovering funds in the event
the manager committed some specified act, typically some type of fraud that caused losses to the
bank. Bonds could be personal or provided through a surety bond agency (which often required
that the person being insured post some type of collateral).12 Surety bonds were most often
required for the cashier, who oversaw the books and for whom the possibility of fraud was
therefore highest (nearly 60 percent of cashiers posted bonds). Other managers also were required
to post such bonds (the President posted a bond in 33 percent of our sample and the vice-president
did so in 12 percent of the sample).
In Chart 4, we illustrate the relationship between manager ownership and one of the
indicators of corporate oversight: the fraction of the Board consisting of outside directors. The
negative relationship between these two measures indicates that more manager ownership tends
to be associated with less oversight. Moreover, not only are each of the measures of Board
oversight negatively correlated with manager ownership, Table 3, but they are all positively
correlated with each other. Although we investigated the impact of each of these measures of
Board control on managerial behavior, it is useful for our purposes to create an index that
aggregates the different measures into a single corporate governance index. We do so by summing
the five indicator variables.13
Examiners seem to have understood that banks could achieve good management of risk
with or without active oversight of management by the Board. Below are excerpts from the
Examination Reports of two banks, one with the minimum corporate oversight score of 0 and the
other with the maximum score of 5. In neither case did the examiner have concerns about the

For more information on surety bonds see Lunt (1922).
We also tried aggregating the five indicators by taking the first principle component, similar to Ellul and
Yerramilli (2010). All the five indicators had positive and roughly equal weights. Thus, the first principle
component was not so different than the simple average so we stick with the average for simplicity.
12
13

20

management of the bank or the soundness of the bank, even though the examiner was aware of the
clear differences in the oversight being exercised by the Board.
Oversight score of 0 - Comment on the Board:
Frequent meetings are not held by the directors of this bank and records only show
that formal meetings are held to declare dividends. No mention being made of their
having examined or approved loans and discounts at such times, and there is no
report of discount and examining committee having acted. The management is
apparently with Mr. Gates, the president of the bank.
Comment on the Officers:
Officers are capable, prudent and of good reputation and their management is
efficient and successful, that management being in the hands of Mr. Henry Gates the
president who has had over 30 years experience in the banking business in this city.
No bonds required.14
Oversight score of 5 - Comment on the Board:
Directors meet monthly. Minutes full and explicit. Have discount board and
examining committee. Discount board pass[es] upon all loans.
Comment on the Officers:
Officers are capable, prudent, of good reputation. Their management successful; the
bonds are furnished by Louisville Bond Co. and in custody of Lexington Trust.15

Section 3.4 Financial and Portfolio Measures
A number of financial measures are potentially of interest as controls in our regressions
relating ownership, governance and risk management, while others will serve as endogenous
variables (i.e., the cash assets ratio and the equity-to-assets ratio). Two important basic control
variables are bank size and bank age. Smaller banks, ceteris paribus, may be more closely held and
may also be less likely to adopt formal governance procedures due to fixed costs. We measure size
and age using the log of assets and the log of the number of years since the bank was established
(this could be the date the bank became nationally chartered, or the date it was founded, depending

From the examiner report of November 14, 1892 for the Nebraska National Bank of Omaha, NE charter
2665.
15 From the examiner report of August 18, 1892 for the Fayette National Bank of Lexington, KY, charter 1720.
14

21

on whether it was a conversion of a state bank). Our banks are of generally similar size, but of fairly
heterogeneous age.
We have considerable information on the asset portfolio of the banks. Loans were
obviously a relatively risky asset but also a relatively high-earning asset. One basic and often-used
asset ratio that captures both risk and earning potential is the share of assets consisting of loans.
The Examination Reports provide additional information about the loan portfolio. During the
National Banking Era, real estate loans were considered riskier loans. National banks were not
supposed to originate mortgages; however, they were allowed to have mortgages loans if the real
estate was being used to collateralize a previously existing loan. Thus, we will employ real estate
loans relative to total loans as a measure of lending risk. We are also interested in the degree of
insider lending. We construct two measures: the share of all loans that are made to insiders
(whether board members or managers) and the share of loans to insiders that are made to
managers rather than outside directors.
Previous research on bank risk management has identified liability structure as an
important indicator (Calomiris and Mason 1997, 2003, 2008, Calomiris, Mason and Wheelock 2011,
Carlson 2010). A bank’s liability structure may reflect exogenous liquidity risks faced by banks (e.g.,
a higher proportion of checking deposits). Liability structure also may capture endogenous changes
in the composition of debts in reaction to changes in unobserved characteristics of banks’ asset
risks (e.g., banks that rely on borrowed funds may find it hard to raise funds from other sources),
and we include reliance on high-interest rate borrowed funds as an endogenous variable in our
analysis as an indicator of risk. 16 In some specifications, we include the proportion of liabilities
consisting of individual deposits and the proportion of deposits in checking deposits, as opposed to
savings or time deposits, as controls.
Often this borrowing took the form of rediscounting notes or having bills payable, but could also take the
form of collateralized certificates of deposit. While the former are noted on the Call Report, the latter type is
noted only in the Examination Reports. As the amounts are not always noted, we instead use an indicator for
whether or not the bank made of this “hot” money.
16

22

We have some potentially useful information about the earnings and expenses of the banks
in our sample. One of the expenses listed in the Examination Reports is the salaries paid to
managers. As larger banks tend to pay higher salaries, we scale salaries by the assets of the bank.
We also observe dividend payments. Dividend payments are a way to reward equity holders. We
analyze dividends as a dependent variable; high dividend payments are sometimes viewed as an
indication of a disciplined corporate governance environment. We recognize, of course, that
dividends can also reflect differences in profitability; that is, they may be used to signal
management’s belief that earnings will persist. Dividend payment differences may also reflect
different growth opportunities; retaining profits raise the amount of equity invested in the bank,
which ceteris paribus, lowers the bank’s default risk, and thus increases the capacity of the bank to
grow its assets. To analyze dividend payouts, we consider is the ratio of dividend payments relative
to shares outstanding if dividends were paid during the past six (banks typically paid dividends
semi-annually, in June and December). 17

Section 3.5 Risk
We consider several indicators of the risk of the bank. Some of these indicators focus on
aspects of bank asset risk – based either on objective criteria about the composition of bank assets
(e.g., the ratio of real estate loans), or on examiner expectations (e.g., the ratio of “troubled” loans,
or the losses forecast on assets). Another asset-side indicator of risk is the amount of other real
estate owned among bank assets. This asset category typically represented properties seized when
loans went into default. Finally, we measure risk based on failure outcomes.
Our measures of risk that employ examiner opinions use specific categories contained in the
Examination Reports. Examiners reported the amount of bad debts or other suspended or overdue
paper; the proportion of loans consisting of these items – which we define as “troubled loans” – is a
As an alternative, we also looked at whether the bank paid out dividends during the past six months. The
implications from those results are similar.
17

23

useful metric of loan quality. Examiners also provided estimates of likely losses on assets (not just
loans but on securities and other items as well, such as non-income generating assets such as
furnishings).
The two primary tools of risk management for banks were the equity-to-asset ratio and the
cash assets-to-total-assets ratio. Equity, or net worth, is measured as the sum of paid in capital plus
cumulative retained earnings held as surplus or undivided profits. There were no equity ratio
requirements, although banks were required to maintain minimum amounts of capital and surplus.
Estimating the demand for cash assets is complicated by the legal minimum requirements of cash
relative to deposits. Cash reserve requirements specified a certain level of cash and deposits in
reserve city banks relative to deposits and net due to banks. As we show in our regression analysis,
however, regulatory constraints on holdings of cash reserves were not binding on banks’ demands
for cash assets.18

Section 3.6 Other Controls
We also include a number of variables to control for local conditions. At the county level,
we gather information on population and the share of county income from agriculture. These
variables are from the 1890 census.
An important feature of the banking system during the National Banking Era was the
system of interbank depositing of reserves. National banks were required to hold cash and
interbank deposits against their own deposit liabilities. Banks outside major cities need to hold a
15 percent reserve, three-fifths of which could be held as deposits at banks in larger “Reserve”
The Examination Reports are based on non-scheduled (surprise) examinations of national banks. In
addition to these examinations, there were regularly scheduled call reports of bank balance sheets in June
and December. We hypothesize that banks did not maintain required reserves continually through the year,
but that they may have engaged in window dressing to meet their reserve requirements temporarily on the
June and December call dates. The penalties available to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency appear
to have been limited to rather extreme measures (suspension of dividends or revocation of charter). Banks
that failed to meet their reserve requirements on examination dates likely were told to correct the problem,
which they could do by window dressing their balance sheets on the next reporting date (the June or
December call).
18

24

cities or, “Central Reserve” cities—New York, Chicago, or St. Louis. Banks in Reserve cities needed
to hold a 25 percent reserve, half of which could consist of deposits in a “Central Reserve” city.
Deposits in New York played a key role in the settling of interregional payments. Many banks held
deposits with banks in New York. Moreover, banks in New York provided a substantial amount of
interbank loans through rediscounting. To capture the potential importance of proximity to New
York in affecting banks’ risks and operations, we include the log of the distance of banks from New
York as a control. We also include an indicator for whether the city in which the bank is located is a
reserve city, to capture the possible effects of differences in interbank relationships and reserve
requirements on bank behavior. We do not include bank asset size as a control variable because, as
our model shows, it is an endogenous variable. Treating bank size as an exogenous variable, and
adding it to the list of controls would not affect any of the conclusions derived below.

Section 4. Analysis
We are interested in how the different ownership and corporate governance variables
affected behavior. As these variables are clearly inter-related, we start by presenting our approach
to identifying the linkages among ownership structure, governance choices, rent seeking, and risk
management. We then review our findings.
Risk-averse managers that hold a large share of their wealth in the form of bank stock, and
whose human capital depends on the fortunes of the bank, should generally prefer less risk than the
outside shareholders. In some states of the world, however – if hidden losses are large – managers
may prefer to undertake more risk than outside shareholders. With respect to rent extractions, we
expect that all managers would prefer to extract greater rents from the bank, and that those with
more equity shares will be more successful in doing so, especially if they are not subject to formal
oversight.

25

Outside directors presumably will try to influence the behavior of managers, particularly if
that behavior deviates from what outside stockholders would prefer. When managers own a larger
equity stake, and outside directors own a smaller stake, fewer oversight tools will be employed. We
also expect that outside directors will try to reduce any rent seeking by the managers. With respect
to risk preferences, outside directors should represent the interests of outside shareholders. If, for
example, managers with large equity stakes tend to keep risk lower than outsiders would like, then
banks with lower managerial shares and greater oversight should maintain higher levels of risk
than banks with high managerial shares and less oversight.

Section 4.1 Inter-Related Ownership and Corporate Governance Measures
We are interested both in both whether higher ownership by management results in
particular behaviors and in whether the use of various oversight tools by outside directors results
in similar or different behaviors. As we have noted, and as the correlations in Table 1 show, there is
a strong negative correlation between the degree of management ownership and each of the
different oversight measures that could constrain management.
Our initial empirical approach to identifying the effects of ownership and government
choices on bank behavior employs a two-step procedure, which treats ownership structure as
exogenous – that is, mainly the result of exogenous cross-sectional variation in the levels of E and
Xmax in our model (we subsequently relax that assumption). We first regress the governance score
measure (from section 2.3) on the fraction of bank shares owned by the top three managers and
other controls. We capture both the predicted values and the residuals from that regression. For
the second stage, we run sets of four regressions (which we will label columns 1-4) for each
outcome variable of interest in which the independent variable of primary interest is, respectively:
the fraction of bank shares owned by the top three managers, the governance score variable, the
predicted values from the first stage, and the residual values from the first stage. In this setting, the
26

predicted values from the first stage indicate the impact on behavior from greater board oversight,
which is predicted by the degree of ownership by management. By using predicted values of
governance as a second-stage regressor, we ensure that governance effects are not reflecting the
endogenous responses of governance to other endogenous variables.
Assuming (initially) that ownership structure is exogenous, the column 1 regressions can be
regarded as a true “reduced form,” which captures the combined direct and indirect effects of
managerial ownership (the exogenous variable) on each of the endogenous variables of interest.
Column 2 reports OLS regressions where the governance score is treated as an exogenous variable
and managerial ownership is excluded from the regression. The coefficient on the governance score
in the column 2 regressions is a partial correlation and should be interpreted with caution. We
regard the governance score as an endogenous variable, and we recognize that column 2 omits a
highly relevant exogenous variable (managerial ownership) from the model, which is correlated
with governance. Nevertheless, we regard column 2 as useful when juxtaposed with columns 3 and
4. Columns 3 and 4 “decompose” the coefficient in column 2 into two parts: the part of governance
that is correlated with managerial ownership and the part that is not.
The results of the first stage regressions are reported in Table 4. As expected, when the top
three managers own a greater fraction of the bank’s stock, the governance score is lower. Having
outside directors own a greater share tends to increase the governance score, but that effect is not
statistically significant. Older banks tend to have lower governance scores. We also find that banks
farther away from New York tended to have lower scores.

Section 4.2 Corporate Governance and Insider Rent Seeking
Here we first explore whether managerial ownership and formal oversight measures are
related to insider rent seeking. In particular, we look at officer salaries, lending to insiders, and
(lower) dividend payments as ways that insiders might seek to extract value from the bank.
27

When management owns a greater share of the stock, we expect them to pay themselves
higher salaries relative to assets as a way of extracting rents from the bank. (As assumed in our
model, it is also true larger banks tend to pay higher salaries, but the extent to which bankers are
able to extract rent should be defined as the ratio of salary to assets.) Higher banker salaries
(relative to assets) increase the expenses of the bank and reduce funds paid out to shareholders as
dividends. When non-management shareholders own a greater proportion of stock, they may be
able to better limit salaries. The results, shown in Table 5, are consistent with that idea and
indicate that when the managers own more shares, they tend to pay themselves higher salaries.
Another way of extracting rents from a bank is for the owners to lend to themselves to
finance their outside projects. There has been considerable prior academic analysis of this issue,
which indicates that insider lending is not always value-destroying or risky (Lamoreaux 1994,
Haber 1995). We look at two variables related to insider lending. The first is the amount of loans
made to all insiders (board members and management) relative to all loans. The second is the
proportion of all insider loans going to managers. We expect that managerial ownership and
governance measures will be associated with both these variables.
Interestingly, in regressions not reported here, we do not find any evidence that our
measures of ownership or Board oversight are associated with insider lending. We do find,
however, that ownership and governance structure strongly influence who receives those insider
loans (Table 6). At banks where the management owned a greater proportion of the stock, a
greater fraction of insider loans went to the management. When there were more corporate
governance controls, more of the insider loans were made to the outside directors.
With respect to dividends, we find, in Table 7, that when more shares are owned by
managers, then dividend payments are higher. While this finding is consistent with the idea that
institutions with higher managerial ownership provide greater payouts to owners, it is also
consistent with the idea that these institutions are more profitable.
28

Taken together, our results regarding salaries, insider lending, and dividend payments are
consistent with the idea that when managers own a greater fraction of the equity shares of the
bank, they extract greater rents from the bank through higher salaries and more loans to
themselves. They do not, however, limit dividend payments (because this means of rent extraction
would harm them as stockholders). Stronger oversight by the Board of Directors tends to be
associated with less rent extraction by the managers but somewhat greater extraction by the
outsiders on the Board (insider lending became skewed more toward the outsiders on the Board).
All parties appeared interested in maintaining strong dividend payments.

Section 4.3 Corporate Governance, Balance Sheet Composition, and Risk Taking
We begin our analysis of the relationship between risk choices and ownership and
governance structure by focusing on measures of risk from the liability side of the balance sheet.
With respect to the composition of liabilities, we examine bank reliance on the use of borrowed
funds, which previous research has shown is a forecaster of bank distress (Calomiris and Mason
1997, 2003, Carlson 2010). Borrowed funds were more expensive and had to be secured; use of
these funds suggests a greater level of risk. As noted earlier, due to data limitations in tracking the
exact amounts of borrowed funds, we use a probit specification to test whether our ownership or
governance variables are associated with the use of such funds. We find, in Table 8, that banks
where managers are more significant owners are less likely to rely on borrowed funds from other
banks.
To economize on the reporting of results, our subsequent findings for other endogenous
variables are summarized in Table 9, which omits the various control variables and focuses on the
key coefficients of interest (the relationship among managerial ownership, governance score, and
other variables of interest).

29

With respect to measures of risk based on the asset side of the balance sheet, we consider
the composition of loans. As noted earlier, real estate loans were generally considered to be riskier
and were forbidden by the National Bank Act, but banks could use mortgages to secure debts
previously entered into. As shown in Table 9, when management owns more shares in the bank,
the bank tends to have fewer mortgages on its books.
There are a number of outcome variables that also reflect the risk preference of the banks.
The three measures we consider are other real estate owned relative to assets, as well as the
examiner’s assessment of problems, measured by the share of troubled loans to total loans and by
the estimated losses on assets relative to total assets. We report in Table 9 that greater ownership
by management is associated with lower values of all these measures. There is no association
between board controls and troubled loans. However, estimated losses do appear to be reduced by
increased board oversight measures, a finding that suggests that these governance structures are at
least partially effective. On closer inspection of the composition of expected losses, we found that
loan losses were not driving this result; rather, losses related to greater expenditures on
furnishings are a primary contributor to the greater expected losses of banks with both low
managerial ownership and low board oversight. That result is intuitively appealing: excessive
expenditures on furnishings are a wasteful, value-destroying use of funds that would not be chosen
in a disciplined environment.
Table 9 also examines the effects of ownership and governance on bank survival. We find
that increased ownership by management is associated with a reduced likelihood that the bank
closes between October 1892 and December 1893, though the bulk of the closures occur during the
Panic of 1893. When managers had a greater ownership stake, they took less risk and were thus
less likely to succumb. However, the direct effect of managerial ownership is reduced when
additional balance sheet controls are included. This finding suggests that the benefits of managerial
ownership on survival operate largely through the balance sheet choices made by the managers.
30

We now turn to the question of how ownership and governance structure are related to
greater or lesser reliance on particular tools of risk management. Our analysis of bank loan
composition in Table 9 showed that higher managerial stakes and greater oversight were
associated with less risky lending, but this is only one of the main influences on bank default risk. In
finance theory, the default risk of a bank is mainly determined by three variables: the riskiness of
the risky assets (loans and other risky assets), the ratio of (riskless) cash assets to total assets, and
the ratio of equity to assets. Less risky loans, a higher ratio of cash assets, or a higher equity ratio all
contribute to lower risk. Banks can tradeoff among these three measures to target the desired level
of default risk on their debts.
In deciding whether to employ more cash assets or more capital to reduce risks, banks
consider the costs of each. Calomiris and Wilson (2004) show that banks may prefer to rely less on
equity when they face higher adverse-selection costs of raising equity in the market. In our
theoretical discussion above, which builds on Calomiris, Heider and Hoerova (2013), we argue that
conflicts of interest in risk management can also lead banks to rely relatively more on cash because
higher cash holdings change bankers’ incentives to manage the risks of their risky assets, and thus
higher cash holdings credibly signals a safer loan portfolio. The implication of both these studies is
that banks that have either higher adverse-selection costs or higher asset substitution risks – both
of which reflect problems of asymmetric information about managerial risk taking – will tend to
rely more on cash and less on equity to manage their default risk.
We expect problems of asymmetric information to be mitigated by the use of Board
oversight. Board meetings, a loan review committee, and bonding should be associated with greater
transparency and less opportunities for risk shifting by management. Thus, we expect a greater
reliance on formal oversight to be associated with a greater use of equity and less use of cash. Of
course, in estimating the reliance on cash, other factors are relevant. In particular, the structure of
deposits has implications for liquidity risk—a bank that is more reliant on checking accounts than
31

savings accounts for its funding will probably need to hold more cash, ceteris paribus. Thus, we
include additional controls in our analysis of the choices of cash and equity, in particular the ratio of
individual deposits to total liabilities and the ratio of checking deposits to all individual deposits.19
The results, presented in Tables 10 and 11, suggest that banks with greater managerial
ownership prefer to make greater use of cash and less use of equity capital to target their default
risk. When outside board members own more shares, they also tend to prefer to have a lower net
worth to asset ratio, but they do not push for holding more cash. At banks that had more Board
oversight of management, cash ratios tended to be slightly lower, consistent with those banks’
higher tolerance for default risk noted above.

Section 4.4 Corroborating Anecdotal Information
In the previous sections, we find that high management ownership is associated with safer
asset portfolio choices, low management ownership is associated with risker portfolios and
manager rent seeking, and strong corporate governance appears to reduce rent seeking. These
finding are consistent with anecdotal information in the examiner reports. For example, in one
bank with high ownership and strong governance, the examiner reported that: “This is a very
conservative bank and loans and discounts only where they believe that they are perfectly safe. I
can discern no poor paper in the bank.20”
Moreover, we find examples of examiner expressions of concern about banks with low
manager ownership and low governance scores:

As noted earlier, banks in Reserve Cities were required to hold more cash relative to deposits than other
banks. We therefore include a dummy variable indicating whether the bank is located in a Reserve City. The
results indicate that this being in a Reserve City did boost cash holdings slightly. Finding only a modest effect
is consistent with Carlson (2013) who finds that cash holdings were not very different between banks in
larger country cities and banks in the reserve cities, as the buffers held by the country banks were substantial.
Moreover, he finds that it was not uncommon for banks to hold less cash than required, suggesting that the
reserve requirements were not strongly binding. For these reasons, the simple dummy variable control in the
regression is likely sufficient.
20 Lumberman’s National Bank, Stillwater, MN.
19

32

Its capital is badly impaired…It is shameful and wicked that so much money should
be fooled away in so short a time and prove the folly of having real estate
speculators as managers of banking institutions.21
and
The general condition of the bank is good excepting that the officers are using too
much of the bank’s money without security, loaning too much to the Bank of Everett
and using too many devices to make a good showing.22
These are particularly apt examples of the sorts of behaviors we identify in the
empirical analysis. More generally, in reviewing the anecdotal information, we find that
there tended to be more concerns about banks with low management ownership and low
governance and few concerns about banks with high ownership and governance.

Section 5 Robustness and extensions
Here we report a variety of robustness checks and extensions of the baseline analysis. In
conducting this additional analysis, we focus on selected indicators of risk. We summarize these
extensions as follows: First, we re-run our regressions, allowing stock ownership structure to be
endogenous. As an instrument, we use managerial turnover events – moments when one bank
president replaced another. Second, we provide an alternative conditional-mean analysis of banks
to test the proposition that managerial ownership and formal corporate governance were
substitute forms of discipline over managerial behavior. Third, we show that our results are robust
to separately considering the components of the governance score used above. Fourth, we show
that managerial compensation structure also affects management incentives toward risk; managers
with more of their compensation in dividends relative to salary undertook lower risk. Fifth, we
show that the association between greater risk and formal corporate governance is accentuated in
the presence of a large outside blockholder (analogously to Laeven and Levine 2009). Sixth, and
finally, we find that our results were robust to the inclusion of various controls.
21
22

Washington National Bank of Tacoma, WA.
Columbia National Bank, Tacoma, WA

33

Section 5.1 Endogenizing Ownership Structure Using Managerial Turnover
Here we treat managerial ownership as endogenous, and we instrument either managerial
ownership or corporate governance score using events associated with managerial turnover. We
expect (and find) that a managerial turnover event (such as the death of a bank president), which
can be thought of as an exogenous reduction in the level of E in our model, is associated with a
reduction in the managerial ownership share of the bank and an increase in corporate governance.
To verify that managerial turnover is traceable to exogenous events, we performed webbased searches, and also searched through newspapers available through the various digitized
search engines maintained by the Library of Congress, to find information about the changes in
bank presidents between 1882 and 1892 for banks in our sample. We used both the bank names
and the presidents’ names to obtain information about the reason for managerial turnover. Because
the sources covered by these digital databases tend to be biased toward larger cities’ newspapers
and national publications, we were not able to find information about many of these management
changes. For the 137 relevant turnover events in our sample, we find information explaining the
reason for the management change for 37 of the events. For 65 of the events for which information
was lacking, we were unable to locate any newspapers for the relevant time period and location.
For 35 of the events for which information was lacking, local newspapers for the relevant time
period were available, but we were unable to find any story about the changes in bank presidents.
Managerial turnover generally was associated with clearly identifiable exogenous events.. In
the cases we were able to trace, the causes of turnover included death or severe illness (23 cases),
election to public office or other new career opportunity (9 cases), retirement (2 cases), and other
apparently exogenous circumstances (one departure in the wake of a cashier embezzlement, one
because of business problems unrelated to the bank, and one because the president declined reelection). We also checked for notable changes in the condition of the banks as indicated by
34

changes in the capital stock around the time the president changed. We found no evidence that
changes in capital systematically preceded, followed, or were coincident with turnover.
In our regressions, the turnover instrument is measured as the number of times the
President of the bank changed between 1882 and 1892. The first-stage regressions – measuring the
effect of turnover on managerial ownership and corporate governance score – are reported in Table
12. Clearly, turnover results in reduced managerial ownership and greater use of formal
governance. Table 13 presents, for each endogenous variable of interest, the results for the key
parameter of interest (the effect of instrumented managerial ownership, or alternatively,
instrumented governance score, on the endogenous variable of interest). For purposes of
comparison, Table 13 reports the estimated coefficient for the second-stage regression alongside
the comparable coefficients reported in Table 9. The results are quite similar, although, not
surprisingly, the new IV results are less precisely estimated.

Section 5.2 Conditional Mean Tests
Another way to test the proposition that managerial ownership and formal corporate
governance acted as substitute means for disciplining managerial rent seeking and promoting risk
management is to divide banks into four groups, using a two-by-two matrix that measures each
bank’s combination of managerial ownership and formal corporate governance score. The four
groups are defined as (1) high-managerial ownership and high-formal governance score banks, (2)
high-managerial ownership and low-formal governance score banks, (3) low-managerial ownership
and high-formal governance banks, and (4) low- managerial ownership and low-formal governance
banks.23 Our findings for these groups are reported in Table 14.
As predicted, the fourth group (which lacks either a high degree of managerial ownership or
formal governance) is riskier. This group was more likely to use borrowed funds, more heavily
This approach also helps assure us that our earlier results were not driven by outliers in our concentration
measure.
23

35

invested in real estate loans, and had greater expected losses than the other groups. Furthermore,
these banks display higher operating costs, which a more granular analysis shows is the result of
unusually high spending on bank premises (a form of managerial perquisities).
Several other findings are also consistent with our earlier results. For instance, the ratios of
managerial salaries to assets and of loans to managers relative to all insider loans are significantly
greater at banks where management ownership is higher and formal corporate governance is lower
compared to banks with low managerial ownership and high formal governance. The average ratio
of cash to liabilities is highest for the most opaque group (high management concentration and low
formal governance), though the difference relative to the group with low ownership and high
governance is of marginal statistical significance. Net worth to asset ratios are notably lower for
the two groups with high management ownership than the other two groups.

Section 5.3 Considering the Components of the Governance Score Separately
We explore whether our results relating to the corporate governance score are driven by
one or two of the five individual indicators. We repeat the regressions, replacing the score variable
with each component in turn. In many cases, we find that the coefficients on the individual
components tend to point in the same direction, which suggests that the overall results are indeed
driven by the summation of these different measures. For example, a high ratio of other real estate
owned relative to assets was positively related to most individual component measures. We also
find that the reduction in losses relative to assets is most strongly associated with having an active
discount committee and with having a bonded cashier, though the relationship with the other
governance measures also point in that direction.
For a few measures, the relationship between oversight and outcomes is more complicated.
For the use of borrowed funds, having the board meet monthly or more frequently, having a
relatively high portion of the Board consisting of outside directors, and requiring a bond from the
36

cashier are all associated with an increased likelihood of using borrowed funds. By contrast, having
an active discount committee and requiring a bond from the president are both associated with a
lower likelihood of using borrowed money. Thus, there is some indication that the different
oversight measures triggered different responses on the part of managers in some cases.

Section 5.4 Examining Executive Compensation Schemes
Managers were paid salaries, and there is no evidence of stock-based, option-based, or cash
bonuses in managerial compensation. Nevertheless, we are able to consider how managerial
incentives may have been influenced by the extent to which the income of the manager covaried
with the bank’s income. The manager received a salary as well as dividend payouts by virtue of his
ownership of shares. A number of recent studies have found that compensation sensitivity to firm
performance matters for risk taking and that when the executive’s salary is more sensitive to risk –
in our case, when it is more dependent on dividends – the bank’s investments tend to be riskier (Bai
and Elyasiani 2013; Cheng, Hong and Scheinkman 2013). For this analysis, we focus on the income
of the president.
We find that the having a higher proportion of the president’s compensation in the form of
salary (rather than dividends) is associated with having a higher proportion of loans related to real
estate and having more troubled loans. These results point to greater risk taking when
compensation is less due to profits. Of course, these results are subject to concerns about
endogeneity; it could be that having more troubled loans reduces profits and dividends, which
increases the proportion of compensation due to salary.

Section 5.5 Alternative Measures of Outside Director Influence
Our measure of outside director ownership considers all outside directors together.
However, it is possible that the effects of board oversight depend on the amount of shares that
37

board members own. To investigate that possibility, we create a dummy variable indicating when
there is an outside director with more shares than any of the top three managers (individually, not
collectively). Such an outside director exists for about 20 percent of the banks in our sample.
When a director with a large number of shares is on the Board, we find that the presence of
such an individual tends to magnify the prior result of greater risk taking. For instance, the bank
tends to have greater shares of loans related to real estate. The tendency for greater risk taking
appears to be consequential as banks with large-shareholding directors also are more likely to close
during the panic.

Section 5.6 Additional Control variables
We also tried including a variety of other variables as controls. One such variable was the
average score for banks in the same city, which might reflect the best practice of the neighboring
banks. This variable tended to have the same coefficient as the bank’s own score variable.
Including it did not affect the results about which we are most interested. We also tried including
the log of bank assets in the state, which might provide indications of lending opportunities or the
banking environment at the city or state level.
As an alternative to controlling for specific local factors, we also replaced our local controls
with state fixed effects which provide a more general control for things that might be less
observable (such as differences in the ability of state banks to offer services prohibited to National
banks). Using fixed effects also has little effect on the ownership structure or corporate
governance regressions.
We also tried including the square of the ownership by the top three managers in case there
were diminishing returns to ownership concentration. This variable also did not affect our main
results and was largely insignificant.

38

Section 6 Conclusion
Our results have interesting, important, and novel implications for how governance
differences lead companies manage to attract outside funding sources in an environment where
conflicts of interest are important. We find that managerial ownership and formal governance tools
are alternative means to resolve conflicts. Each of these alternatives has important and somewhat
different implications for rent seeking, the targeting of default risk, and the tools used (cash vs.
equity) to achieve the targeted level of default risk. More concentration of ownership leads to less
formal structures of governance, more insider tunneling through loans and salaries, more dividend
paying, less risk taking (presumably due to risk aversion of manager stockholders), and more
reliance on cash (to resolve asset-substitution and adverse-selection problems). Endogenously
chosen formal governance structures produce greater risk, and more relative reliance on capital for
risk management, but lower managerial salaries.
In summary, there are two key corporate governance problems that arise in banking:
managerial rent extraction through simple transfers (high salaries and subsidized loans to
managers) and the possibility of managers’ undertaking excessive risk (i.e., risk shifting or “asset
substitution”). High managerial ownership without formal corporate governance addresses the
second of these problems, but permits greater managerial rent extraction than would occur under
more formal corporate governance practices. That outcome may be preferred by the managers who
organize banks (i.e., if the potential rents from expanding the size of the bank are limited). If,
however, manager/organizers wish to expand their enterprises to a scale that is large relative to
their managerial stakes in the bank, then formal corporate governance is likely to become
necessary. The formal approach to governance results in higher tolerance for risk (reflecting the
greater diversification of holdings of bank stock) and a reduction in the rents that bank managers
are able to extract though high salaries subsidized lending. In the presence of formal governance,
managers share their privileged access to bank loans with outside directors.
39

References
Acharya, Viral, Jennifer Carpenter, Xavier Gabaix, Kose John, Matthew Richardson, Marti
Subrahmanyam, Rangarajan Sundaram, and Eitan Zemel (2009). “Corporate Governance in
the Modern Financial Sector,” in Restoring Financial Stability, Acharya, Viral and Matthew
Richardson, eds., Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons.
Anginer, Deniz, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Harry Huizinga, and Kebin Ma (2013). “How Does Corporate
Governance Affect Bank Capitalization Strategies?” World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper 6636, October.
Berger, Allen, Bjorn Imierowicz, Chrisian Rauch (2012). “The Roles of Corporate Governance in
Bank Failures During the Recent Financial Crisis,” European Banking Center Discussion
Paper 2012-023.
Bodenhorn, Howard (2013). “Large Blockholders, Institutional Investors, Boards of Directors, and
Bank Value in the Nineteenth Century,” Clemson University Working Paper.
Bruno, Valentina, and Stijn Claessens (2010). “Corporate Governance and Regulation: Can There Be
Too Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19: 461-482.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Mark Carlson (2013). “National Bank Examinations and Operations in the
Early 1890s,” Working Paper, October.
Calomiris, Charles W., Florian Heider, and Marie Hoerova (2013). “A Theory of Bank Liquidity
Requirements,” unpublished mimeo.
Calomiris Charles W. and Charles Kahn (1991). “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
Optimal Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review, 81(3): 497-513
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph Mason (1997). “Contagion and Bank Failures During the Great
Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic,” American Economic Review, 87(5): 863883.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph Mason (2003). “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During
the Depression,” American Economic Review, 93(5): 1615–1647.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph Mason (2008). “Resolving the Puzzle of the Underissuance of
National Bank Notes,” Explorations in Economic History, 45(4): pp. 327-55
Calomiris, Charles W.; Mason, Joseph; Wheelock, David (2011), “Did Doubling Reserve
Requirements Cause the Recession of 1937-1938? A Microeconomic Approach,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers 16688
Calomiris Charles W. and Berry Wilson (2004). “Bank Capital and Portfolio Management: The 1930s
'Capital Crunch' and the Scramble to Shed Risk,” Journal of Business, 77(3): 421-455
Carlson, Mark (2010). “Alternatives for Distressed Banks during the Great Depression,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 42(2-3): 421-442.
Carlson, Mark (2013). “Lessons from the Historical Use of Reserve Requirements in the United State
to Promote Bank Liquidity” Federal Reserve Finance and Economics Discussion Series 201311.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison Hong, and Jose A. Scheinkman (2013). “Yesterday’s Heroes:
Compensation and Risk at Financial Firms,” unpublished mimeo, September.

40

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Joseph P. H. Fan, and Larry H. P. Lang (2002). “Disentangling the
Incentive and Entrenchment Effects of Large Shareholdings,” Journal of Finance, 57 (6):
2741-2771.
Demsetz, Rebecca, Marc Saidenberg, and Philip Strahan (1997). “Agency Problems and Risk Taking
At Banks.” Banking Studies Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working Paper
(September).
Ellul, Andrew, and Vijay Yeramilli (2010). “Stronger Risk Control, Lower Risk: Evidence from U.S.
Bank Holding Companies,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16178.
Fahlenbrach, Rudiger, and Rene Stulz (2011). “Bank CEO Incentives and the Credit Crisis,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 99:11-26
Freeman, Mark, Robin Pearson, and James Taylor (2012). Shareholder Democracies? Corporate
Governance in Britain & Ireland before 1850. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Haber, Stephen (1995). “Regulatory Regimes, Capital Markets and Industrial Development: A
Comparative Study of Brazil, Mexico and the United States, 1840-1930,” in The New
Institutional Economics and Third World Development, Harriss, John, Janet Hunter, and Colin
Lewis, eds., London and New York: Routledge.
Haber, Stephen, and Noel Maurer (2007). "Related Lending and Economic Performance: Evidence
from Mexico." Journal of Economic History, 67 ( 3): 551–581.Hansmann, Henry, and Mariana
Parglender (2012). “The Evolution of Shareholder Voting Rights: Separation of Ownership
and Consumption,” Yale Law School Working Paper.
Hilt, Eric (2008). “When Did Ownership Separate from Control? Corporate Governance in the Early
Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Economic History, 68 (3): 645-685.
Holderness, Clifford G., Randall S. Kroszner, and Dennis P. Sheehan (1999). “Were the Good Old
Days That Good? Changes in Managerial Stock Ownership since the Great Depression,”
Journal of Finance, 54(2): 435-69.
James, John (1978). Money and Capital Markets in Postbellum America, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Jensen, Michael C and William Meckling (1976). “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs, and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4): 305-360.
Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine (2009). “Bank Governance, Regulation, and Risk Taking,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 93: 259-275.
Lamoreaux, Naomi (1994). Insider Lending: Banks, commercial Lending, and Economic Development
in Industrial New England. Cambridge University Press.
Lamoreaux, Naomi, and Christopher Glaisek (1991). “Vehicles of Privilege or Mobility? Banks in
Providence, Rhode Island during the Age of Jackson,” Business History Review, 65(3): 537557.
Lunt, Edward (1922). Surety Bonds: Nature, Functions, Underwriting Requirements, New York: The
Ronald Press Company.
Mehran, Hamid, Alan Morrison, and Joel Shapiro (2011). “Corporate Governance and Banks: What
Have We Learned from the Financial Crisis?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Report No. 502, June.

41

Meissner, Christopher (2005). “Voting Rules and the Success of Connected Lending in Nineteenth
Century New England Banks,” Explorations in Economic History, 42 (4): 509-528.
Merton, Robert (1977). “Analytical Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan
Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory,” Journal of Banking and
Finance 1:3-11.
Myers, Steward C (1977). “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial Economics,
5:147-175.
Parglender, Mariana, and Henry Hansmann (2012). “A New View of Shareholder Voting in the
Nineteenth Century: Evidence from Brazil, England and France,” Business History,
forthcoming.
Robertson, Ross (1995). The Comptroller and Bank Supervision, A Historical Appraisal. Washington
DC: Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Saunders, Anthony, Elizabeth Strock, and Nickolaos G. Travlos (1990). “Ownership Structure,
Deregulation, and Bank Risk Taking,” Journal of Finance, 45 (2): 643-654.
Senior Supervisors Group (2008). Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent
Market Turbulence, available at www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008
/SSG_Risk_Mgt_doc_final.pdf

42

Table 1
List of variables
Variable
Management
ownership
Ownership of
outside directors

Source

Board meets month

Exam report

Outside directors on
board
Active discount
committee

Exam report
Exam report

Exam report
Exam report

Description
The share of stock owned by the top 3 bank managers
– the president, vice president, and cashier
The share of stock owned by individuals who were on
the board of directors but were not managers
Indicator variable for the board of directors meeting
monthly or more frequently
The share of the board of directors that consisted of
individuals that were not managers
Indicator variable for having an active independent
discount committee

President bonded

Exam report

President posted a surety bond

Cashier bonded

Exam Report

Cashier posted a surety bond

Score

Derived

Sum of governance indicators

Turnover

Exam reports &
bankers magazine

Number of changes in the president between 1882
call report and 1892 call report

Log assets

Call Report

Log of assets.

Log age

Comptroller &
Rand McNally

Log of the difference between 1892 and the time the
bank was established.

Salaries to assets

Exam report

Ratio of salaries of 3 officers to assets

Officers loans to
insider loans

Exam report

Dividends to shares

Exam report

Used borrowed
funds
Real estate loans to
total loans
Other real estate
owned to assets
Troubled loans to
total loans

Exam report & call
report

Ratio of loans made to top 3 officers to loans to all
insiders (managers and board members)
Ratio of dividends paid at last payout to shares
outstanding (dollars per share)
Indicator that the bank borrowed using interbank
certificates of deposit, rediscounts, or bills payable

Exam report

Ratio of loans secured by real estate to total loans

Call report

Ratio of other real estate owned to assets

Losses to assets

Exam report

Loan losses to assets

Exam report

Other losses to
assets
Individual deposits
to total liabilities

Exam report

Exam report
Call report

Ratio of “troubled” loans – those past due or
suspended – to total loans
Ratio of total losses on all balance sheet items as
estimated by the examiner relative to assets
Ratio of losses on bad loans, other overdue paper,
other loans and overdrafts to assets
Ratio of losses on securities, bank house, furniture and
fixtures, other real estate, cash, and other to assets
Share of liabilities consisting of deposits by
individuals
43

Checking deposits to
individual deposits

Exam report

Net worth to assets

Exam report

Cash to assets

Exam report

Cash and legal tender to assets

Closed

Comptroller
reports

Indicator that the bank suspended, failed, voluntarily
liquidated after filing the Sept. 1892 call report but
before Jan 1, 1894.

Reserve city

Comptroller
reports

Indicator that the city is a reserve city

Log city population

1890 Census

Log of city population (city population is not available
for El Paso, TX so county population is used)

Log distance to New
York
Fraction county
income from
agriculture

Share of individual deposits consisting of checking
deposits
Ratio of capital, surplus, and undivided profits to
assets

Log distance in miles to NY
1890 Census

Value of agricultural products in the county divided by
the sum of the value of agricultural products and the
value of manufacturing

44

Table 2
Summary statistics
Variable

Mean

Median

Std.
Dev

Min

25th
percentile

75th
percentile

Max

0.24

0.17

0.23

0.01

0.08

0.37

0.97

0.15

0.12

0.11

0.01

0.06

0.22

0.57

0.63

1

0.48

0

0

1

1

0.69

0.71

0.13

0.20

0.60

0.78

0.94

0.60

1

0.49

0

0

1

1

President bonded

0.33

0

0.47

0

0

1

1

Cashier bonded

0.57

1

0.50

0

0

1

1

Score

2.69

3

1.56

0

1

4

5

Turnover

0.67

0

0.81

0

0

1

3

Log assets

14.1

14.1

0.8

12.0

13.5

14.7

15.9

Log age

2.42

2.40

0.74

0.69

1.79

3.14

3.43

0.59

0.46

0.45

0.02

0.33

0.69

3.61

36.7

34.4

29.4

0

8.1

56.2

100

Dividends to shares

4.7

4

6.2

0

3

5

50

Used borrowed funds

0.31

0

0.46

0

0

1

1

3.6

1.1

6.1

0

0

1.2

11.2

0.9

.1

1.6

0

0

1.2

11.2

9.1

5.9

9.9

0

2.5

12.4

71.8

1.2

.2

3.8

0

0

1.1

32.1

.95

.10

3.05

0

0

.85

28.6

Management
ownership
Ownership of outside
directors
Board meets month
Outside directors on
board
Active discount
committee

Salaries to assets
(percent)
Officers loans to
insider loans
(percent)

Real estate loans to
total loans (percent)
Other real estate
owned to assets
(percent)
Troubled loans to total
loans (percent)
Losses to assets
(percent)
Loan losses to assets
(percent)

45

Other losses to assets
(percent)
Individual deposits to
total liabilities
Checking deposits to
individual deposits
Net worth to assets
(percent)
Cash to assets
(percent)

.27

0

0.96

0

0

.15

11.3

.70

.72

.17

.20

.57

.85

.97

.74

.77

.20

.18

.61

.91

1

32.9

30.7

12.7

8.5

24.1

39.9

76.1

7.9

7.6

3.6

.3

5.0

9.8

20.3

Closed

.29

0

.45

0

0

1

1

Reserve city

0.37

0

0.48

0

0

1

1

Log city population

11.0

10.8

.45

8.2

10.3

11.9

12.6

7.07

7.05

0.45

6.35

6.76

7.40

7.81

0.25

0.12

0.27

0.02

0.07

0.36

0.96

Log distance to New
York
Fraction county
income from
agriculture

46

Table 3
Correlation of measures of ownership and control
Board meets High %
Active
President
at least
Outsiders on
discount
bonded
monthly
Board
committee
Management
ownership
Board meets at
least monthly

-0.23

Cashier
bonded

-0.44

-0.25

-0.15

-0.22

0.20

0.33

0.08

0.15

0.25

0.22

0.20

0.24

0.43

High % Outsiders
on Board
Active discount
committee
President bonded

0.50

47

Table 4
Determinants of the Corporate Governance Score

Management ownership
Ownership of outside
directors
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NYC
Fraction county income
from agriculture
Intercept

Score
-1.93***
(0.44)
0.73
(0.83)
-0.35***
(0.13)
-0.02
(0.30)
0.12
(0.18)
-1.29***
(0.26)
-0.007
(0.50)
11.65***
(3.03)
206
0.29
12.7

Observations
Adj R2
F-statistic

Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Estimated using ordinary least squares. Standard errors in parentheses and
italics.

48

Table 5 - Determinants of Manager Salaries Relative to Assets
Spec 1
Management ownership

Spec 2

Spec 3

0.32*
(0.18)
0.00
(0.03)

Score

-0.16*
(0.09)

Score – predicted
Score – residual
Ownership of outside
directors
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NY
Fraction county income
from agriculture
Intercept

Spec 4

-0.01
(0.30)
-0.20***
(0.05)
0.03
(0.11)
-0.04
(0.07)
0.06
(0.09)
0.10
(0.19)
1.06
(1.14)

-0.04
(0.30)
-0.18***
(0.05)
0.03
(0.11)
-0.06
(0.07)
0.09
(0.10)
0.07
(0.19)
1.12
(1.20)

0.09
(0.34)
-0.25***
(0.07)
0.02
(0.12)
-0.03
(0.08)
-0.15
(0.18)
0.07
(0.21)
3.09*
(1.77)

0.01
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.25)
-0.18***
(0.05)
0.03
(0.07)
-0.06
(0.05)
0.09
(0.08)
0.07
(0.16)
1.06
(1.61)

Observations
172
172
172
172
Adj R2
0.12
0.10
F-stat
4.19
3.64
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Specifications 1 and 2 estimated using ordinary least squares; specifications 3
and 4 estimated using two-stage least squares. Standard errors in parentheses and italics.
Standard errors in specifications 3 and 4 have been adjusted to reflect the use of generated
regressors.

49

Table 6 – Determinants of Loans to Management as a Share of Insider Loans
Spec 1
Management ownership

Spec 2

Spec 3

33.63***
(8.96)
-4.97***
(1.37)

Score

-17.40***
(5.53)

Score - predicted
Score - residual
Ownership of outside
directors
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NY
Fraction county income
from agriculture
Intercept

Spec 4

-37.56**
(16.75)
1.77
(2.72)
1.17
(5.99)
0.23
(3.54)
13.52***
(5.18)
20.75**
(10.09)
-73.94
(61.16)

-36.18**
(16.82)
1.19
(2.76)
0.35
(6.00)
-0.02
(3.55)
10.75**
(5.46)
18.81*
(10.09)
-27.98
(63.54)

-24.88
(20.57)
-4.30
(4.03)
0.91
(7.13)
2.36
(4.34)
-8.87
(10.57)
20.63*
(12.02)
128.92
(100.75)

-3.78***
(1.41)
-40.70**
(17.32)
3.39
(2.87)
0.13
(6.92)
-0.97
(3.69)
18.59***
(4.98)
18.08*
(10.32)
-90.74
(55.05)

Observations
206
206
206
206
2
Adj R
0.18
0.17
F-stat
7.28
7.11
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Specifications 1 and 2 estimated using ordinary least squares; specifications 3
and 4 estimated using two-stage least squares. Standard errors in parentheses and italics.
Standard errors in specifications 3 and 4 have been adjusted to reflect the use of generated
regressors.

50

Table 7 – Determinants of the Ratio of Dividends to Shares
Spec 1
Management ownership

Spec 2

Spec 3

6.39***
(1.97)
-0.52*
(0.30)

Score

-3.22***
(1.21)

Score - predicted
Score - residual
Ownership of outside
directors
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NY
Fraction county income
from agriculture
Intercept

Spec 4

1.15
(3.65)
1.77***
(0.61)
0.19
(1.30)
0.11
(0.76)
2.32**
(1.12)
4.37*
(2.16)
-20.10
(13.18)

0.93
(3.73)
1.92***
(0.62)
-0.02
(1.32)
-0.02
(0.77)
2.46**
(1.21)
4.00*
(2.20)
-16.86
(13.96)

3.92
(4.60)
0.69
(0.90)
-0.07
(1.57)
0.50
(0.94)
-1.98
(2.37)
4.46*
(2.63)
18.47
(22.35)

-0.26
(0.23)
0.40
(3.77)
2.16***
(0.67)
-0.03
(0.87)
-0.12
(0.85)
3.29***
(1.22)
3.92
(3.76)
-23.51
(13.46)

Observations
201
201
201
201
2
Adj R
0.14
0.11
F-stat
5.63
4.38
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Specifications 1 and 2 estimated using ordinary least squares; specifications 3
and 4 estimated using two-stage least squares. Standard errors in parentheses and italics.
Standard errors in specifications 3 and 4 have been adjusted to reflect the use of generated
regressors.

51

Table 8 – Factors Associated with the use of Borrowed Money
Spec 1
Management ownership

Spec 2

Spec 3

-1.71***
(0.54)
0.08
(0.7)

Score

0.88**
(0.35)

Score - predicted
Score - residual
Ownership of outside
directors
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NY
Fraction county income
from agriculture
Intercept

Spec 4

-1.82**
(0.94)
-0.19
(0.15)
0.63*
(0.35)
-0.63***
(0.21)
0.58**
(0.29)
-2.08***
(0.67)
3.65
(3.33)

-1.83**
(.93)
-0.23**
(0.14)
0.63*
(0.34)
-0.53***
(0.20)
0.47*
(0.29)
-1.81***
(0.64)
2.66
(3.37)

-2.56**
(1.24)
0.10
(0.23)
0.65
(0.44)
-0.74***
(0.28)
1.69***
(0.64)
-2.08**
(0.80)
-6.38
(5.85)

0.02
(0.08)
-1.69*
(0.91)
-0.25*
(0.14)
0.64*
(0.34)
-0.51**
(0.20)
0.35
(0.27)
-1.79***
(0.64)
3.64
(3.25)

Observations
200
200
200
200
2
Pseudo R
0.14
0.10
2
LR χ
34.63
24.86
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Specifications 1 and 2 estimated using probit analysis; specifications 3 and 4
estimated using an ordinary least squares first stage and a probit second stage. Standard errors in
parentheses and italics. Standard errors in specifications 3 and 4 have been adjusted to reflect the
use of generated regressors.

52

Table 9 – Other measures of bank risk taking

Real estate loans to total
loans
Other real estate owned
to assets
Troubled loans to all
loans
Estimated losses to
assets
Bank closed its doors

Management
ownership
-3.5*
(1.9)
-1.1**
(0.5)
-5.0*
(3.0)
-2.2*
(1.3)
-0.88*
(.49)

Score
0.1
(0.3)
0.1
(0.1)
0.4
(0.5)
-0.4**
(0.2)
.06
(.07)

Score –
predicted
1.8*
(1.1)
0.5*
(0.3)
2.6
(1.6)
1.1
(0.7)
-.18
(.54)

Score residual
-0.0
(0.4)
0.0
(0.1)
0.1
(0.6)
-0.5**
(0.2)
.09
(.08)

Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Rows 1-4 are estimated using ordinary least squares while row 5 uses probit
analysis. Columns 3 and 4 using a two-step procedure. Standard errors in parentheses and italics.
Standard errors in columns 3 and 4 have been adjusted to reflect the use of generated regressors.
All regressions include the controls used in the previous regressions (such as those shown in the
preceding table).

53

Table 10 –Determinants of the Ratio of Net Worth to Assets
Spec 1
Management ownership

Spec 2

Spec 3

-15.55***
(3.38)
1.01*
(0.54)

Score

7.82***
(2.39)

Score - predicted
Score - residual
Ownership of outside
directors
Individual deposits to
total liabilities
Checking deposits to
individual deposits
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NY
Fraction county income
from agriculture
Intercept

Spec 4

-19.76***
(6.31)
-15.97***
(4.78)
11.63***
(4.20)
-6.10***
(1.07)
-5.12**
(2.37)
-1.85
(1.49)
1.76
(2.01)
1.65
(3.88)
66.30***
(23.07)

-19.02***
(6.59)
-16.82***
(4.99)
9.45**
(4.40)
-6.45***
(1.13)
-5.10**
(2.47)
-1.16
(1.55)
0.92
(2.18)
3.15
(4.03)
60.65**
(25.01)

-24.70***
(9.1)
-15.32**
(6.73)
3.87
(6.20)
-3.75**
(1.77)
-6.11*
(3.35)
-1.57
(2.09)
11.16**
(4.51)
3.14
(5.42)
-27.77
(44.79)

0.34
(0.53)
-18.14***
(5.93)
-17.01***
(6.22)
9.94**
(4.44)
-6.86***
(1.14)
-4.99**
(2.83)
-1.04
(1.66)
-0.62
(2.05)
-3.21
(4.06)
73.62***
(24.20)

Observations
206
206
206
206
2
Adj R
0.41
0.33
F-stat
15.19
12.19
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Specifications 1 and 2 estimated using ordinary least squares; specifications 3
and 4 estimated using two-stage least squares. Standard errors in parentheses and italics.
Standard errors in specifications 3 and 4 have been adjusted to reflect the use of generated
regressors.

54

Table 11 – Determinants of the Ratio of Cash to Assets
Spec 1
Management ownership

Spec 2

Spec 3

2.30**
(1.06)
-0.24
(0.16)

Score

-1.15**
(0.58)

Score - predicted
Score - residual
Ownership of outside
directors
Individual deposits to
total liabilities
Checking deposits to
individual deposits
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NY
Fraction county income
from agriculture
Intercept

Spec 4

-0.43
(1.98)
4.46***
(1.50)
0.82
(1.32)
1.18***
(0.34)
0.04
(0.74)
1.51***
(0.47)
1.63***
(0.63)
-0.94
(1.22)
-26.99***
(7.24)

-0.47
(1.99)
4.56***
(1.51)
1.21
(1.33)
1.19***
(0.34)
0.05
(0.75)
1.41***
(0.47)
1.63**
(0.66)
-1.17
(1.22)
-25.02***
(7.57)

0.29
(2.20)
4.37***
(1.63)
1.96
(1.50)
0.83*
(0.43)
0.19
(0.81)
1.47***
(0.51)
0.25
(1.09)
-1.16
(1.31)
-13.10
(10.86)

-0.15
(0.17)
-0.68
(1.81)
4.61***
(1.61)
1.16
(1.35)
1.29***
(0.34)
0.04
(0.89)
1.37***
(0.47)
2.00***
(0.60)
-1.19
(1.01)
-28.03***
(6.79)

Observations
206
206
206
206
2
Adj R
0.25
0.24
F-stat
8.75
8.36
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Specifications 1 and 2 estimated using ordinary least squares; specifications 3
and 4 estimated using two-stage least squares. Standard errors in parentheses and italics.
Standard errors in specifications 3 and 4 have been adjusted to reflect the use of generated
regressors.

55

Table 12
First stage for IV regressions

Turnover
Ownership of outside
directors
Log age
Reserve city
Log city population
Log distance to NYC
Fraction county
income from
agriculture

Management
ownership
-0.06***
(0.02)
-0.09
(0.13)
0.06***
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.05)
-0.05*
(0.03)
0.15***
(0.04)
-0.09
(0.08)

0.38***
(0.12)
0.89
(0.84)
-0.50***
(0.14)
-0.07
(0.30)
0.27
(0.18)
-1.56***
(0.25)
0.18
(0.51)

-0.33
(0.47)

11.60***
(3.10)

Intercept

Score

206
206
Observations
.26
Adj R2
0.17
11.05
F-statistic
7.08
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Estimated using ordinary least squares. Standard errors in parentheses and
italics.

56

Table 13
IV results
IV
IV
Management
Score
ownership
33.63***
-4.97***
64.29*
-10.4*
Loans to management to
all insider loans
(8.96)
(1.37)
(39.02)
(6.36)
6.39***
-0.52*
-8.11
1.22
Dividends to shares
(1.97)
(0.30)
(9.79)
(1.44)
-1.71***
0.08
-4.45**
0.65*
Likelihood that used
borrowed money
(0.54)
(0.7)
(2.31)
(.37)
-3.5*
0.1
-10.37
1.67
Real estate loans to total
loans
(1.9)
(0.3)
(8.48)
(1.42)
-1.1**
0.1
-1.97
0.31
Other real estate owned
to assets
(0.5)
(0.1)
(2.23)
(.35)
-5.0*
0.4
-4.36
0.70
Troubled loans to all
loans
(3.0)
(0.5)
(12.60)
(2.04)
-2.2*
-0.4**
1.00
-0.17
Estimated losses to
assets
(1.3)
(0.2)
(5.22)
(0.87)
-0.88*
0.06
-3.56*
.57
Bank closed its doors
(.49)
(.07)
(2.13)
(.35)
-15.55***
1.01*
-29.42**
4.91*
Net worth to assets
(3.38)
(0.54)
(14.40)
(2.70)
2.30**
-0.24
8.22*
-1.37*
Cash to assets
(1.06)
(0.16)
(4.67)
(.81)
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. All rows estimated using ordinary least squares, except rows 3 and 8 which are
estimated using probit analysis. Columns 3 and 4 using a two-step procedure. Standard errors in
parentheses and italics. Standard errors in columns 3 and 4 have been adjusted consistent with
instrumented variable analysis. All regressions include the controls used in the previous
regressions.
Management
ownership

Score

57

Table 14
Mean bank characteristics by Management Ownership and Governance Score

Salary to
assets
Officer loans
to insider
loans
Dividends per
share
Used
borrowed
funds
Real estate
loans to all
loans
Other real
estate owed to
assets
Troubled loans
to total loans
Losses to
assets
Loan losses
to assets
Other losses
to assets
Closed
Cash to
liabilities

High
ownership
high
governance

High
ownership
low
governance

Low
ownership
high
governance

Low
ownership
low
governance

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

0.67
(0.55)

0.75
(0.49)

0.51
(0.45)

0.54
(0.20)

36.3
(26.2)

53.3
(32.2)

24.7
(22.8)

33.9
(28.3)

4.4
(3.4)

7.0
(10.4)

3.3
(1.5)

4.1
(2.9)

20.9
41.2

27.1
44.8

33.8
47.6

45.8
50.9

**

*

3.2
(4.4)

3.5
(4.3)

2.5
(4.8)

7.3
(11.7)

**

**

0.8
(1.9)

0.7
(1.6)

0.8
(1.5)

1.2
(1.7)

8.8
(9.4)
0.7
(1.5)
0.58
(1.28)
0.10
(0.28)

10.4
(11.0)
1.1
(4.1)
0.90
(3.72)
0.21
(0.60)

7.3
(9.0)
0.8
(1.3)
0.58
(1.00)
0.21
(0.52)

11.5
(10.1)
3.6
(7.6)
2.73
(5.66)
0.86
(2.24)

30.2
(46.5)
7.9
(4.3)

28.3
(45.4)
8.3
(3.8)

25.0
(43.6)
7.6
(3.3)

33.3
(48.0)
8.1
(3.1)

Test for differences
in means
1 vs
4

2 vs
4
*

3 vs
4

***

*
*

***

**
**

**

***

**

*

***

**

**

**

30.4
30.2
35.8
34.8
Net worth to
assets
(11.2)
(11.4)
(13.1)
(15.5)
Notes: The symbols (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
level, respectively. Standard errors in parentheses and italics.

58

Chart 1
Distribution of ownership by top 3 managers

Share of sample (percent)

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Ownership share of top 3 managers (percent)

Chart 2
Distribution of ownership by outside directors
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Ownership share of outside directors

59

Chart 3
Distribution of ownership by non-managers, non-board members
12
10
8
6
4
2

96-98

92-94

88-90

84-86

80-82

76-78

72-74

68-70

64-66

60-62

56-58

52-54

48-50

44-46

40-42

36-38

32-34

28-30

24-26

20-22

16-18

12-14

8-10

4-6

0-2

0

Ownership share of non-managers/non-board members

Fraction of shares owned by top 3 managers

Chart 4
Manager ownership and Board Composition
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Share of board consisting of outside directors

60

0.9

1

