                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CROSS BORDER EFFECTS OF STATE HEALTH TECHNOLOGY REGULATION

                                            Jill R. Horwitz
                                            Daniel Polsky

                                        Working Paper 19801
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19801


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




Previously circulated as "Challenges to Regulatory Decentralization: Lessons from State Health Technology
Regulation." We thank Bob Cooter, Leemore Dafny, John DiNardo, Jonathan Kolstad, Ellen Meara,
Austin Nichols, Jon Skinner, Doug Staiger, and seminar participants at the Berkeley School of Law,
Cornell University Law School, Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical Practice, Northwestern
University Institute for Policy Research, University of Michigan Law School, and the University of
Victoria Department of Economics for helpful comments. We also thank Michael Harhay, Lynn McClelland,
Sarah Palmer, and Matthew Parson for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Jill R. Horwitz and Daniel Polsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Cross Border Effects of State Health Technology Regulation
Jill R. Horwitz and Daniel Polsky
NBER Working Paper No. 19801
January 2014, Revised November 2014
JEL No. H70,I11,I18,K32,L1,L52

                                              ABSTRACT

Certificate of Need Laws (CON), state laws requiring providers to obtain licenses before adopting
healthcare technology, have been controversial. The effect of CON on technology supply has not been
well established. In part this is because analyses have focused on state-level supply effects, which
may reflect either the consequence of CON regulation on supply or the cause for its adoption or retention.
Instead, we focus on the cross-border effects of CON. We compare the number and location of magnetic
resonance imaging providers in counties that border states with a different regulatory regime to: 1)
counties in the interior of states, 2) counties on state borders with the same regulatory regime on both
sides, and 3) counties on borders with different regulatory regimes, but with a large river on the border.
We find there are 6.4 fewer MRIs per million people in regulated counties that border counties in unregulated
states than in unregulated counties that border regulated counties. This statistically significant finding
that regulatory spillover can be sizable should be accounted for in future research on state-based health
technology regulation. In addition, it suggests state experiences may not accurately predict the effects
of CON if it were implemented nationally.


Jill R. Horwitz
University of California Los Angeles
School of Law
Box 951476
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1476
and NBER
horwitz@law.ucla.edu

Daniel Polsky
University of Pennsylvania
Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
polsky@mail.med.upenn.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19801
1. Introduction


        Certificate of Need Laws (CON) − state licensing regimes that restrict the adoption and

modification of health technology by existing providers and new entrants–have generated

controversy since their adoption in the 1970s. Proponents have urged the adoption of CON in

markets like health care where incomplete information and agency problems can lead to

overinvestment in high-fixed-cost technologies. The argument is that direct regulation would

work to control costs, constrain investment, and improve quality in markets (Salkever 2000).

Opponents cite the anti-competitive nature of such regulation, particularly its susceptibility to

capture, and have urged repeal of remaining certificate of need laws (see, e.g., Epstein and

Hyman, 2013; Cordato, 2007). Empirical research has not resolved these debates.

        Here we seek to inform this larger debate by exploring how CON affects the provision of

a regulated technology by examining the effects of CON regulation on the location of free-

standing Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) providers. We hypothesize that if the CON

regulation is binding we would see the technology being provided in unregulated states to serve

nearby populations in regulated states. Specifically, we test whether MRI providers

disproportionately locate in unregulated states in counties that border states regulated by CON

licensing laws.

        Previous research has focused on statewide effects of CON. It is difficult to determine if

CON changes supply decisions or downstream outcomes using this approach because a state’s

decision to adopt or retain CON regulations can be as much a reaction to existing provider

supply as a cause of future provider supply. By focusing on whether counties border a state with

a different regulatory regime, we can overcome this limitation by contrasting these counties with

three other types of counties: 1) counties in the interior of states that don’t face a border at all, 2)


                                                   3
counties on state borders with the same regulatory regime on both sides, and 3) counties on

borders with different regulatory regimes, but with a large river on the border.

        In addition, previous research has largely focused on capital and labor intensive

technologies such as percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) and open heart surgery. These

technologies are typically provided in hospitals, which are both likely to seek a CON for these

services and unlikely to respond to regulation of an individual technology by relocating. On the

contrary, free-standing MRI providers comprise a relatively fluid market for analysis of the

potential effects of technology regulation. These results can inform regulation regarding the

increasing number of services that are being offered outside of hospitals.

        Our results show a sizeable and statistically-significant cross-border effect of CON

regulation on the location of MRI providers. Among counties located on state borders where one

state regulates MRI entry and the other state does not, there is more likely to be an MRI provider

in the unregulated county than in the regulated county. Moreover, we confirm our results by

linking the effect to the relative ease of travelling across state borders; we find the difference

between regulated and unregulated border counties to stem almost exclusively on state borders

that are not separated by rivers, borders that are presumably easier for potential patients and staff

to cross.

        These results point to several conclusions. First, the effects of state regulation include

not only the effects on residents in those states, but there are spillover effects that should not be

ignored. Previous research on CON has focused on the former and, as Cotet has argued in

another context, when “border effects are important, specifications that fail to control for

spillovers lead to biased estimates of the impact of the law.” (Cotet, 2012, pg. 203) In particular,

studies that find fewer providers in CON states may overstate the implications of regulation for



                                                   4
potential patients who live close to non-CON states. On the other hand, this spillover effect may

help explain why many studies have been unable to attribute differences in costs or quality to

CON regulation. Second, our results suggest that where state regulations have spillover effects

on other states, states may not serve as effective sites to evaluate the effectiveness of those

regulations. As a result, the effectiveness of state regulations may not inform the effectiveness

of the regulation if it were implemented nationally.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Part 2 outlines the purposes and history of CON

legislation, summarizes previous research, and provides a conceptual framework for

understanding provider location in response to regulation. Part 3 describes our data and the

descriptive statistics. Part 4 describes our empirical framework for estimating the cross-border

effects of CON regulation, reports the results, and describes limitations of the analysis. Part 5

concludes.



2. Health Planning and Certificate of Need Regulation: Background, Previous Research,

and Institutional Context

       a. Background. Certificate of Need (CON) laws require health care organizations to

obtain permits from a state regulatory agency before building new health care facilities, offering

new medical services, or acquiring certain medical technology. Although the first CON laws

were implemented in New York in 1964 and a few other northeastern states shortly thereafter,

such programs have their roots in earlier federal health planning efforts, such as the 1946

Hospital Survey and Construction Act (The Hill-Burton Act), meant to increase access to care,

improve quality, and control costs (Hamilton, 1986). The premise of capital investment

restrictions such as CON restrictions was that in markets for health care -- markets characterized



                                                  5
by failures that make price competition an untenable method for providing an efficient level of

care -- regulation controlling the supply of medical providers and health care services would

prevent excess capacity, duplicative and unnecessary service provision caused by provider-

induced demand, and spiraling costs (Finkler, 1985).

         Virtually every state adopted CON requirements in response to two federal statutes -- the

Social Security Act of 1972 (which conditioned Medicare and Medicaid payments on reviews for

large capital expenditures) (Section 1122, 1972), and the 1974 National Health Planning and

Resources Development Act (which offered financial incentives for states to establish review

procedures for new clinical services, inpatient technology acquisition, and capital expenditures

greater than $150,000). Early state CON requirements applied to inpatient hospital services, but

in the 1980s many states expanded their CON regimes to control the growth of ambulatory

services such as diagnostic imaging.

         After 1986, when President Reagan signed the law repealing the National Health

Planning Act, many states eliminated some or all of their CON requirements based on evidence

that the planning authorities had proved “costly to the Federal Government, in the last analysis

without benefit, and even detrimental to the rational allocation of economic resources for health

care.” (Yakima Valley, 2011). Even more recently, in 2004 the Federal Trade Commission and

the U.S. Department of Justice urged the remaining states with CON requirements to “reconsider

whether these programs best serve their citizens’ health care needs,” in large part because of their

failure to contain costs and anticompetitive risks. (U.S. Federal Trade Commission, 2004).

Nonetheless, state CON laws remain remarkably stable; states that repealed their CON laws

tended to do so in the late 1970s and through the 1980s, with little change since then. (NCSL,

2014).



                                                 6
         b. Previous Research on CON. Previous research evaluating the effects of direct

regulation such as CON has generated mixed results. (Salkever 2000). However, research

comparing the experiences of regulated to unregulated states has often concluded that CON has

been ineffective at limiting supply, controlling costs, or improving quality. (Conover and Sloan,

1998). The earliest research on the effects of CON on costs, investments, and service diffusion

in hospitals generated disparate results. Russell (1979) found some evidence that CON limited

investments in specialty services. However, in sum, early research tended to find that that capital

expenditure controls such as CON did not constrain costs, but may have limited the supply of

beds within individual hospitals (Salkever, 2000). For example, Salkever and Bice (1979)

studied the effects of regulation in those states that were early adopters of CON programs and

found no conclusive evidence that CON had effects on costs or quality. Another early study

found mixed results on the effects of CON, but largely concluded that regulation not only failed

to control costs but may well have increased costs and labor inputs. (Sloan and Steinwald,

1980).

         Later studies were similarly mixed. Some found that CON increased costs (Lanning,

Morrisey and Ohsfeldt 1991; Antel, Ohsfeldt and Becker 1995), while another found that CON

programs reduced per-capita acute care spending by 5 percent, but did not affect total per-capita

spending, suggesting that providers responded to cost-containing regulation by increasing costs

elsewhere (Conover and Sloan 1998).

         Only a few studies focused on CON as applied to ambulatory services such as diagnostic

imaging. They were conducted soon after regulation of outpatient and free-standing medical

services was implemented and focused exclusively on technology diffusion rates. For example,

using data from the American College of Radiology, Hillman and Schwartz (1985) conducted



                                                7
telephone interviews with MRI installers and employees in the marketing departments of MRI

manufacturers to track all the early adoption of MRI conducted through CON applications; they

found that MRI diffused more slowly than Computed Tomography (CT) in free standing

facilities, and concluded that Medicare’s prospective payment system and CON regulations

explained the difference. Steinberg et al. (1985) made similar claims, as well as identifying

clinical, technical, and other economic issues as the reason that MRIs diffused comparatively

slowly with only 108 machines in place by the end of 1984.

       The most recent CON research has focused on a few hospital-based services, particularly

invasive cardiac treatments, and has also generated mixed results regarding its effectiveness at

controlling costs, limiting quantity, and improving quality. Cutler et al. (2010) concluded that

the removal of CON in Pennsylvania was welfare neutral; in that case, increased entry into

cardiac surgery led to a redistribution of patients to higher quality surgeons, an effect that

approximately offset the losses due to increased fixed costs. Studies of the effects of CON on

the volume of cardiac services typically found that the average number of procedures performed

per hospital in states without cardiac CON was significantly lower than in regulated states (Ho

2004; Vaughan-Sarrazin et al., 2002). Studies further link the relatively high volume at hospitals

in regulated states with better health outcomes. For example, Vaughan-Sarrazin and colleagues

(2002) found lower mortality in regulated states, and Popescu and colleagues found that patients

in regulated states were less likely to need revascularization services than those in unregulated

states (2006). Moreover, Ho (2007) demonstrated that the number of hospitals offering intensive

cardiac services (coronary artery bypass grafting and PCI) was lower in states with CON than in

others, and that CON was associated with fewer PCIs per capita (Ho, 2007). In her most recent

work, Ho (2009) used a difference and difference approach that substantiated some of her earlier



                                                  8
findings. She analyzed states that discontinued CON between 1989 and 2002 and found no

change in utilization rates after the elimination of regulation (Ho, 2009). Some researchers have

considered the effects of CON on access, for example finding that the loosening of CON rules

was associated with increased access to cardiac care for African-Americans as well as with

reductions in health disparities (Delia et al 2009).

       Our research, in the context of this previous work, is significant in at least four important

respects. First, to our knowledge there is no previous research on the effects of CON on practice

location. Second, strategic practice location may result in spillovers that have not previously

been accounted for in this body of work evaluating state-specific cost and quality outcomes

resulting from CON regulation. Third, because CON regulations occur at the state level,

previous research has been limited in their ability to control for the fact that states that retained

CON regulations are different from those that did not in ways that are relevant to current health

technology markets. Our research focuses on border counties. This allows us to use interior

counties to remove any state-specific fixed effects. We also can control for border-specific

effects because not all borders face regime changes.

       Fourth, although ambulatory services such as free-standing MRI, which are relatively

easy to move, are likely to be more responsive to entry regulation than are hospital-based

services such as cardiac treatment, existing research focuses on the latter. The lower costs of the

MRI technology also probably make providers relatively nimble; a new cardiac catheterization

laboratory (in the range of $3 million and up1) also costs more than an MRI machine (depending



1
  Costs range depending on the type of equipment, including whether it is new or used. The most
recent New York applications for new laboratories that we could find were roughly $3.5 million.
Mount Sinai hospital requested the purchase of two new labs for a total of $7,139,016 (New
York Department of Health, 2010) and Orange Regional Medical Center requested one new lab
for $3,462,325 (New York Department of Health, 2008).
                                                   9
on the power of the unit, an MRI costs between roughly $1 to $3 million dollars, and the price of

a common whole-body scanner -- a 1.5 tesla unit -- is $1.25 million) (Cosmus and Parizh, 2011).

       Moreover, hospital-based technologies are provided to relatively sick patients, those who

are either inpatients or likely have more limited ability to travel compared to patients seeking

diagnostic imaging at a free-standing center. On the contrary, even though increased travel for

patients may be costly -- and at some distance patients may forgo care entirely -- patients can

likely more easily travel to free-standing MRI offices than to hospitals. This is especially true

given that some MRI machines can be located anywhere one can site a trailer, particularly with

the development of compact scanners. As a result of these differences, MRI providers can be

relatively nimble in their responses to regulation and competition. We assume that the relative

ease of entry on the supply side and patient travel on the demand side makes MRI markets good

markets in which to consider responsiveness to state technology regulation. Given the growth of

services provided on an outpatient basis, primarily due to an increase of service provision outside

of hospitals (MedPac, 2012), studying free-standing providers like MRI will yield increasingly

generalizable results.

       C. Institutional Context

       Our study rests on several assumptions about the responsiveness of entrepreneurs and

firms to direct technology regulation. First, we hypothesize that a provider considering serving a

population in a regulated area would prefer to locate the business in a nearby unregulated

location if one is available as long as travel costs from the regulated area are minimal. We make

this assumption because opening a new imaging center in a regulated state can add additional

costs to starting a business in terms of the financial costs to assemble a CON application, time

costs of waiting for approval, and uncertainty regarding whether a potential competitor with a



                                                 10
CON license would challenge the application. But providers weigh these costs against the

benefits of locating where there is unmet demand for care, demand that may be greater in

regulated areas near unregulated areas where licensing costs can be easily avoided.


         Second, the financial benefit from locating on the other side of a state border depends

crucially on whether patients are covered by their insurance plans when they see providers across

state lines. Although insurers do not typically sell insurance across state lines, they do typically

include out-of-state providers in their preferred networks when the market spans multiple states. 2

Insurers also do generally reimburse for out of state care, albeit with less favorable cost-sharing,

when providers are outside of their preferred network.

         Finally, one might reasonably assume that the threat of entry across a state border would

push states to eliminate CON if neighboring states have done so. In this case, regulating may

mean allowing a neighboring state to capture tax and labor benefits that travel across borders

with new business. And, as can be seen in Figure 1, the states that have retained CON are

clustered in a few regions of the U.S. leaving a limited number of states with MRI CON that face

these border issues. There are, however, several reasons why states may maintain CON. For

example, health care cost control may be a more important or salient issue for politicians. Or,

even if politicians might wish to eliminate direct regulation, the organizations that benefit from

CON such as large hospitals and major teaching centers also have considerable influence over

politicians.

2
  Although this may not be true for every insurer, there is sufficient evidence that insurance coverage is not a
barrier for out of state care. First, beneficiaries in traditional Medicare can obtain care from any provider who
accepts Medicare. Second, although we could not find a single authoritative source to indicate whether insurers
include out of state MRI providers in their networks, we used the provider search functions for various insurers
(e.g., Blue Cross Blue Shield in Michigan and Kentucky) to search for imaging providers and found that networks
typical include both in and out of state providers. In addition, it is always possible for a beneficiary to seek care on
an out-of-network basis with an out-of-state provider. Third, although we have been told by several state
Medicaid offices that they do not reimburse providers in other states, we visited one Ohio provider that told us it
accepted Michigan Medicaid. Finally, many patients pay for imaging on an out-of-pocket basis.

                                                           11
3. Data and Descriptive Statistics


3.A. Data


       Determining whether a state regulates health technology adoption is difficult. CON laws

and related regulations appear in different types of statutes and are enforced by different agencies

(for example, departments of state health planning, public health, health and human services)

depending on the state, and once found the statutory language is often ambiguous. The laws vary

a great deal in terms of which services and equipment are regulated and how the regulations are

triggered (e.g., by listed services, size of capital investment, or whether the purchase is for new

or replacement equipment). Moreover, even when licensing laws are on the books, regulators

may not enforce those laws. This means that the secondary sources listing state regulatory

regimes, the sources upon which most empirical research relies, may be unreliable.


       We assembled an original dataset of state CON laws as applied to MRI for all states

except Alaska and Hawaii. First, we researched current statutes and regulations in 2011-2012 to

determine which states had CON for MRI. At least two lawyers, including a law librarian, and a

law student reviewed each state’s statutes to determine whether it applied to free-standing MRI

providers. To resolve disagreements among the coders and to determine whether state regulators

actively enforced their CON for MRI, we conducted further research, mainly by contacting

regulators by phone or email in almost every state we designated as having, at least, a general

CON program (i.e., states with CON for any major technology, even if the written laws did not

appear to apply to diagnostic imaging).3 Figure 1 identifies states with CON for any service,


3
  We contacted regulators by phone or electronic mail in all but twelve states. Additional
research makes us confident that we classified those states correctly because there we found
corroborating evidence – such as an updated state website that suggested an active regulatory
                                                 12
CON for MRI, and no CON as of 2012. The states with CON for MRI are concentrated in the

Midwest, Northeast, and Southwest.

       We also assembled a dataset containing virtually all free-standing MRI facilities in the

continental United States by using address lists of accredited MRI facilities. We obtained these

lists in December 2012 from the websites of the two agencies that accredit MRI facilities --

American College of Radiology (ACR) and Intersocietal Accreditation Commission (IAC). We

believe we have close to a universe of the facilities existing at that time because all outpatient

imaging providers, including both practitioners and facilities, were required by the Medicare

Improvement for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 to obtain accreditation from one of three

CMS-designated accreditation organizations, including the ACR and the IAC, by January 1,

2012 to be reimbursed by Medicare for the technical component of various imaging procedures

including MRI.4 Because these regulations did not start until 2012, reliable time series data on

accredited MRI facilities were unavailable. The third organization, the American Hospital

Association, accredits hospitals and, therefore, is unlikely to include freestanding facilities.

After removing duplicates, we identified 6104 facilities and their locations from the ACR and an

additional 662 from the IAC. We then used their addresses to collapse the dataset to the county

level and constructed two MRI county-level variables: the number of MRI providers in each

county and whether the county had any free-standing MRI providers.




program or such as press reports or website evidence that showed the state had discontinued their
regulatory programs many years ago.
4
  Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 122 Stat. 2532Section 135,
codified at 42 U.S.C.A § 1395m (e). For the definition of provider see Social Security Act
§1861(d). The term “supplier” means, unless the context otherwise requires, a physician or other
practitioner, a facility, or other entity (other than a provider of services) that furnishes items or
services under Medicare.
                                                  13
       We identified counties that lie along state borders using spatial joins in ArcGIS (using

ArcGIS v10). We identified borders separated by rivers using a visual identification of major

rivers on the border. County-level demand and supply side controls came from the 2012-2013

Area Resource File (AHRF) (US Department of Health and Human Services).


3.B. Descriptive Statistics


        We describe our constructed county-level dataset in Table 1 by whether the county is in

a non-CON (unregulated) or CON (regulated) state. There are 2.5 MRI providers per county in

non-CON counties and 1.6 in CON counties. However, more people live in unregulated

counties; therefore, when normalized by each million people in the county, there are more

providers in CON counties (11.4 providers per million people in non-CON counties and 11.7

providers per million people in CON counties). There are also about an equal number of

counties with at least one MRI in regulated and unregulated counties (Unregulated = 36.8% v.

Regulated = 36.7%).


       We do not draw conclusions as to whether the quantity of MRI providers in these

counties is influenced by their regulatory environment because these counties are quite different

in some respects. On the one hand, as shown in Table 1, they are similar in terms of some

demographic characteristics associated with health status and health care use, such as age

(population > ages 18-64 is 59.7% in regulated counties v. 58.1% in unrelated counties;

population >64 is 14.9% in regulated counties v. 15.6% in unregulated counties), education

(population >25 years with college education is 13.0% in regulated counties v. 14.3% in

unregulated counties), and median household income ($42,574 in regulated counties v. $44,903

in unregulated counties). However, unregulated counties are quite different from regulated


                                                14
counties in other respects; they have larger populations (Mean=109,092 in unregulated counties

v. 82,569 in regulated counties), are less dense (164 people per square mile in unregulated

counties v. 358 in regulated counties), more rural (measured by non-metro and rural

classifications), and have more hospital beds per population (374 beds per 100,000 in

unregulated counties v. 325 in regulated counties.). These differences between the counties in

regulated and unregulated states may be related to the reasons that states decided to either retain

or eliminate CON regulation after federal incentives for regulation were repealed in 1986.


       Moreover, on the one hand, CON regulations were meant to restrict entry, suggesting that

if they worked as intended then regulated counties might have fewer providers than unregulated

counties. On the other hand, the presence of a CON regulation may also be the result of some set

of unobservables. And the reason a state retained CON regulations after changes in federal

policy made it possible to repeal them without penalty may have been because of a sense among

regulators that there are too many providers. If so, regulated counties may have more providers

than unregulated counties, even if the regulations effectively restricted entry.


       Given the difficulty of determining how a state’s regulatory regime affects differences in

the number of providers in regulated compared to unregulated states, we have employed an

estimation approach that does not rely on such differences. Because CON regulations are state

rather than county regulations, the factors that contributed to whether a state retained regulation

should not be reflected in differences between counties within the state. We take advantage of

this observation to test whether a state’s CON regulation affects the location of MRI providers

within that state and across the border in neighboring states depending on whether there is also

CON regulation in the neighboring state.



                                                 15
4. Empirical Framework and Results


4.A. Empirical Framework


        We compare the numbers of providers among various types of counties -- considering not

only whether the county is regulated but where it is located in terms of other counties with the

same or different regulatory regimes. We emphasize that we are not looking to test whether

CON regulations can reduce the total number of MRIs; rather we focus on the marginal influence

of CON near state borders.


        Our setup for this hypothesis relies on our classification of counties based on whether

they sit on the border of the state and on whether the regulatory regime across that border is the

same or different. Thus we defined a county as a border county if it touches another state or as

an interior county if the county does not touch another state border or, if it is on a state border, it

does not touch another state. For border counties we classified them into two types: a border

county that faces the same regulatory regime in the state across the border (“same-regime”) and a

border county that faces a different regulatory regime in the state across the border (“different-

regime”).


         We test whether different-regime counties differ from other types of counties in their

supply of MRI providers. Specifically, we test whether unregulated different-regime counties

have more MRI providers than CON different-regime counties. In contrast to general

comparisons between CON and non-CON states, we construct comparison groups that should

difference out any unmeasured confounding factors between CON and non-CON states. For

example, border counties that do not face a regime change provide a useful comparison group as

it controls for general differences between CON and non-CON states as well as any specific


                                                  16
differences that can be attributed to border counties. We also use the number of MRI providers

in interior counties as an alternative way to benchmark the changes that occur between CON and

non-CON border counties with regime change.


       We offer here a more formal description of this empirical strategy. We test the effect of

CON regulation using two measures of MRI location. The first is the number of providers per

million people in the county. Because the majority of counties have no MRI providers at all --

the modal number of providers in counties that have any MRI is 1 -- we also estimate these

effects on the existence of any MRI provider in the county.


We estimate the following equations:


       (1) MRI/millioni = βo + β1Different_regimei *CON + β2Interiori *CON +

           β3Different_regimei + β4Interiori + β5CON + β6Demandi + β7MedSupplyi + e

       (2) E(Any MRI Provider) = βo + β1Different_regimei *CON + β2Interiori *CON +

           β3Different_regimei + β4Interiori + β5CON + β6Demandi + β7MedSupplyi + e



           where (1) estimates the number of MRI providers per million people in a county

(MRI/million) and (2) estimates an indicator of any MRI provider in the county (E(Any MRI

Provider)). We estimate both models, and all subsequently described models, using Ordinary

Least Squares (OLS) with robust standard errors.5


       CON represents whether a county is regulated or unregulated. In addition to the

Different-regime and Interior variables that measure the number of providers in different types of
5
 The binary outcome of Any MRI provider was also estimated using a Probit model where the
magnitude of the effects were converted to marginal effects with all control variables set at their
means. Because estimates were so close to the OLS estimates, we did not report them. They are
available from authors upon request.
                                                17
counties as described above, we also include control variables for the counties to adjust for any

remaining imbalance between the differences in counties that may not be differenced out in the

difference-in-difference framework, including variables that may well affect demand or supply

of services. Demand includes population and population squared of the county in which the

provider is located, the population density (county inhabitants per square mile), and categorical

variables using the 2013 rural-urban continuum codes (we classified whether the county is in a

metropolitan area, a non-rural non-metropolitan area, or whether the county is rural). Demand

also includes the percent of the county living in poverty, the percentage of adults (18-64 years)

old, the percentage of adults 65 years of age and older (and, therefore, eligible for Medicare), and

the percent of adults in the county with college degrees. MedSupply represents the number of

hospital beds per 100,000 in the county.


       Our primary hypothesis is that β1 < 0, the coefficient on the variable interacting being in a

regulated state being located on a state border where contiguous counties across the state border

have different regulatory regimes, which would suggest that MRI providers are more likely to

locate on the unregulated (non-CON) side of a state border when the choice is available to them

in a local market, controlling for the behavior of MRI providers in state border markets where

contiguous counties across state borders have the same regulatory regime .


       We also test an alternative control group –interior counties – as β1 – β2 < 0 -- which

allows us to examine the same effect as above, but now using the difference in the number of

providers in interior counties as a control. This alternative control is presumably more

representative of a county’s regulatory regime as the location is less likely to be affected by

regulations in other states.



                                                 18
       This set up also allows us to look at the single difference within unregulated states. A

finding that β3 > 0 would suggest that, for unregulated counties on state borders, there are more

MRI providers in counties that are contiguous with counties in regulated states (different-regime

counties) than in counties that are contiguous with counties in other unregulated states (border-

same counties). A finding that β3 – β4 > 0 would suggest that there are more MRI providers in

unregulated counties on state borders that are contiguous with counties in regulated states

(different-regime counties) in interior counties in unregulated states.


       Since our hypothesis that providers’ higher likelihood of locating near a regulated state

when locating in an unregulated state is related to tapping into unmet need in the regulated state,

this higher likelihood will be a function of the cost of traveling over the state border, all else

equal. Therefore, to further test our results we include a variable for whether borders are

separated by a major river as a proxy for the ease of travel over state borders. This approach

follows previous research (Hoxby, 2000) and research on urban planning in which the location

and size of the bridges necessary to cross rivers are cited as an important professional concern of

city planners and traffic engineers because of the central role they play in access and the

economy (Levinson and Krizek, 2008). We expect our findings to be stronger where there is a

land boundary than where there is a river boundary between states with different regulatory

regimes.


       To implement this approach, we estimate:


       (3) MRI/millioni = βo + β1Land_different_regimei *CON + β2River_different_regimei

           *CON + β3River_same_regimei *CON + β4Interiori *CON +




                                                  19
           β5Land_different_regimei + β6River_different_regimei + β7River_same_regimei +

           β8Interiori + β9CON + β10Demandi + β11MedSupplyi + e

       (4) E(Any MRI Provider) = βo + β1Land_different_regimei *CON +

           β2River_different_regimei *CON + β3River_same_regimei *CON + β4Interiori *CON

           + β5Land_different_regimei + β6River_different_regimei + β7River_same_regimei +

           β8Interiori + β9CON + β10Demandi + β11MedSupplyi + e


Where the equations are the same as equations (1) and (2) with the separation of borders into two

types, River and Land. These equations, then, allow the average border effect in the first two

equations to be separated into the effects within each of these two types of borders.


       We hypothesize here that β1 < 0, the coefficient on the variable interacting being in a

regulated state * being located on a state border separated by land where contiguous counties

across the state border have different regulatory regimes. If β1 < 0, this would suggest that MRI

providers are less likely to locate on the regulated (CON) side of a state border when travel

between the boundaries is relatively easy since finding a bridge is unnecessary, when compared

to the difference between CON and non-CON counties on land borders that face the same

regulatory regime across their borders. As in initial specifications, we test alternative

comparison groups, this time alternatives include the difference in river border counties with a

regime change, β1 – β2 < 0 and the difference in interior counties, β1 – β4 < 0. As above, we also

examine the coefficients within unregulated counties.


4.B. Results


       In Table 2 the key dependent variables are described by the county types for our analysis

strategy. Among the 3,100 counties, 1,138 are border counties. Among the 1,138 border


                                                 20
counties, 394 face a change in regulatory regime at the border. Among the 394 facing a

regulatory regime change, 234 are on a land border and 160 are on a river border. When broken

down by CON and non-CON states, the split is fairly proportional except there are only 5

counties in CON states that are contiguous with a CON county and are separated by a large river

on the state border.


       As can be seen in Table 2, the raw comparison of MRI providers per million people in a

county between regulated and unregulated states show very little difference (0.3). When broken

down by border and interior counties the differences are still small and are only negative among

border counties (-1.0), meaning that, among counties on state borders, there are fewer providers

per million people in regulated than unregulated counties. However, also in the raw data, there

are considerably larger differences among those counties that border counties in other states that

have different regulatory regimes. Moreover, when broken down further by whether that border

is a land or river border, we only see large differences among land borders. The same patterns

appear in the raw data that measure whether there is any MRI provider in the county (a

dichotomous variable).


       For an example of what this might look like on a particular land border, consider the case

of the border between Michigan (a regulated state) and Ohio (an unregulated state). Two

counties in Michigan -- Lenawee (pop approx. 100,000) and Monroe (pop approx. 150,000)

counties each have no MRI providers. The two counties just on across the border in Ohio each

have providers -- Lucas County (pop approx. 440,000) has 14 providers and Fulton County, the

smallest of the four counties (pop approx. 43,000) has one provider.




                                                21
       We look at these relationships for all counties and more formally in the regression

analyses, reported in Tables 3 and 4. As shown in Table 3, Column 1, the key coefficient is -6.4.

This suggests there are fewer MRI providers per million people in regulated counties that border

counties in unregulated states than in unregulated counties that border regulated counties, after

accounting for any differences between regulated and unregulated states in the number of

providers in counties contiguous with cross-border counties with the same regulatory regime

(p<0.01). As can be seen in Table 3, Column 2, after controlling from the demographic and

market variables discussed above, the coefficient is nearly the same, -6.9 (p<0.01), suggesting

that the control groups in our difference-in-difference analysis are highly robust. In Table 3,

column 3, where we estimate whether there is any MRI provider in the county, the coefficient is

-0.241 (p<0.001). Again, there is little change in the coefficient when control variables are

added, as can be seen in Table 3, column 4. Finally, we note that the difference-in-differences

all remain large and significant when compared to interior counties rather than to other types of

border counties.


       The results in Table 3, Row 3 show that there are 4.9 more MRI providers per one

million residents in unregulated counties that border regulated counties than unregulated counties

that border other unregulated counties. This result suggests that most of the difference we

identify in the difference-in-difference results is driven by activity on the unregulated side of the

border rather than fewer providers on the regulated side of the border.


       When we account for the ease of travelling across state borders by introducing the

distinction between state borders marked by rivers versus land, as described in equations 3 and 4

and reported in Table 4, we find that the border effects are considerably larger for land borders

than river borders. Among border counties where the border is not a large river (land border

                                                 22
counties), controlling for demographic and other county characteristics, and after differencing

out the effects attributable to merely being on a border (i.e., regulated counties that border

counties in other regulated states), there are 11.3 fewer MRI providers per million people in

regulated counties bordering unregulated counties. (Table 4, Column 2, P<0.01).


          In contrast to the large differences among land border counties contiguous with counties

in states with different regulatory regimes, there is very little difference among corresponding

counties separated by rivers. For regulated counties with river borders that border unregulated

counties the corresponding difference is only -0.2 (SD=2.620). Given these results, if we

subtract the coefficients measuring the effects of being on different types of borders from our

key coefficient (the -11.3), our results remain large and robust. We note that because there are

only 5 CON counties on borders that are contiguous with counties that both have the same

regulatory regime and are separated by rivers, the coefficients on --river-same-regime*CON are

unstable, but are not statistically significant when control variables are included (-2.14 [SD-

4.16]).


          We also find the same patterns when we use a dichotomous variable for the existence of

any MRI provider in a county (Table 4, Columns 3 & 4). Again the results are large,

demonstrating a decline of 0.32 in the proportion of counties with any MRI provider (p<0.001).


          For ease of interpretation, we have reported the OLS results in the specifications using a

dichotomous variable (Any MRI) on the left hand side. In sensitivity testing, we also applied a

Probit specification, estimated at the mean of all the variables, which is more appropriate for

dichotomous variables. The results are nearly identical to the main specifications.


4.C. Sensitivity Testing and Limitations


                                                  23
       We performed several tests to ensure the robustness of our results. First, we reran our

results removing all of the counties in the states that have no boundaries with a different regime

across the boundary. This removes 30 percent of all counties, but does not change the results

because the identification is mostly within the border changing counties. The results do move

slightly as a result of the covariate adjustments. For example, the main coefficient on the

interaction in specification 2 in Table 3 is -6.9. The coefficient after removing the 30 percent of

counties with no border changes is -6.6. The other specifications all show a similarly small

change in the main result. Second, we also reran the results removing one critical state at a time.

No single state moves our results. For example, when we remove Pennsylvania, the main

coefficient moves from -6.9 to -6.8. The coefficient is -6.7 when Iowa is removed.


       In addition, as an alternative to using robust standard errors we estimated our equations

with clustering by state. As expected, the standard errors were not sensitive to this alternative.


       Finally, we also perform sensitivity tests that focus on the significance of population for

the results. As opposed to merely using several adjustments for population, some researchers

may favor a model that weights the variables by population. Having applied the tests for

determining whether regression weighting is appropriate advanced by Solon, Haider, and

Wooldridge (2013), we concluded that the unweighted model is more accurate than the weighted

model for several reasons: 1) we have tried to include a full universe of free-standing providers

and, therefore do not need weights to account for a skewed sample in our descriptive statistics; 2)

we have no reason to believe that the individual-level error terms within the groups of regulated

or unregulated border counties are correlated because of some unobserved group-level factors

(after all the border counties are in different states); to confirm our intuition, we tested for

heteroskedasticity by regressing the squared residuals from the OLS equations on the inverse of

                                                  24
the population variable for regulated and unregulated border counties (See a description of this

modified Breusch-Pagan test in Solon, 2013). The results were not significant for the regressions

testing MRI per population, although they were for the regressions testing whether a county had

any MRI at all; and 3) we believe we have the universe of providers and, therefore, do not have

endogenous sampling.


       However, a fourth reason for weighting in this context is that CON regulations might

have a greater or lesser effect in more populous counties, perhaps creating different thresholds

for opening any provider site. Nonetheless, the weighted results support our hypotheses that

MRI regulation affects the location of providers; however, many estimates are less precise (have

higher standard errors) and show considerably smaller effects than those in our preferred

specification. We report the descriptive statistics and all of the regression results in both

unweighted and weighted form in the online Appendix.


       There are several limitations to our study. First, our study is based on cross-sectional

estimates, both leaving open the possibility that there is some local difference that contributes to

our results and limiting the generalizability of our results over time. We could not perform time-

series analyses because the primary sources from which we constructed original databases for

this project do not allow us to create panel data. We assembled the MRI provider location data

from member lists of MRI certification agencies that we found online in December 2012.

However, the CMS requirement to join a certification agency only became effective in January

2012. In addition, we created an original database of states with CON for MRI from both legal

research and interviews with regulators about whether the laws are actively enforced. This

approach, which we believe makes our data more reliable than had we conducted only statutory

and regulatory research, does not allow us to construct a reliable panel.

                                                 25
       To address the limitation of cross-sectional analysis, we included both within and cross-

state specifications. We also included several independent variables to address potential left out

variable bias. Although there may well be remaining bias related to the reasons why some states

retained their CON laws, it is difficult to explain why any of those factors would cause

freestanding MRI providers to appear on the other side of a state border without there being

some excess demand in the CON states.


       Second, because the data were unavailable, we were not able to account for the type or

number of MRI machines used by each provider, nor were we able to account for the quantity of

individual scans provided. Therefore, we are unable to determine whether CON for MRI has had

a similar volume effect to those found by other scholars studying CON regulations for different

services. Third, all of the states with active CON for MRI are in the Midwest and Northeast,

leaving open the possibility that there are regional effects which we were unable to assess.


5. Conclusion


       Our robust finding of 6.9 fewer MRI providers per million people in regulated counties

that border counties in unregulated states than in unregulated counties that border regulated

counties yields several important conclusions and implications for policy. First, we conclude

that these effects are large. Given that a typical county has 11.6 MRI providers per million

people, our finding suggests that for residents in regulated border counties with nearby

unregulated counties, residents would have to cross to border to access 60 percent of the area’s

supply of MRI providers. Given the size of this effect, it should be accounted for in future

research on the effects of state-based health technology regulation.




                                                26
       Second, we find that CON regulations for free-standing MRI affect not only residents in

regulated states, but spill over and affect those in unregulated states nearby. This is only a single

example of how the effects of state regulation are not, and probably cannot be, confined within a

state despite the fact that the regulation of health insurance (via the federal McCarran Ferguson

Act which exempts insurance from most federal regulation) and much of the regulation of health

care itself (via state licensing laws like CON and state based public health programs) is explicitly

state based. Some of the benefits of state regulation, like responsiveness to local citizens, depend

on a degree of isolation from the policy choices of other governments, both federal and other

states policy choices. (Greve, 2001) If the effects of these policies cannot be contained within a

state, the kinds of spillover effects we identify here call into question whether local and state

regulators are better positioned, as is often asserted, than the federal government to reflect the

preferences of their citizens. Depending on the welfare effects of CON, which are beyond the

scope of this study, our findings provide some support for federal intervention in regulation

where there are extreme spillover effects across state boundaries.

       Third, it is widely believed that a decentralized regulatory system allows states to serve

as laboratories, testing various policies so that all levels of government can learn from the

experiments. However, large spillover effects undermine the effectiveness of state regulations as

a basis to determine whether regulation would work on a larger scale or if it were implemented

nationally.


       Fourth, these results may inform development of imaging payment policy. While the

development of advanced diagnostic imaging – and MRIs in particular - have made important

contributions to human health, advanced diagnostic imaging has been identified as an overused

technology. (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, 2005). The overuse of medical


                                                 27
technology can have negative health effects, including risks related to MRI technology and

contrast agents (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2013, U.S. Food and Drug Administration,

2010; Kanda et al., 2013), as well as false positives that lead to further interventions (Chandra

and Skinner 2012). The large variation in prices for diagnostic scans suggests there is room for

cost-control; in 2012, prices for MRIs in the United States varied a great deal with the 25th

percentile at $522, an average price of $1,121, and the 95th percentile at $2,871 (International

Federation of Health Plans, 2013). In addition, the tendency for a doctor to order scans appears

to be influenced by whether the doctor owns MRI equipment; for example, Baker (2010) found

an increase in imaging use and spending on patients shortly after their orthopedist and

neurologist acquired MRI equipment and began billing Medicare for scans.


       Fifth, and more generally, the Affordable Care Act employs numerous methods that were

included as part of an effort to slow spending, particularly spending on over use of technology.

These methods include various payment reforms to alter the financial incentives for medical

practitioners and organizations to provide services, but they do not include direct regulation of

technology through programs such as CON. An accurate assessment of whether direct regulation

such as CON can or cannot be effective must consider types of cross-border effects of

regulations we analyze here. Because of the increase in care at outpatient and free-standing sites,

accounting for spillover effects will become even more important for assessing regulation.


       Finally, while our study did not consider the welfare effects of CON an evaluation of

which would need to address the effects of barriers to entry on price, volume, and quality we

surmise that, all other things equal, exporting patients across state lines is generally not welfare

enhancing when the alternative would be to 1) obtain care in their home locations, or 2) not

obtain care that is unnecessary. Such costs will, in part, be imposed on the patient who suffers

                                                 28
unnecessary travel for needed care or receives travel and unnecessary care. To the extent these

patients are insured under Medicare, the federal government will bear the cost burden. We leave

these important issues for future research.




                                               29
                                          References

Antel, J.J., R.L. Ohsfeldt, and E.R. Becker. "State Regulation and Hospital Costs." Review of
        Economics and Statistics. 77, no. 3 (1995): 416-422.

Baker, Laurence. “Acquisition of MRI Equipment by Doctors Drives Up Imaging Use and
       Spending.” Health Affairs. 29, no.12 (2010): 2252-2259.Chandra, Amitabh, and Jonathan
       Skinner. "Technology Growth and Expenditure Growth in Health Care." Journal of Econ
       Lit. L:N.3 (2012): 645-680.

Conover, Christopher J., and Frank A. Sloan. "Does Removing Certificate-of-Need Regulations
      Lead to A Surge in Healthcare Spending?." Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law.
      23, no. 3 (1998): 455-481.

Cordato, Roy. “Certificate of Need Laws: Why It’s Time for Repeal.” Alabama Policy Institute.
       (2007). Available at: http://www.alabamapolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/API-Research-
       Certificate-of-Need_new.pdf (last checked July 8, 2014).

Cosmus, Thomas C., and Michael Parizh. "Advances in Whole-Body MRI Magnets." IEEE
     Transactions on Applied Superconductivity. 21, no. 3 (2011): 2104 - 2109.

Cotet, Anca M. “The Impact of Noneconomic Damages Cap on Health Care Delivery in
       Hospitals.” American Law and Economics Review. 14, no.1 (2012): 192-234.

Cutler, David M., Robert S. Huckman, and Jonathan T. Kolstad. "Input Constraints and the
        Efficiency of Entry: Lessons from Cardiac Surgery." American Economic Journal:
        Economic Policy. 2, no.1 (2010): 51-76.

DeLia, Derek, Joel C. Cantor, Amy Tiedemann, and Cecilia S. Huang. "Effects of Regulation
       and Competition on Health Care Disparities: The Case of Cardiac Angiography in New
       Jersey." Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law. 34, no.1 (2009): 63-91.

Epstein, Richard A., David A. Hyman. “Fixing Obamacare: The Virtues of Choice,
       Competition, and Deregulations.” New York University Annual Survey of American Law.
       68 (2013): 493-537.

Finkler, Merton D. "Changes in Certificate-of-Need Laws: Read the Fine Print." Incentives vs.
       Controls in Health Policy: Broadening the Debate. (1985): 132-143.

Greve, Michael S. American Enterprise Institute, "Laboratories of Democracy." Last modified
       March 31, 2001. http://www.aei.org/article/politics-and-public-
       opinion/elections/laboratories-of-democracy/.

Hamilton, Reed. "Barriers to Hospital Diversification: The Regulatory Environment." Duquesne
      Law Review. 24 (1985-1986): 425-453.

Ho, Vivian. "Certificate of Need, Volume, and Percutaneous Transluminal Coronary
       Angioplasty Outcomes." American Heart Journal. 147, no. 3 (2004): 442-448.

                                               30
Ho, Vivian, Meei-Hsiang Ku-Goto, and James G. Jollis. “Certificate of Need (CON) for Cardiac
       Care: Controversy Over The Contributions to CON.” Health Services Research. 44, no. 1
       (2009): 483-500.

Ho, Vivian, Joseph S. Ross, Brahmajee K. Nallamothu, and Harlan M. Krumholz. “Cardiac
       Certificate of Need Regulations and the Availability and Use of Revascularization
       services.” American Heart Journal. 154, no. 4 (2007): 767-775.

Hoxby, Carolyn M. "Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students And
      Taxpayers," American Economic Review, 2000, v90(5,Dec), 1209-1238.

Hillman, Alan, and J. Sanford Schwartz. "The Adoption and Diffusion of CT and MRI in the
      United States." Medical Care. 23, no. 11 (1985): 1283-1294.

"International Federation of Health Plans." 2011 Comparative Price Report, Medical and
       Hospital Fees by Countries, March 06, 2012, 7.

Kanda, Tomonori , Kazunari Ishii, Hiroki Kawaguchi, Kazuhiro Kitajima, and Daisuke
       Takenaka. “High Signal Intensity in the Dentate Nucleus and Globus Pallidus on
       Unenhanced T1-weighted MR Images: Relationship with Increasing Cumulative Dose of
       a Gadolinium-based Contrast Material,” Radiology. 270, no. 3 (2014): 834-41 Accessed
       August 6, 2014. http://pubs.rsna.org/doi/abs/10.1148/radiol.13131669.

Lanning, Joyce A., Michael A. Morrisey, and Robert L. Ohsfeldt. "Endogenous Hospital
      Regulation and its Effects on Hospital and Non-Hospital Expenditures." Journal of
      Regulatory Economics. no. 3P (1991): 137-154.

Levinson, David M., and Kevin Krizek. Planning for Place and Plexus: Metropolitan Land Use
       and Transport. New York: Routledge, 2008.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, "Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy,
      March 2012." Chapter 3, pgs. 46-47. Accessed July 8, 2014
      http://www.medpac.gov/chapters/Mar12_Ch03.pdf.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, "Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy,
      March 2005." Last modified March 2005. Accessed August 17, 2013.
      http://www.medpac.gov/documents/Mar05_EntireReport.pdf.

National Conference of State Legislatures. Website: Certificate of Need: State Health Laws and
       Programs (2011, 2013). http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/con-certificate-of-need-
       state-laws.aspx#Regulated. Accessed July 8, 2014.

New York State Department of Health, "Certificate of Need Applications." Last modified
     November 22, 2010. Accessed August 17, 2013.
     http://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/cons/more_information/applications/2010/november2
     2thru26_2010distributed.htm .



                                              31
New York State Department of Health, "Certificate of Need Applications Approved September
     2008." Last modified September 2, 2008. Accessed August 17, 2013.
     http://www.health.ny.gov/facilities/cons/more_information/applications/2008/september2
     008approved.htm .

Popecu, I, Mary S. Vaughan-Sarrazin, and Gary E. Rosenthal, “Certificate of Need Regulations
      and Use of Coronary Revascularization after Acute Myocardial Infarction.” Journal of
      the American Medical Association. 295, no. 18 (2006): 2141-2147.

Russel, L.B. “Technology in Hospitals.” The Brookings Institution. Washington, D.C. (1979).

Salkever, David S. "Regulation of Prices and Investment in Hospitals in the United States."
       Handbook of Health Economics. no. B (2000): 1489-1535.

Salkever, David S., and Thomas W. Bice. Hospital Certificate of Need Controls: Impact on
       Investment, Costs and Use. Washington: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy
       Research, 1979.

Sloan, Frank A., and Bruce Steinwald. "Effects of Regulation on Hospital Costs and Input Use."
       Chicago Journals. 23(1980): 81-109.

Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey Wooldridge. “What Are We Weighting For?”
       Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013. NBER Working Papers
       (18859).

Steinberg, Earl P., Jane E. Sisk, and Katherine E. Locke. "X-ray CT and Magnetic Resonance
       Imagers. Diffusion Patterns and Policy Issues." New England Journal of Medicine. 313,
       no. 14 (1985): 859-864.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration,
       Bureau of Health Professions, "Area Resource File (AHRF) Rockville, MD." Last
       modified 2012-2013.

"Improving Health Care: A Dose of Competition, Executive Summary." U.S. Federal Trade
      Commission and U.S. Department of Justice, A Report by the Federal Trade Commission
      and the Department of Justice. (2004): 2.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration, "Radiation-Emitting Products, MRI (Magnetic Resonance
       Imaging)." Last modified June 06, 2012. Accessed September 6, 2013.
       http://www.fda.gov/Radiation-
       EmittingProducts/RadiationEmittingProductsandProcedures/MedicalImaging/ucm200086
       .htm.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration, "Drugs, FDA Drug Safety Communication: New Warnings
       For Using Gadolinium-Based Contrast Agents in Patients with Kidney Dysfunction."
       Last modified December 23, 2010. Accessed September 6, 2013.
       http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm223966.htm.


                                               32
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). Medicare Imaging Payments. Medicare: Trends
      in Fees, Utilization and Expenditures Before and After Implementation of the Deficit
      Reduction Act of 2005. Letter to Congressional Requesters (GAO 08-1102R).
      Washington, DC, 2008.

Vaughan-Sarrazin, Mary S., Edward L. Hannan, C J. Gormley, and Gary E. Rosenthal.
      “Mortality in Medicare Beneficiaries Following Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery in
      States With and Without Certificate of Need Regulation.” Journal of the American
      Medical Association. 288, no. 15 (2002): 1859-66.

Yakima Valley Memorial Hospital v. Washington State Department of Health, 654 F.3d 919
      (2011).




                                            33
Figure 1. State Certificate of Need Laws, 2012




  No CON for any service
  CON for some services, not MRI
  CON for MRI



SOURCES: The designations in this figure are from the authors’ primary research including: a 48-state survey of
state statutes and regulations, confirmed by interviews with state regulators in departments of health, bureaus of
health planning, CON offices, or other relevant state offices.




                                                        34
Figure 2. State Borders with Major Rivers




SOURCES: Templates from ArcGIS. Original source for major rivers from ESRI, Rand McNally & Company,
Bartholemew and Times Books, Defense Mapping Agency presently known as National Geospatial-Intelligence
Agency.




                                                   35
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

                                                                All Counties                  CON Counties                  Non-CON Counties

                                                                 (N=3,100)                      (N=1,213)                        (N=1,887)

                         Variable                           Mean         Std. Dev.         Mean          Std. Dev.         Mean           Std. Dev.

   MRI Providers                                                2.17              7.15            1.63          4.92             2.52            8.26

   Population                                                 98,714           314,458        82,569        193,829          109,092         371,568

   MRI Providers per million pop                                11.6              21.0            11.7          24.5             11.4            18.5

   Urban-rural classification: non-metro                        0.44             0.496         0.427           0.495            0.448          0.497

   Urban-rural classification: rural                           0.211             0.408         0.186            0.39            0.227          0.419

   Density: pop per square mile                                  240             1670             358          2515               164            710

   Population below poverty line (%)                            15.3               6.0            16.7           6.3             14.4             5.7

   Median Household Income ($)                                43,992            11,328        42,574         11,838           44,903          10,894

   Population 18-64 years (%)                                   58.8               4.5            59.7           4.3             58.1             4.6

   Population > 64 (%)                                          15.3               4.2            14.9           3.6             15.6             4.5

   Pop >25 with College Education (%)                           13.8               6.0            13.0           6.4             14.3             5.6

   Hospital Beds (per 100,000 pop)                               355              534             325           488               374            561


  SOURCES: Authors’ analysis of data on MRI providers from the American College of Radiology (2012) and Intersocietal Accreditation Commission, on
  rural and urban status from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics Urban-Rural Classification Scheme
  (2012), and, for the remaining measures, the US Department of Health and Human Resources, Health Resources Administration, Area Resource File
  (2010).




                                                                          36
Table 2. MRI Providers by County Border Classification by Certificate of Need Status

                                            Number of counties                   MRI per million population                Any MRI in county
                                        Total    CON       Non-CON               CON      Non-CON        diff         CON       Non-CON         Diff
     All counties                        3,100    1,213         1,887             11.7           11.4      0.3         0.367          0.368     0.001



         Border                          1,138      452           686             10.8           11.8     -1.0         0.392          0.362    -0.030
         Interior                        1,962      761         1,201             12.3           11.3      1.0         0.352          0.371     0.019
                                                                          diff    -1.5            0.5     -2.0         0.040         -0.009    -0.049



         Border
             Different regime              394      209           185               10           15.3     -5.3         0.354          0.486     0.132
             Same regime                   744      243           501             11.5           10.4      1.1         0.424          0.315    -0.109
                                                                          diff     -1.5           4.9     -6.4          -0.07         0.171     0.241



               Different regime
                       land border         234      123           111              8.3           18.4    -10.1         0.309          0.541     0.232
                       river border        160       86            74             12.4           10.8      1.6         0.419          0.405    -0.014
                                                                          diff    -4.1            7.6    -11.7        -0.110          0.136     0.246

               Same regime
                      land border          662      238           424             11.7           10.6      1.1         0.433          0.321    -0.112
                      river border          82        5            77              0.0            9.6     -9.6         0.000          0.286     0.286
                                                                          diff    11.7            1.0     10.7         0.433          0.035    -0.398



    SOURCES: Authors’ analysis of data on MRI providers from the American College of Radiology (2012) and Intersocietal Accreditation
    Commission, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics Urban-Rural Classification Scheme (2012), and the
    US Department of Health and Human Resources, Health Resources Administration, Area Resource File (2010).


                                                                            37
Table 3. Regression Results for Border County Classification

                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
                                             MRI pop          MRI pop         Any MRI          Any MRI
                                                        **              **              ***
       Different regime * CON                  -6.431          -6.929          -0.241           -0.238***
                                                [2.318]         [2.206]         [0.0624]        [0.0523]


       Interior * CON                          -0.0587          0.0389          -0.128**         -0.102**
                                                [1.787]         [1.577]         [0.0440]        [0.0357]


       Different regime                         4.915**         4.301**         0.171***         0.133***
                                                [1.728]         [1.661]         [0.0422]        [0.0366]


       Interior                                  0.852          -0.0241         0.0560*          0.00672
                                                [0.983]         [0.956]         [0.0250]        [0.0203]


       CON                                       1.044            1.230          0.108**          0.102**
                                                [1.371]         [1.314]         [0.0379]        [0.0312]


       Control Variables                            No              Yes              No              Yes


       Constant                                10.43***          -0.764         0.315***           0.247
                                                [0.835]         [7.645]         [0.0208]          [0.147]


       Observations                               3100            3100             3100             3100
       R Squared                                 0.022          0.1944             0.133

      NOTES: Regressions (1) and (2) estimated by ordinary least squares. Regressions (3) and (4)
      estimated with a linear probability model; corresponding Probit estimates produced similar results
      (available from authors). See data description in text for definitions, sources, and list of control
      variables. Standard errors in brackets. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                         38
Table 4. Regression Results for River and Border County Classification

                                                    (1)                   (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                              MRI pop               MRI pop            Any MRI             Any MRI
 Land Diff regime*CON                         -11.24***             -11.33***           -0.344***           -0.321***
                                                [2.928]               [2.824]           [0.0744]            [0.0644]


 River diff regime*CON                             0.447               -0.195            -0.0988               -0.106
                                                 [2.936]               [2.620]          [0.0875]             [0.0701]

 River Same regime*CON                         -10.72***               -2.150           -0.398***              -0.102
                                                 [2.490]               [4.162]          [0.0649]             [0.0891]

 Interior * CON                                   -0.147                 0.116           -0.131**           -0.0985**
                                                 [1.838]               [1.625]          [0.0452]             [0.0368]

 Land Different regime                           7.802**               7.265**           0.220***             0.186***
                                                 [2.370]               [2.288]          [0.0525]             [0.0466]

 River Different regime                            0.204                -0.501            0.0847               0.0367
                                                 [1.986]               [1.775]          [0.0615]             [0.0500]

 River Same regime                                -0.993                -0.883           -0.0350              -0.0411
                                                 [2.231]               [2.101]          [0.0563]             [0.0453]

 Interior                                          0.700                -0.160            0.0506            0.000400
                                                 [1.052]               [1.019]          [0.0267]             [0.0215]

 CON                                               1.133                 1.143           0.112**             0.0982**
                                                 [1.435]               [1.375]          [0.0394]             [0.0324]

 Control Variables                                   No                   Yes                 No                  Yes

 Constant                                       10.58***                -1.300           0.321***               0.239
                                                 [0.915]               [7.658]          [0.0227]              [0.147]

 Observations                                       3100                 3100               3100                 3100
 R squared                                        0.0220               0.1944             0.0191               0.3511


NOTES: Regressions (1) and (2) estimated by ordinary least squares. Regressions (3) and (4) estimated with a
linear probability model; corresponding Probit estimates produced similar results (available from authors). See
data description in text for definitions, sources, and list of control variables. Standard errors in brackets. * p <
0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                           39
40
