NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RAINFALL FORECASTS, WEATHER AND WAGES OVER THE AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION CYCLE
Mark R. Rosenzweig
Christopher Udry
Working Paper 19808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19808
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

We thank Nirav Shah for excellent research assistance and Seema Jayachandran for comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Mark R. Rosenzweig and Christopher Udry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Rainfall Forecasts, Weather and Wages over the Agricultural Production Cycle
Mark R. Rosenzweig and Christopher Udry
NBER Working Paper No. 19808
January 2014
JEL No. J2,J31,J43,O1,O13,Q12
ABSTRACT
We look at the effects of rainfall forecasts and realized rainfall on equilibrium agricultural wages
over the course of the agricultural production cycle. We show theoretically that a forecast of good
weather can lower wages in the planting stage, by lowering ex ante out-migration, and can exacerbate
the negative impact of adverse weather on harvest-stage wages. Using Indian household panel data
describing early-season migration and district-level planting- and harvest-stage wages over the period
2005-2010, we find results consistent with the model, indicating that rainfall forecasts improve labor
allocations on average but exacerbate wage volatility because they are imperfect.
Mark R. Rosenzweig
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
mark.rosenzweig@yale.edu
Christopher Udry
Economic Growth Center
Yale University
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
udry@yale.edu

In (Rosenzweig and Udry 2013) we showed that investments by Indian farmers in the
July -August planting stage were significantly affected by the long-range kharif-season monsoon
rainfall forecast issued by the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) in late June. We also
found that the profitability of those investments were highly sensitive to the realization of rainfall
over the season, so that the forecasts enhanced average profits but contributed to profit volatility.
In this article we examine the effects of the forecast and rainfall on planting- and harvest-stage
agricultural wage rates. Prior research on the effects of rainfall on agricultural wage rates (e.g.
Jayachdran, 2006; Kaur, 20012) have examined the effects of rainfall on seasonal average wages
without attention to the timing of investment and labor-supply/migration decisions within the
season. This neglect is potentially important, as wages in the planting stage are relatively
unaffected by rainfall, but may be affected by rainfall forecasts, and the effects of rainfall
realizations on harvest-stage wage rates may be affected by whether or not the rainfall forecast
predicted good or bad weather for the season.
To analyze the interactions between rainfall forecasts and weather realizations on wages
over the crop-cycle we first construct a simple general-equilibrium model of the agricultural
labor market which is attentive to the sequential nature of agricultural production. In the first
period prior to the full realization of rainfall, farmers choose agricultural inputs based on a
forecast of subsequent rainfall while landless households decide whether to remain in the village
or to out-migrate. We thus focus on the ex ante migration decision, in contrast to the prior
literature that has examined ex post labor supply (Kochar, 1997) and ex post migration responses
to rainfall shocks (Morten, 2013). In the second period of the model, the rainfall shock is realized
and farmers profit-maximize, hiring the labor that has remained in the village given their sunk
planting-stage investments. The model indicates that a positive rainfall forecast has an
ambiguous effect on planting-stage wages, depending on the strengths of investment and
2

migration responses, but can have a negative effect on harvest-stage wages if realized rainfall is
low.
Based on the model, we estimate the effects of the IMD forecast on planting-stage
migration decisions using household panel data and the effects of the forecast and rainfall
realizations on planting- and harvest-stage wages using Indian district-level data on activity- and
month-specific wages and district-level monthly rainfall data covering the period 2005-2010. In
putting these data together, we uncover some of the pitfalls of using existing district-level wage
and rainfall data. The estimates indicate that a forecast of above-average rainfall leads to reduced
village out-migration, especially by men, and to a small but statistically significant overall
decline in planting-stage wages. The positive forecast, as indicated by the model, also
exacerbates the negative impact of adverse weather on harvest-stage wages. Thus, rainfall
forecasts appear to improve the allocation of labor across space when they are correct but also
increase inter-annual wage volatility as a result of being imperfect. We also show that the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), introduced in a limited set of districts in
2007 and then in all districts by 2010, helps moderate this volatility.
I. Rural Labor Markets with Forecasting
In this section we provide a simple model of rural labor markets when informative
forecasts of seasonal weather are available. Consider a set of identical farmers. Farm output is

hs ( x0 , x1 ), where x0 is the quantity of planting stage labor, x1 is the quantity of harvest-stage labor
and s {g , b} is the weather realization. Planting-stage labor is chosen before s is realized;
harvest-stage labor after. We abstract from other inputs (and suppress the land input, since it is
identical across farmers). Assume that hb ( x0 , x1 )  hg ( x0 , x1 ) and

hb ( x0 , x1 ) hg ( x0 , x1 )

for
xt
xt

t {0,1} . In addition, we assume that planting- and harvest-stage labor are complements and that
3

this complementarity increases is good weather

 2 hg ( x0 , x1 )
x0x1



 2 hb ( x0 , x1 )
 0. A forecast
x0x1

F {G, B} is released before x0 is chosen. Farmers have access to savings/credit markets, but we

assume that there is no insurance available. After the forecast is made, farmers choose labor
inputs (x0, x1g, x1b) and saving/borrowing (a) to maximize
(1)

u(c0 )  prob(b | F )u(c1b )  (1  prob(b | F ))u(c1g ).

Conditional on the forecast, the farmer’s budget constraints are
(2)

c0  Y  w0 ( F ) x0  a

(3)

c1s  hs ( x0 , x1 )  w1s ( F ) x1  ra,

where we have made the possible dependence of wages on the forecast explicit. Both output and
consumption are valued at price 1.
If state s is realized in period 1 after a forecast of F in period zero we have separability in the
choice of x1 which can be summarized by
(4)

x1 ( x0 , s, w1s ( F ))  arg max hs ( x0 , x1 )  w1s ( F ) x1.
x1

The concavity of hs (.) implies that x1 ( x0 , s, w1s ) is decreasing in w1s. x1 ( x0 , g , w)  x1 ( x0 , b, w)
because the marginal product of harvest labor is higher in good weather. Complementarity
between planting- and harvest-stage labor implies x1 ( x0h , s, w)  x1 ( x0l , s, w), x0h  x0l , s {g , b}.
We have a mass 1 of identical farmers demanding labor, so the aggregate demand for harveststage labor in the village is simply x1 ( x0 , s, w1s ( F )). Turning to the planting-stage, Rosenzweig
and Udry (2013) show that x0 (G, w0 , w1g , w1b )  x0 (B, w0 , w1g , w1b ). x0 is strictly declining in each
of the three wages. Farmers are identical, so aggregate planting-stage labor demand is simply

x0 ( F , w0 , w1g , w1b ).
4

Labor is supplied by a mass 1 of landless laborers. After the forecast, the landless choose
to migrate out of the village or not ( m{0,1} ). If they choose to migrate, they earn the wage at
the place to which they migrate in both the planting and the harvest-stage; if they choose not to
migrate they supply 1 unit of labor to the village labor market. Landless choose m to maximize
(1) subject to
(5)

c0  Y  mwm  (1  m)w0 ( F )  a

(6)

c1s  mwm  (1  m)w1s ( F )  ra

where wm is the net wage from migration, which is known and the same in period 0 and any state
of period 1. The landless have a distribution of net wages from migration given by H ( wm ).
There is a critical wm  ( F , w0 , w1g , w1b ) such that all landless with wm  wm migrate and
all others do not (in parallel to the cultivators, we are assuming that all landless have the same Y,
so we suppress the dependence of wm on Y).  is increasing in each of the wages. If in
equilibrium w1g  w1b then (G, w0 , w1g , w1b )  ( B, w0 , w1g , w1b ), because of the higher probability
of good weather occurring conditional on a forecast of good weather. Labor supply in the
planting-stage and in the good and bad states of the harvest-stage is identical and equal to

H ( wm ).
The equilibrium set of wages w( F )  {w0 ( F ), w1g ( F ), w1b ( F )} satisfies

H (( F , w ( F ))  x0 ( F , w ( F ))
(7)

H (( F , w ( F ))  x1 ( x0 , g , w1g ( F ))
H (( F , w ( F ))  x1 ( x0 , b, w1b ( F ))

5

Equilibrium harvest-stage wages are always higher in good than bad weather: for F {G, B},
w1g ( F )  w1b ( F ). The complementarity between planting- and harvest-stage (which is stronger in

better weather) ensures that w1g (G)  w1b (G)  w1g ( B)  w1b ( B).
The effect of the forecast on planting- and harvest-stage wages can be ambiguous
because of the potential migration response to a good vs. bad forecast. The reservation migration
wage increases with a forecast of good weather, because the local harvest-stage wage is higher in
good weather. Suppose that there is a small migration response to this change in the reservation
wage: H (( B, w( B)))  H ((G, w( B))). Then, because x0 (G, w)  x0 (B, w) and x1 ( x0 , s, w1s ) is
increasing in x0, equilibrium wages are higher with a forecast of good weather. But the reverse
can be true if the migration response to the forecast is sufficiently strong.
The public works opportunities provided by NREGA are modelled as a wage floor. The
most interesting case is when equilibrium wages have the following pattern in the absence of
NREGA: w1g ( F )  w0 ( F )  w1b ( F ) . Now suppose NREGA introduces a wage floor ( w). Our
model implies that the effect of increasing w depends on when this floor binds. If it binds only in
the harvest-stage if the rainfall is poor, then, since out-migration declines as w increases and
planting-stage labor demand declines with harvest-stage wages, both the planting-stage wage and
the harvest-stage wage if there is good rainfall decline as NREGA comes into effect. In contrast,
if w is greater than the planting-stage wage, then the planting-stage wage increases with NREGA.
In our empirical work, we examine four facets of this model. First, we examine the
migration response during the planting-stage to the IMD forecast. Second, we quantify the
equilibrium response of district-level planting-stage wages to the forecast. Third, we ask if the
effect of rainfall shocks on district-level harvest-stage wages varies according to the forecast. In

6

particular, is the negative effect of a bad rainfall shock particularly severe after a forecast of a
good monsoon? Finally, we look at the effect of NREGA on planting- and harvest-stage wages.
II. Data
Analyzing stage-specific responses to forecasts and rainfall realizations requires data that
provide information by either agricultural production stages or by month. In Rosenzweig and
Udry (2013) we used the International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics Village
Level Survey Data (ICRISAT VLS), which provides high frequency information on agricultural
inputs by date and operation for six villages over the period 2005-2011. These data also provide
information on the out-migration of household members included in the survey. For the purposes
here of studying ex ante out-migration, we focus on out-migration between July 1 and August 15
- after the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) June forecast but prior to the full realization
of rainfall. Unfortunately, the surveyors did not adhere to the monthly survey design in 2007 and
2008, so we have five years of migration information for the six villages. Out-migration in the
early months of the kharif (June-October) season is non-trivial for prime-age males. As seen in
the top panel of Table 1, almost 16% of males age 15-39 migrated in July-August. Female ex
ante migration is one-third that of male migration. The sample we use for the analysis of
migration includes all household members who participated in the labor market during the kharif
season. Because of the different migration rates of men and women, we also analyze the
determinants of migration separately by gender.
For the empirical analysis of agricultural wage rates we also need wage rates by
operational stage. The Directorate of Economics and Statistics within the Indian Ministry of
Agriculture provides district-level daily agricultural wages by month, “activity,” and gender.
Three activities are relevant to our analysis - “sower” and “ploughman” for the planting stage
and “reaper and harvester” for the harvest stage. Our criteria for choosing wages was to select
7

male wages for sowers and ploughman in the month of June and July and male harvesters for
September and October for the years 2005-2010. Unfortunately, many of the districts had
missing information for these month and activity classifications. To maximize sample size, we
constructed June/July planting-stage wages by first selecting ploughmen wages in those months,
then if this category was missing selecting the wage rates of sowers and then if this category was
missing for the relevant months we used the wages for “other agricultural labor.” The majority of
wages for the planting-stage were for ploughmen. For the September/October harvest period, we
selected harvester/reaper wages as a priority and then the wages for other agricultural operations
in those months if wages were missing for that activity. 1 All wages are deflated by the CPI for
agricultural workers, using 2005 as the base year.
The standard rainfall data set for monthly Indian district-level rainfall is the Terrestrial
Air Temperature and Precipitation compiled by Cort J. Wilmott and Kenji Matsuura, which
covers the period 1950-2010. While rainfall is provided for a 0.5 by 0.5 degree grid of points
across India, which can be matched to the centroid of each of over 600 Indian districts, the
source of the rainfall information comes from only 81 weather stations maintained by the
National Center for Atmospheric research (NCAR). The district-level rainfall data is thus
spatially interpolated. This interpolation introduces noise. To minimize the effects of
measurement error, we initially selected districts that were within 100 miles of the NCAR
weather stations (65 districts). However, because of the problem of missing wage information, to
increase the number of districts we added additional districts. The final data sets for analysis
1

Jayachrandran (2006) and Kauer (2012) used the district-level male agricultural wage series assembled by Robert
E. Evenson and James W. McKinsey, Jr. from the same monthly wage data we use, and available in the World Bank
India Agricultural and Climate data. This series does not distinguish wages by stage of operation, providing only one
average wage observation per year that weights the months of June and August more heavily and also selects
ploughman as a priority activity. Because June operations and ploughing in particular cannot be affected by rainfall
over the full agricultural season, this wage series will be less sensitive to weather realizations than will a wage series
focusing on the harvest stage. In our analyses of planting-stage and harvest-stage wage rates we included dummy
variables indicating activity-type for the relevant months. These were not statistically significant.

8

consisted of 106 districts and 387 observations for planting-stage wages and 95 districts and 337
observations for harvest-stage wages.
Using the rainfall data, we constructed for each district and year the ratio of actual
rainfall in the July-September period over its 60-year historic mean. We classify a bad rainfall
shock as one in which this measure is below one. We also appended to each observation the June
area- and year-specific IMD forecast and created a dummy variable for each district/year
indicating whether or not NREGA had been implemented in the district.
The bottom panel of Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for these data. As can be seen,
the average distance of an NCAR weather station to a district is over 82 miles. As a
consequence, in our wage specifications we examine whether the estimated rainfall shock effect
on harvest wages is attenuated by weather station distance. A key point of our analysis is that the
determinants of planting- and harvest-stage wages are not the same. In our data sets, while the
average levels of the harvest and planting-stage wages are similar, they display distinctly
different variability across years. This is indicated in Figure 1, which plots the ratio of harvest to
planting-stage wages by year for the districts and years in which both stage-specific wages are
available.
III. Results
Table 2 reports village fixed-effect estimates of the effect of the IMD long-range forecast
on planting-season migration in the ICRISAT VLS survey. In column one, the point estimate
implies that a one standard deviation increase in forecasted rain leads to a 0.7 percentage point
reduction in migration, from a base level of 9 percent of the population. 2 Columns 2 and 3
provide estimates by gender. The responsiveness of migration to the forecast is stronger for men
than for women. A one standard deviation increase in forecasted rain leads to a decline of 1.1
2

The effect of forecasted rain on migration is robust to controls for realized rainfall over the entire monsoon, or for
realized rain in June and July (not shown).

9

percentage points in male seasonal migration (from a base of 16 percent). Female seasonal
migration is insensitive to forecasted rain. Female seasonal migration is also not associated with
age, and female migration declines with education, in contrast to the pattern observed for men.
In Table 3 we examine the relationships between the IMD forecast and realized rainfall
for equilibrium planting- and harvest-stage agricultural wages using the district-level data. The
district fixed effect estimates indicate that there is a small, but precisely-determined decline in
the planting-stage wage with increases in forecasted rainfall. A one standard deviation increase
in forecasted rainfall leads to a 2 percent decline in the planting-stage wage. This is consistent
with the migration response to forecasted rain that we observe in Table 2.
The planting-stage wage also increases with rainfall shocks. A one standard deviation
increase in rainfall above the long-term average increases planting-stage wages by 5.6 percent.
However, this relationship declines in the distance between the district centroid and the nearest
NCAR weather station. The point estimates indicate that there is no correlation between the
rainfall shock and planting-stage wages for a district 100 miles from the nearest station. The
estimates also indicate that the implementation of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
increased planting-stage wages by about 9.6 percent. Thus the NREGA wage is sufficiently high
that it binds in the planting-stage.
The model suggests that harvest-stage wages are differentially sensitive to the IMD
forecast, depending upon realized rainfall. This is shown in column 2 of Table 3. On average,
harvest-stage wages move little with the IMD forecast, which is consistent with the migration
response to the forecast seen in Table 2. However, increases in forecasted rainfall lead to
declines in the harvest-stage wage if a bad rainfall shock is realized. This effect occurs both
because the forecast of more rainfall increases labor supply by reducing seasonal migration away

10

from the village, and because the bad rainfall shock reduces harvest-stage labor demand by
cultivators.
As we observed with planting-stage wages, the estimated relationship between rainfall shocks
and harvest-stage wages declines with the distance between the district and the nearest NCAR
rainfall station. Implementation of NREGA is also associated with increases in harvest-stage
wages, particularly in years with bad rainfall shocks, as expected.
IV. Conclusion
Informative rainfall forecasts permit welfare-improving anticipatory migration. This
complements the finding of Rosenzweig and Udry (2013) that forecasts improve average profits
of cultivators. The supply of and the demand for stage-specific agricultural labor depend on
forecasts of seasonal rainfall.

As a consequence, equilibrium stage-specific wages for

agricultural labor are sensitive to these forecasts. The response of harvest-stage wages to
forecasted rainfall, however, varies depending upon realized rainfall for the season. The
availability of rainfall forecasts creates a new risk for the landless, even if they have rainfall
insurance.3 A forecast of good rainfall (which reduces out-migration of labor from the village)
followed by a realization of adverse weather generates a sharper drop in the harvest-stage wage
than would be realized were no forecast available. Hence even if perfect (basis-risk free)
weather index insurance existed, there would still be a missing market for forecast insurance.
Our results indicate that NGEGA, in part, fills this function by raising harvest-stage wages
particularly in bad weather states.
References
Jayachradran, Seema. 2006. “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in
Developing Countries.” Journal of Political Economy 114 (3): 538-575.
3

Mobarak and Rosenzweig (2013) examine the effects on agricultural wages of rainfall insurance purchased by
cultivators and/or the landless.

11

Kaur, Supreet. 2012. “Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets.” unpublished.
Kochar, Anjini. 1997. “Smoothing Consumption by Smoothing Income: Hours-of-Work
Responses to Idiosyncratic Agricultural Shocks in Rural India,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 81(1): 50–61.
Morten, Melanie. 2013. “Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in Village India.”
unpublished.
Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2013. “Risk, Insurance and Wages in
General Equilibrium,” Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 1035.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Christopher R. Udry. 2013. “Forecasting Profitability.” NBER
Working Paper No. 19334.

12

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics, by Data Set
Variable

Mean

SD

Planting-stage migration rate, males 15-39

.157

.364

Planting-stage migration rate, females 15-39

.0467

.211

Age

33.3

18.8

Schooling (years)

5.37

4.46

Forecast

96.5

2.36

ICRISAT VLS India, 2005-2011

District Male Agricultural Daily Wages, 2005-2010
Planting-stage wage (2005 Rs.)

71.6

32.2

Harvest-stage wage (2005 Rs.)

73.0

29.4

Rainfall shock (relative to 60-year mean)

1.04

.293

Bad rainfall shock (below mean)

.347

.477

Distance from nearest NCAR weather station (miles)

82.1

59.7

Forecast

95.1

4.12

National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) in place

.615

.487

13

Table 2
Village Fixed-Effects Estimates of the Determinants of Planting-Stage Out-Migration
(ICRISAT VLS India: 2005-2011)
Variable

All Workers

Males

Females

Forecast

-.00293
(2.69)

-.00485
(2.68)

-.000332
(0.33)

Age

.000853
(1.32)

.00141
(1.32)

-.000195
(0.32)

-.0000194
(2.38)

-.0000314
(2.28)

-.0000683
(0.91)

Schooling

.00711
(10.0)

.0118
(10.9)

-.00184
(2.47)

Male

.0557
(9.58)

-

-

N

6,501

3,507

2,994

Age squared

Absolute values of t-ratios in parentheses.
Table 3
Village Fixed-Effects Estimates of the Determinants of Male Daily Wages,
by Stage of Operation (Agricultural Wages of India, 2005-2010)
Variable

Log Planting-Stage Wage

Log Harvest-Stage Wage

.192
(3.09)

.056
(0.73)

Rainfall shock x distance to
weather station (miles)

-.00196
(2.56)

-.00152
(1.72)

Forecast

-.00622
(2.71)

.000898
(0.30)

Forecast x
bad rainfall shock

-

-.00109
(2.09)

NREGA in place

.096
(4.50)

.0623
(1.76)

-

.0929
(1.78)

387

337

Rainfall shock

NREGA x bad rainfall shock
N
Absolute values of t-ratios in parentheses.
14

