                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                COAL AND THE EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

                                        Alan Fernihough
                                    Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke

                                       Working Paper 19802
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19802


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2014




This research has received funding from the European Research Council under the European Union’s
Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013), ERC grant agreement no. 249546. We are grateful
to Bob Allen, Kristine Asch, Michael Athanson, Nick Crafts, James Fenske, Morgan Kelly, Alexander
Mirko M¨uller, Cormac Ó Gráda and Colin Waters for useful comments, advice and help with data.
We are also grateful to seminar and conference participants at the University of Southern Denmark,
Nottingham, Oxford, Queen’s University of Belfast, the 9th BETA Workshop in Historical Economics
at the University of Strasbourg, the University of Warwick Summer School on Economic Growth
2013, and a conference in honour of Karl Gunnar Persson held at the University of Copenhagen. The
usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Alan Fernihough and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Coal and the European Industrial Revolution
Alan Fernihough and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 19802
January 2014, Revised September 2014
JEL No. J10,N13,N53,O13,O14

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the importance of geographical proximity to coal as a factor underpinning comparative
European economic development during the Industrial Revolution. Our analysis exploits geographical
variation in city and coalfield locations, alongside temporal variation in the availability of coal-powered
technologies, to quantify the effect of coal availability on historical city population sizes. Since we
suspect that our coal measure could be endogenous, we use a geologically derived measure as an instrumental
variable: proximity to rock strata from the Carboniferous era. Consistent with traditional historical
accounts of the Industrial Revolution, we find that coal had a strong influence on city population size
from 1800 onward. Counterfactual estimates of city population sizes indicate that our estimated coal
effect explains around 60% of the growth in European city populations from 1750 to 1900. This result
is robust to a number of alternative modelling assumptions.


Alan Fernihough
IIIS, Trinity College
Dublin 2
Ireland
alan.fernihough@gmail.com

Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
All Souls College
University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
and NBER
kevin.orourke@all-souls.ox.ac.uk
1       Introduction

There is a long tradition in economic history that places coal at the centre of the
Industrial Revolution. For many economic historians trained in history depart-
ments, the Industrial Revolution was a switch towards coal, above all else. This

paper will focus on two claims that have been made for coal, one temporal and
one spatial. Focusing on variation over time, it was argued that harnessing coal
explained a large share of subsequent economic growth (what we will refer to for
the sake of concision as the growth hypothesis). Focusing on variation across space,
it was argued that the location of industry was strongly influenced by the location

of coalfields (what we will refer to as the location hypothesis).1
        In contrast, several economic historians trained in economics departments
have been more circumspect about the importance of coal. In some instances,

they have been downright sceptical, especially about the location hypothesis, but in
some cases about the growth hypothesis also. Both sides have used various data to
support their claims, and cliometricians have used back of the envelope calculations

to try to measure the importance of coal. However, systematic econometric studies
of coal’s importance during the Industrial Revolution have been surprisingly scarce.

Careful quantification would thus seem essential in order to distinguish between
the two positions.
        This paper provides an econometric test of both the location and growth

hypotheses in a pan-European context. More precisely, it tests (and quantifies)
the latter, based on an identification strategy that relies on (and tests) the former.
Because of our interest in the location of economic activity, we need fine-grained

    1
    Until declines in transport costs sufficiently weakened the gravitational pull of coalfields,
some time in the late 19th or early 20th century (Wright, 1990).


                                               2
spatial data spanning the periods both before and after the Industrial Revolu-
tion. Unfortunately, data on European regional GDP or industrial output are not
available over the time scale needed, and in any event regional data might not be
geographically fine-grained enough to test the influence of proximity to coalfields

in a sufficiently rigorous manner. We therefore use data on city sizes, in line with
several other recent studies (Nunn and Qian, 2011; Dittmar, 2011; Cantoni, 2013).2
While these do not provide us with information on income per capita, they are a
good indicator of the geographical distribution of economic activity at a point in
time.

        We are interested in the consequences of adopting new coal-using technolo-
gies. We therefore use a di↵erence-in-di↵erences (DID) strategy, to see whether
cities that were located closer to coalfields grew more rapidly during and after
the Industrial Revolution (but not before) than those further away. We find that
being located close to a coalfield mattered for city sizes after the Industrial Revo-

lution, but not before; we take this to be strong evidence in favour of the location

hypothesis. We also find that the introduction of the coal-using technologies of
the Industrial Revolution can account for around 60% of European urban growth
between 1750 and 1900, even when controlling for period and country-period fixed
e↵ects; that is to say, after controlling for the general rise in Europe’s urban pop-
ulation during this period, as well as for any country-specific factors influencing
national urban growth over time. Because we do not have data on city GDPs, some

readers may not regard this as constituting a direct test of the growth hypothesis.
However, the finding that coal mattered to this extent in determining city growth

   2
     We cannot explore urbanization rates, since data on the denominator (total population) are
not available at the level of regional disaggregation required for our purposes.


                                              3
after the Industrial Revolution is an important finding in its own right, and is
certainly consistent with the growth hypothesis.
     The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes the debate between
those who think that coal was central to the Industrial Revolution, and those

who have downplayed its significance. Section 3 provides a brief literature survey,
while Section 4 discusses some historical issues relating to identification. Section 5
introduces our data. Section 6 establishes the main empirical results of the paper,
and Section 7 concludes.



2    Historical Debate

There are two distinct arguments that were traditionally made about coal.
     The first is that the switch to using coal as a source of energy, above all

in metallurgy and in steam engines, was the central fact permitting the take-o↵
to modern economic growth. According to Deane (1965, p. 129), “The most im-

portant achievement of the industrial revolution was that it converted the British
economy from a wood-and-water basis to a coal-and-iron basis.” For Landes (1966,
p. 274), three phenomena “constituted the Industrial Revolution”: “the substitu-
tion of machines...for human skill and e↵ort; the substitution of inanimate for

animate sources of power, in particular, the introduction of engines for converting
heat into work, thereby opening to man a new and almost unlimited supply of
energy; the use of new and far more abundant raw materials, in particular, the
substitution of mineral for vegetable or animal substances.” “Mechanisation re-
quired large sources of power” wrote Braudel (1973, pp. 274–275), but “they were
not available until after the eighteenth century...Came steam and everything was,


                                          4
as if by magic, speeded up.”
        The best-known exponent of this view over the past fifty years has been E.A.
Wrigley, who regards the switch to coal as having been “a necessary condition for
the industrial revolution” (Wrigley, 2010, p. 23), although not a sufficient one.

For Wrigley, the Industrial Revolution was above all a transition from an “organic
economy” to an “energy-rich economy”. In the former, photosynthesis was the
major source of energy (the others being water and wind), whether this energy
took the form of human or animal power, wood, or charcoal. Land was thus an

indispensable input into all material production, even of metallic products (since
ores were heated with wood or charcoal) (Wrigley, 2010, p. 9).
        In such circumstances, it is not hard to see how Malthusian constraints could
bind tightly. “Iron, for instance, has many physical properties that make it of
the greatest value to man but as long as the production of 10,000 tons of iron

involved the felling of 100,000 acres of woodland, it was inevitable that it was
used only where a few hundred-weight or at most a few tons of iron would suffice

for the task in hand” (Wrigley, 1988, p. 80). The switch to coal allowed humans
to tap into a vast capital reserve of energy—“stored sunlight”, as Cipolla (1978,
p. 62) calls it—which allowed them to break free of these constraints. In a famous
calculation, Wrigley estimated that English coal production in 1800 yielded energy
that would otherwise have required 11 million acres of woodland (and that British

coal production was equivalent to 15 million acres of woodland). This compares
with a total English land area of 32 million acres (and a British land area of 57
million acres) (Wrigley, 1988, pp. 54–55). By the 1820s, British coal production
“liberated” an area as large as the entire island (Sieferle, 2001, p. 103).3
   3
       Landes (1966, p. 327) calculates that the UK was consuming coal in 1870 whose calorific


                                               5
      The second argument traditionally made about coal is that local supplies
of coal were essential, or at least highly desirable, if a region was to industrialize
during the 19th century. Mathias (1983, p. 11) puts the argument starkly: “The
logistics of energy inputs based upon coal, translated against available transport in

a pre-railway age, precluded any major industrial complex in heavy industry from
developing except where coal and ore were plentiful and adjacent to one another
or to water carriage.” Coal was bulky, heavy and costly to transport. It was
also a fuel, whose weight vanished when it was used in the production process:

there were thus substantial cost savings if coal was used close to where it was
mined (Wrigley, 1961, pp. 6–7).4 Pollard (1981, p. 4) remarks that “the map
of the British Industrial Revolution, it is well known, is simply the map of the

coalfields”, and Britain’s good fortune in being well-endowed with coal has often
been noted (Pollard, 1981, p. 40). On the European Continent, the coalfields of

Belgium and northern France, and later on the Ruhr, became major centres of
heavy industry, and other industrial regions “only survived if they had reasonable
access by water to a supply of good coal” (Pollard, 1981, p. 121).
      On a grander scale, Pomeranz (2000) has argued that coal was a crucial

reason why the Industrial Revolution happened in Europe rather than in China.
In Europe the coal was abundantly located in the most dynamic economy of the
18th and 19th centuries, Britain. By contrast, China’s coal resources were in “the
wrong place”, in the north and northeast, far from the southern coastal regions


content could have fed 850 million adult males.
    4
      “If the full weight of the raw material is embodied in the product there is no saving in the
total cost of transport when the source of the raw material is also the point of manufacture:
but if a part or the whole of the weight disappears during manufacture, the saving in transport
costs which follows from manufacture at the source of the raw material may be considerable”
(Wrigley, 1961, pp. 6–7).

                                                6
where China’s most dynamic regions were located. And in a recent cliometric
contribution, Allen (2009) has argued that innovation during the British Industrial
Revolution was geared towards saving expensive labour, and replacing it with
cheap capital and coal. These new technologies were unprofitable where coal was

too expensive relative to labour, although as their efficiency improved over time
they di↵used over an increasingly wide area. Directed technological progress can
thus help to explain why modern industrial techniques were initially adopted close
to sources of cheap coal.

        There are several reasons why cliometricians have tended to downplay the
role of coal.
        First, the increased use of coal was a symptom of technological change, which
all authors accept was the main driver of the Industrial Revolution, and which has
been the focus of a series of major works by Mokyr (1990, 2002, 2009). England

always had coal, but it took the Industrial Revolution for this geographical advan-
tage to achieve its full economic potential. There is no real dispute on this point:

as we have seen Wrigley does not view coal as being a sufficient condition for the
Industrial Revolution, but rather as a necessary one.5
        Second, several authors dispute the notion that coal, or more broadly the
search for energy efficiency, was a driver of technological change. “In the absence

of coal, the ingenuity applied to using it would have been directed towards replac-
ing it...Resource scarcities, like demand, are a steering mechanism, not a primum
movens, of technological progress” (Mokyr, 1990, pp. 160, 162).6 This paper does
not take a position on the issue of what drove technological change: its concern is

   5
       See also Pomeranz (2000, pp. 66–68), who is also cited in Clark (2007, p. 260).
   6
       See also Mokyr (1993, p. 31) and McCloskey (2011, pp. 188–189).


                                                 7
whether, once the Industrial Revolution was in progress, proximity to coal started
to matter for the location of economic activity, and whether coal-using technolog-
ical change mattered a lot or a little for urban growth.
       Third, cliometricians have pointed out that coal could be transported, al-

beit at a cost, and that coal only accounted for a fraction of the cost in several
leading industries of the Industrial Revolution, notably textiles.7 Mokyr (1976,
pp. 204–208) argues that local supplies of coal in Belgium cannot explain why
it industrialized, while the Netherlands did not: the Dutch could import coal by
sea, and use both peat and wind. In a similar vein, he dismisses the argument

that pre-Famine Ireland did not industrialize because of a lack of suitable coal
deposits (Mokyr, 1983, pp. 152–158). Ireland imported coal from Britain, with
the result that its coal prices were between 100 and 150% higher; fuel costs in the
“nonmetallurgical industries” were at most 4% of total costs. The lack of suitable

local coal supplies thus increased Irish costs by at most 10% relative to British

costs, and by less once substitution possibilities are taken into account. Lower
Irish wages should have more than compensated for this. True, being close to coal
mattered more in metallurgy than in textiles, and it mattered more in the days
before widespread and efficient railway transport: even coal sceptics like Mokyr

and McCloskey (2011, p. 187) recognize this. But both authors doubt whether
coal was as significant a locational factor as was traditionally claimed. In a recent
contribution, Clark and Jacks (2007) admit that coal may have been an important
locational factor as far as iron making was concerned, but that the latter sector

   7
     On the other hand, Balderston (2010) points out that between 1875 and 1884, the UK
cotton industry consumed 10 pounds of coal for every one pound of raw cotton: the fact that
coal accounted for such a small share of the industry’s costs reflects its abundance and consequent
cheapness.

                                                8
contributed little to Industrial Revolution productivity growth. “In a counterfac-
tual world where the coal reserves were located in Ireland or Scotland or elsewhere
in northwest Europe the history of Industrial Revolution England need not have
resulted in much slower economic growth” (Clark and Jacks, 2007, p. 65).

     Fourth, some authors have disputed the growth hypothesis. Both McCloskey
and Mokyr stress that technological progress was extremely broad-based during
this period: “The industrial revolution was not the Age of Cotton or of Railways or
even of Steam entirely; it was an age of improvement” (McCloskey, 1981, p. 118).

In this context, an argument often made against the importance of coal, or any
other single factor thought to have “caused” the Industrial Revolution, has to do
with substitution: “a coal theory, or any other one-step geographical theory, has an
appointment with Harberger” (McCloskey, 2011, pp. 186–187). “The Industrial
Revolution did not absolutely ‘need’ steam..., nor was steam power absolutely

dependent on coal” (Mokyr, 2009, pp. 101–102). Water power, peat and wood
were all potential substitutes for coal, and water power was very important well

into the 19th century (and was used with increasing technical efficiency) (Mokyr,
2009, p. 127). Scarcer and dearer coal would have implied greater fuel efficiency,
and an economy producing fewer energy-intensive goods (Mokyr, 2009, p. 104):
the net cost to the economy might have been modest. Von Tunzelmann (1978)’s
social savings calculations for steam engines in 1800 are tiny. Clark and Jacks

(2007) provide an even more heroic calculation, assuming that in the absence of
any European coal Britain would have had to import the equivalent of its coal
consumption in the form of Baltic timber. They estimate that this more expensive
fuel would have cost the British economy no more than 4% of GDP as late as
the 1860s, and while by that stage Baltic timber supplies would have come under

                                         9
strain, the textiles revolution “would have been well under way in the 1820s and
1830s before energy constraints became even a significant issue” (Clark and Jacks,
2007, p. 68).



3       Previous Literature

Did coal matter a lot or a little for the location of economic activity? Did it matter
a lot or a little for post-Industrial Revolution growth? These are empirical issues
requiring econometric investigation.
        There have been some country-specific studies testing the importance of coal

for the location of specific industries within a Heckscher-Ohlin framework: in this
model, abundant coal should matter for the location of fuel-intensive industries.
The evidence is mixed: Crafts and Mulatu (2006) find strong evidence that coal
abundance mattered for the location of steam-intensive industries within late 19th

century Britain.8 By contrast, Wolf (2007) finds no evidence that mineral en-
dowments explained the location of fuel-intensive industries in interwar Poland,

Klein and Crafts (2012) find little evidence that coal prices mattered for the lo-

cation of fuel-intensive industries in the United States between 1880 and 1920,
and Martinez-Galarraga (2012) finds an e↵ect of mineral endowments on the lo-
cation of mineral-intensive industries in Spain in 1913, but not in other years.
In a careful recent study, Gutberlet (2012) finds that access to coal mattered for
the location not only of metallurgy in late 19th century Germany, but of cotton
textiles production as well.

        In contrast to these studies, we are interested in the overall location of eco-
    8
     Crafts and Wolf (2013) find mixed results regarding the importance of coal for the location
of cotton mills in Britain in 1838.


                                              10
nomic activity, as proxied by city size, rather than in the location of particular
manufacturing sectors. Those cliometricians who deny the importance of coal to
aggregate growth after the Industrial Revolution would not deny that being close
to coal might have mattered for the location of particularly fuel-intensive indus-

tries. They would, on the other hand, argue that not being close to coal would
have led to regions and national economies specializing in industries that were not
fuel-intensive, and that therefore the aggregate impact of a lack of coal would have
been small. The studies cited above do not deal with this issue. Furthermore, in

contrast to these papers, in this article we adopt a pan-European rather than a
national approach.
     There are other papers which have used a DID strategy to study the evo-
lution of European urbanization, or city sizes, over time. For example, Andersen
et al. (2013) measure the benefits associated with the introduction of the heavy

plough during the medieval period. The cross-section variation that they exploit
comes from soil type, since some soils were more conducive to the introduction of

the heavy plough than others. They find that the heavy plough had a positive im-
pact on urbanization (measured as the number of cities per square kilometre) and
population, accounting for around 10% of the growth in these variables during the
high medieval period. Dittmar (2011) analyses city sizes, as we do, to explore the
macroeconomic impact of the printing press. He finds that cities which adopted

the printing press in the 15th century grew 60% more rapidly in the 16th century
than those which did not. Cantoni (2013) also uses city sizes to explore the growth
consequences of Protestantism within the Holy Roman Empire. Unlike the other
papers just cited, the innovation studied in this paper—religious reform—does not
appear to have had an impact on city size, or by implication on economic growth.

                                        11
     Nunn and Qian (2011) use a DID approach to study the impact of the potato
on population and urbanization between 1700 and 1900. Their identification strat-
egy is based on the fact that some areas are better suited than others for the cul-
tivation of potatoes. They then ask whether, after the potato was introduced to

the Old World, these more suitable areas experienced higher levels of population
growth and urbanization than less suitable regions. Nunn and Qian find that the
potato’s introduction can explain about a quarter of Old World population growth
and urbanization during the 18th and 19th centuries.



4    Identification Issues

In Nunn and Qian (2011), the “treatment” is the introduction of the potato;
in Dittmar (2011) it is the introduction of the printing press. In this paper,

the treatment is the introduction of the coal-using technologies of the Industrial
Revolution. Similarly, Nunn and Qian achieve identification by exploiting the fact

that some areas are better suited to potato cultivation than others. In our case,
we identify the impact of the new coal-using technologies by exploiting the fact
that some cities were located closer to coalfields than others. There is of course a
possibility that coalfields might have been discovered close to cities, and we take

account of this by using proximity to Carboniferous rock strata as an instrument
for proximity to coal.
     When did the treatment which we are interested in take place? It is important
to note that coal was used in pre-Industrial Revolution Britain for a wide variety of
purposes, both domestic (heating) and industrial: “brickmaking, glass, ceramics,
soapboiling, lime burning, forging, distilling, and brewing” (Mokyr, 2009, p. 22).


                                         12
Cheap domestic heating, for example, could have facilitated higher population
densities even before the Industrial Revolution (Balderston, 2010, p. 574). What
changed during the Industrial Revolution was the use of coal in the iron and steel
industry, and the introduction of the steam engine. In 1709, Abraham Darby

discovered how to smelt iron ore using coke (a purified form of coal) rather than
charcoal as a fuel, and the process started becoming widespread in Britain in
the second half of the century. Three years later, in 1712, Thomas Newcomen
developed his famous steam engine to pump water from mines. James Watt started

working on an improved design in 1763, and by 1776 his steam engines were being
used commercially. Steam then started to di↵use across the economy, slowly at
first, and then more rapidly, so that eventually coal was being used to fuel not just
the metallurgical industries, but textiles and many other sectors as well. Steam
accounted for 35,000 out of the 170,000 horsepower installed in Britain in 1800;

for 165,000 out of 350,000 in 1830; for 2,060,000 out of 2,300,000 in 1870; and for
9,659,000 out of 9,842,000 in 1907 (Crafts, 2004, p. 342).

     To summarize, the new coal-using technologies of the Industrial Revolution
were invented in stages over the course of the 18th century, and were then progres-
sively improved and increasingly adopted during both the 18th and 19th centuries.
They were first invented and used in Britain, but then di↵used with a lag to the
rest of Europe. By the middle of the 19th century, both coke-smelting and steam

engines were being used in all the coalfields of northern France, Belgium and west-
ern Germany (Wrigley, 1961, p. 4). An appropriate “treatment date” would thus
be 1750 or later.
     Why would being closer to a coalfield have led to bigger city sizes once these
new technologies had been introduced? The argument is straightforward, and

                                         13
relies on a combination of the growth and location hypotheses. Adopting new
coal-using technologies directly spurred economic growth, and once these tech-
nologies had been adopted increasing production required higher inputs of coal.
All of this was more profitable where coal was cheaper, and coal was cheaper

close to coalfields. Greater economic activity, in turn, could lead to agglomeration
economies, permitting further growth.9 Economic growth in turn stimulated pop-
ulation growth: indeed, the connection between industrial growth and population
growth in the coalfield regions of northwest continental Europe was so tight that
Wrigley (1961) used the latter as a proxy for the former.

       Our identification strategy relies crucially on whether industry tended to lo-
cate closer to coalfields because of the costs of transporting coal. The strategy
would break down when other forms of energy, such as electricity, became widely
available, or when the costs of transporting coal became sufficiently cheap. The

historical record suggests that being close to coalfields should have started mat-

tering less by the end of the 19th century, as electricity was increasingly adopted,
and an increasingly dense and efficient railway network lowered freight rates. “For
example, a point was reached about 1890 when it became cheaper to carry coke
to the Lorraine iron ore fields than to carry the ore to the Ruhr, because blast

furnaces had grown much more economical in their use of coke than in the early
days of the coke-fired furnace, and the lean ores of Lorraine were unusually costly
to transport” Wrigley (1961, p. 6). For this reason, we end our analysis in 1900.




   9
     For example, Balderston (2010) argues that coal was crucial to the development of agglom-
eration economies in the Lancashire cotton textile industry.


                                             14
5    Our Data

Our empirical analysis combines a number of di↵erent sources. To measure eco-
nomic activity we use historic population size for a panel of European cities based
in the first instance on Bairoch et al. (1988). The panel consists of around 2,200

cities that satisfy the criterion of having at least 5,000 inhabitants at some stage
between 800 and 1800. City populations are measured at 100 year intervals be-
tween 800 and 1700, and at 50 year intervals after 1700. The panel is unbalanced,
since evidence on city population levels is understandably lacking for many cities
as we look further back in time.

     These missing observations are potentially problematic, and we therefore take

several steps to remedy this. First, as in Nunn and Qian (2011), we supplement
these data with observations from De Vries (1984). Second, we begin our analysis
in 1300, ignoring all data prior to this date. The vast majority of cities included
in the Bairoch et al. dataset do not have population data prior to 1300, and we

also suspect that the available population evidence prior to 1300 is less accurate
than more recent figures.

     Bairoch et al. (1988) only provide city population sizes up until 1850. Given
that we want to measure economic development through the end of the 19th cen-
tury, we extend the Bairoch et al. panel to include city populations in 1900. For

this purpose we use a contemporary resource: Lippincott’s New Gazetteer (Heil-
prin and Heilprin, 1906). The gazetteer lists the location and population figures
for the majority of the cities included in the Bairoch et al. panel. We restrict our
sample to cities positioned west of the 40 degree line of longitude, and above the
30 degree line of latitude. This leaves a sample of 2,147 cities.


                                         15
        The aim of this paper is to link city populations to the availability of coal.
Thus, we need to create a measure of access to coal for each city. To do this we
digitize the Les Houillères Européennes map in Châtel and Dollfus (1931). This
atlas contains the location of 124 major coalfields within Europe. We include

lignite fields in our calculations since lignite (or brown coal) played an important
role in the introduction of the steam engine in Prussia (Redlich, 1944). We digitise
this map, and then calculate the minimum distance from each city to a coalfield.
For simplicity, we use great-circle distance for this calculation. Because it is more

intuitive to interpret the e↵ect of proximity to coal than the e↵ect of distance from
it (so there is a positive relationship if coal drives city population size), we define
our coal variable by inverting the distance from each city to the nearest coalfield.10
Another approach would be to use a least-cost distance measure, like Özak (2012).
However, dramatic changes in the form and speed of transportation methods over

our eight century sample period make such a calculation impracticable.
        Coal prices, as used in Crafts and Wolf (2013), would be an economically

more meaningful measure of access to coal. Unfortunately, we lack city-level price
data for our panel of more than 2,000 cities over 800 years. However, we assume
that our proximity measure is highly correlated with the spatial variation in coal
prices. To investigate how reasonable this assumption is, we use data from Crafts

and Wolf (2013), who provide coal prices for all British and Irish counties between
1843 and 1845. We match each of the British and Irish cities in our sample to
the closest county centre point, and allocate that county’s price to them. We
then compare the coal price for each city with the proximity of that city to the
closest coalfield. This comparison is illustrated in Figure 1. The strength of the
  10
       Full details of this transformation are contained in Appendix A.


                                                16
relationship between these two measures is evident (the correlation coefficient is -
0.744): coal prices were lower in cities closer to coalfields. Such a strong correlation
is striking in a comparatively small country like the UK, well-endowed as it was
with both coalfields and internal waterways: our assumption that proximity to

coalfields was negatively correlated with coal prices seems a valid one.


                                [Figure 1 about here.]


     Nonetheless, our great-circle distance-based proximity measure could bias
our empirical exercises for a number of reasons. As already noted, we are not

using a least cost measure of coal proximity. Thus, our coal measure does not

reflect the fact that cities at, or close to, the coast may have better access to coal
than cities further away from the coast and/or located on more rugged terrain—
although, we do include proximity to coasts, ruggedness and a number of other

geographical control variables in our empirical specifications. Another issue is that
while we can measure the distance to each coalfield, we cannot measure the abun-
dance or quality of the coalfield. Both of these features will result in measurement
error in a regression model estimating the impact of coal proximity on city pop-
ulations. Finally, we cannot rule out the possibility of reverse causality, that is

to say the possibility that the coalfields in our dataset were developed because of
their proximity to cities.
     To address these measurement and endogeneity concerns, we instrument our

proximity to coal measure with a variable that measures the proximity of cities
to Carboniferous geological strata. Coal is often found in rock strata from the
Carboniferous age, and thus the coalfield locations should often be on, or very



                                          17
close to, rock strata from the Carboniferous epoch.11 To construct a Carboniferous
measure that corresponds to our coal proximity variable, we use data collated
by the German Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR)
for a project that mapped the European geological landscape: The 1:5 Million

International Geological Map of Europe and Adjacent Areas (Asch, 2005). This
was a pan-European project that involved a high level of collaboration across a
number of national geological offices; the result was a high resolution GIS map
containing a number of geological features including age and rock type (Asch,

2005). We create a proximity to Carboniferous strata variable for each city in an
equivalent manner to that of the coal proximity variable.


                                     [Figure 2 about here.]


        Figure 2 contains two panels illustrating the location of our cities and their

proximity to both coalfields and Carboniferous strata. Most coalfields overlap
with areas whose rock strata are categorized as being of the Carboniferous epoch,

although this overlap is not perfect. There are some Carboniferous areas that do
not contain any coalfields, and some coalfields not located within a Carboniferous
area. For example, lignite is geographically younger than black coal, typically orig-

inating in the Tertiary period. Our coal and Carboniferous measures are evidently
correlated, but not perfectly. Figure 3 illustrates the strength of this relationship.
A weak relationship between these variables would invalidate our IV strategy; how-

ever Figure 3 shows that the relationship between these two variables is sufficiently
strong for our purposes. Our empirical section formally discusses the issue of weak
instruments, and we provide a series of appendix tables displaying the relevant
  11
       Carboniferous literally means “coal-bearing”.


                                                18
weak instrument test statistics.


                                [Figure 3 about here.]


     In addition to measurement error and simultaneity, omitted variable bias

poses a threat to our identification strategy. For example, Acemoğlu et al. (2005)
argue that the acceleration of growth in post-1500 Europe was caused by the
proximity of certain economies to the Atlantic coast (important for colonial trade)
and the institutions that emerged in these economies. Similarly, as we have seen,
Nunn and Qian (2011) find that the introduction of the potato played an important

role in explaining comparative development in the Old World during the Industrial

Revolution.
     We therefore include a rich set of control variables in our regression analysis.
These include distance to coastlines; more precisely, we create three variables

that measure the distance to the Atlantic, the Mediterranean, and to all coasts.
We also measure cities’ distance to primary rivers. Given the prominence of state
institutions in Acemoğlu et al.’s research, we also match each city to historical state
borders. It is important to acknowledge that both state borders and institutions
changed, and had di↵erential impacts over time. We therefore digitise European

state borders for a series of years between 1500 and 1913 (1500, 1618, 1699, 1748,
1804, 1848, and 1908), and match these borders as closely as possible to each year
in our sample. In other words, we include time-varying state border fixed e↵ects

to control for institutions, public health infrastructure, demographic change, and
any other factors influencing economic growth and urban population sizes at the
national level in di↵erent periods.
     We also include variables measuring terrain ruggedness; the suitability of land

                                          19
for cultivating potatoes, wheat, and oats; altitude; and temperature. Appendix A
provides more detailed information on the construction of these variables and the
sources used. We also address the issue of spatial spillovers and clustering in a
number of ways. First, we include controls for absolute latitude and longitude in

all model specifications. Additionally, as as already noted, we control for time-
varying border fixed e↵ects. Second, we have adjusted the standard errors in all of
our estimated models to account for spatial spillovers. All of the reported standard
errors in this paper have been adjusted to account for clustering between cities in

close proximity to one another. In order to do this, we grouped the cities into
100 clusters based on their geographic coordinates. The number of clusters was
chosen so as to strike a balance between too few and too many clusters, although
our standard error estimates are relatively insensitive to smaller and larger cluster
structures.12 We performed the clustering assignment using a k -means clustering
algorithm (Hartigan and Wong, 1979).13 Finally, an appendix reports the results
obtained when we explicitly incorporate a spatially lagged variable into the model

specification (for further details see below).




   12
      We also performed our analysis using 50 and 150 clusters and obtained quantitatively similar
estimates. Results available on request. An earlier version of the paper clustered on the individual
city, and again the results were similar.
   13
      Our estimated standard errors also account for the o↵setting presence of temporal autocor-
relation because we are clustering on time-invariant groups. We have also adjusted our standard
errors using the method advocated by Conley (1999). In general, our clustered standard errors
are more conservative compared with those obtained via the Conley method. We report Conley
standard errors wherever space permits.

                                                20
6     Empirical Results

6.1    Empirical Methodology

Our empirical strategy follows the standard DID approach. We estimate city
population as a function of the interaction between a city’s proximity to coal
and a post-treatment year indicator. In general, we estimate the following linear
regression model:


                     ln(P opit ) = ↵i +   t   + ln(Coali )ItP ost + "it               (1)


where the natural log of each city’s population level is a function of city (↵i ) and
time ( t ) fixed e↵ects, the interaction between a city’s proximity to a coalfield
(Coali ) and a binary variable equal to one when the year is after the specified cut-
o↵ point (ItP ost ), and an idiosyncratic error term ("it ), with the i and t subscripts
corresponding to city and time domains respectively. The             parameter represents

the causal e↵ect of proximity to coal on city population size, once these technologies
had been introduced.

      The inclusion of the interaction e↵ect between proximity to coal and a post-
treatment year indicator implicitly assumes temporally heterogeneous coal e↵ects.
This assumption is crucial for identifying the causal parameter beta in our DID
setup. If, for example, the impact of coal had been time invariant, beta would be
subsumed into the city fixed-e↵ects and we would find that coal had no impact

on city sizes. What we are interested in is whether something happened during
the course of the 18th or 19th centuries which made proximity to coal matter for
city sizes in a way that it had not mattered before. That “something” was of


                                              21
course the introduction of the coal-using technologies of the Industrial Revolution,
represented by ItP ost in our econometric specification. In the following subsection
we implement a flexible modelling procedure that allows us to assess the plausibility
of our DID strategy, and detect the “treatment” cut-o↵ year after which the new
coal-using technologies started to matter for city size.

     The model in eq. 1 assumes that heterogeneous coal e↵ects are the only
observable systematic variable that causes di↵erences in city populations, aside
from common time e↵ects and fixed city factors. Realistically, this assumption is
likely to be violated, and will result in an omitted variables bias when our coal

proximity measure is correlated with such omitted variables. Therefore, we include
a rich set of covariates (interacted with time e↵ects) in all of our estimated models.
We amend eq. 1 to take this into account:

                                                            1900
                                                            X
            ln(P opit ) = ↵i +                  P ost
                                 t + ln(Coali )It     +             X0 i Ijt   j   + "it   (2)
                                                           j=1400


            P1900
where the    j=1400   X0 i Ijt term interacts a large number of geographic and historic
control variables (X0i ), described in Section 5, with time indicators (Ijt ), with the
j subscript denoting specific years. The        j   term represents the regression coeffi-
cients corresponding to the j-th year. In addition to city (↵i ) and time ( t ) fixed
e↵ects, multiple historic state border fixed e↵ects are contained in the matrix Xi .
These multiple fixed e↵ects allow us to control for a variety of potentially con-
founding factors. For example, the city fixed e↵ects allow us to control for the
possibility that administrative cities such as London were consistently larger than

other cities; the time fixed e↵ects allow us to control for the general rise in Euro-
pean urban populations over time; and the time-varying border fixed e↵ects allow


                                           22
us to control for increases in national urban populations relative to the European
trend, due to national demographic developments, institutional environments, or
other factors. Estimating a linear regression model with multiple categorical vari-
ables can be computationally burdensome, so we use the recent algorithm provided

in Gaure (2013) to simplify the estimation procedure.14
       The mismeasurement of our coal proximity variable represents another po-
tential threat to our empirical strategy, as does the potential for other forms of
model misspecification that would results in endogeneity. Mismeasurement could
lead to a downward bias in our estimates of the causal               parameter, while forms

of reverse causality or omitted variable bias could lead to an upward bias. We
tackle these concerns by using an equivalent measure of proximity to Carbonifer-
ous strata as an instrumental variable (IV), and estimate eq. 2 via the following
two-stage least-squares (2SLS) schema:



                                                                      1900
                                                                      X
  ln(Coali )ItP ost = µi + ⇣t + ln(Carbonif erousi )ItP ost +                   X0 i Ijt ⌦j + uit (3)
                                                                     j=1400




                                    V
                                                             1900
                                                             X
           ln(P opit ) = ↵i +                  P ost
                                t + ln(Coali )It     it +            X0 i Ijt    j   + "it       (4)
                                                            j=1400

where eq. 3 shows the first-stage regression that includes the full-set of control

variables from eq. 2, and eq. 4 is as before except that the predicted values from
eq. 3 now represent the ln(Coali )ItP ost interaction variable. Our rationale for using
this IV strategy has already been discussed, with Figure 3 illustrating the strength

  14
    We implement the procedure of Gaure (2013) in the R package lfe available on the Com-
prehensive R Achieve Network.


                                           23
of the relationship between these two variables. Figure 4 presents scatter plots
illustrating the relationship between both our coal and Carboniferous measures
and the change in natural logged population between 1700 and 1900 for cities
where we have recorded population totals in both years. Both panels in Figure 4

are consistent with the hypothesis that coal was an important factor related to
city population growth during the Industrial Revolution.


                                     [Figure 4 about here.]


6.2       Flexible Model Results

We begin our formal empirical modelling by taking a flexible approach, and esti-
mating the following regression model:


                                         X                         1900
                                                                   X
                                                            j
              ln(P opit ) = ↵i +    t+         j ln(Coali )It +            X0 i Ijt   j   + "it   (5)
                                         j2Y                      j=1400

where we include multiple interaction e↵ects between the eight time periods and

each city’s proximity to coal. We choose Y = {1300, 1400, 1600, 1700, 1750,
1800, 1850, 1900} so that the year 1500 is our reference group. Therefore, we

obtain eight      j   parameters, which indicate the influence of coal on city population
size relative to our 1500 baseline (since 1500 is the excluded year). The year

1500 was chosen as our reference group since it contains a larger number of more
accurately recorded city population observations than prior years, and is a year
that comfortably pre-dates the introduction of coal-burning Industrial Revolution
technologies.15
        The “flexible” element in this approach is that it allows us to be relatively
  15
       Using alternative reference years results in the same pattern observed in Figure 5.


                                                 24
agnostic about when coal started to matter; that is to say, about the definition
of the post-treatment period. The flexible model not only permits us to detect
this cut-o↵, but also provides an assessment of the DID approach’s plausibility. If
coal was relatively unimportant for city population sizes prior to the emergence of

coal-based technological innovations, we would not expect to see the earlier beta
parameters (   1300 ,    1400 ,   and   1600 )   have a substantial impact on city population
levels. In this sense, these additional                  estimates form placebo tests. We also
run IV regressions as part of this analysis wherein each of the coal-year interac-
tion terms are modelled as endogenous regressors as in eqs. 3–4. Therefore, we

instrument each of the eight endogenous regressors with eight Carboniferous-year
interaction instruments. This means that the model is just identified, i.e. there
are as many instruments as there are endogenous regressors.


                                        [Table 1 about here.]


     Table 1 displays the estimated coal-year interaction OLS coefficients from

eq. 5. Column (1) estimates the model using OLS and all available city data. The
results here are consistent with our prior belief that proximity to coal mattered
after the introduction of the new coal-based technologies of the Industrial Revolu-
tion. The   1850   and    1900    coefficients demonstrate that proximity to coal was was
positively correlated with city population size, relative to the 1500 baseline, after

1800. This model, and all others shown in this section, include our full set of con-
trol variables as additional regressors. The results obtained when running a similar
specification without such controls yields similar results. The other coefficients in

column (1) do not indicate that coal was an important influence on city population
size before 1800. Since both the dependent variable and the coal variable are in

                                                    25
natural logarithms we can interpret these results as elasticities. However, we do
not place too much emphasis on this, since we present a counterfactual framework
in Section 6.3 that provides a much more intuitive way of interpreting our findings.
        Column (2) of Table 1 is analogous to column (1), except that the data sample

now excludes cities in the United Kingdom.16 As in the previous column, the
results here point towards coal becoming a decisive determinant of city population
size after 1850, but not before. For this sample, the e↵ect appears later than
in column (1), which is reasonable since most of the coal powered innovations

originated in the UK and only di↵used subsequently to other European locations.
Columns (3) and (4) are similar to the preceding two columns, demonstrating
how removing the potentially problematic 14th and 15th century data from the
estimation sample does not alter the pattern seen in columns (1) and (2).

        The remaining four columns of Table 1, columns (5)–(8), show the results

obtained when we instrument the coal proximity variables using the Carboniferous
proximity variables. Not shown in this table are the first-stage regressions of coal
on Carboniferous strata for the various years, which we have excluded from the
main text for reasons of parsimony. Appendix B provides these results as well

as the relevant weak instrument multivariate partial F -statistics. We use the
approach advocated in Angrist and Pischke (2009) for detecting weak instruments
in the presence of multiple endogenous regressors. This approach enables one
to calculate multiple partial F -test statistics (one for each endogenous regressor),
analogous to the method used in cases with a single endogenous regressor. None of
the weak instrument statistics indicate the presence of weak instrumental variables.
        Overall, the IV results in columns (5)–(8) of Table 1 are consistent with the
  16
       Including Irish cities.


                                          26
OLS evidence in columns (1)–(4). As before, we see that coal proximity becomes an
important determinant of city population size later in the sample. For the sample
that includes all cities, it appears that coal mattered for cross-city population
size after 1750, but not before: the coefficients that correspond to these years

are positive and large, and we can reject the standard two-sided hypothesis test
that the coefficient is equal to zero at conventional levels of statistical significance.
Columns (6) and (8) exclude UK cities. As before, the IV results support the
notion that coal became an important determinant of city population size later

outside the UK. We also find support for our suspicion that measurement error
may be biassing the OLS coefficients downwards, since the estimated          coefficients
for later years are substantially larger for the IV models than for the equivalent
OLS specifications.
      Figure 5 provides an illustration of these results. Panel (a) plots the esti-

mated   j   values when the model in eq. 5 is estimated without any control variables
(that is, the matrix Xi is null). In other words, these results correspond to those
in columns (1) and (5) of Table 1, when we omit our control variables, but not

the time or city fixed e↵ects, from the specification. Panel (b) displays the results
corresponding to columns (1) and (5) in Table 1. The results in both plots are

consistent with one another, and show the coal e↵ect becoming important in the
18th or 19th century.


                                [Figure 5 about here.]




                                           27
6.3    Fixed Treatment E↵ect Results

Our analysis thus far has been primarily concerned with detecting the treatment
year after which coal endowments became a factor influencing comparative popu-
lation sizes in our panel of European cities. The analysis indicates that the earliest

date for this post-treatment cut-o↵ is 1750, which is consistent with the qualita-
tive historical literature. One drawback of the flexible modelling approach is that
it can be difficult to assess the economic significance of these results. Therefore,
we follow Nunn and Qian (2011) and estimate models with a single treatment
e↵ect—as detailed in eq. 2 or eq. 4—and then use this single causal parameter to

create counterfactual population totals. These counterfactual totals represent the

estimated population of each city in the absence of a coal e↵ect; that is to say,
in the absence of the introduction of the coal-using technologies of the Industrial
Revolution which implied that proximity to coal became a factor influencing city
sizes after the treatment year.

      More formally, the counter-factual population for city i at the end of our
                                  g
estimation sample, 1900, is ln P op i1900 = ln P opi1900
                                                            ˆ ln Coali . If we sum over all

cities, we can calculate a counterfactual total urban population for 1900, and thus

a counterfactual growth rate for the total urban population between the treatment
year and 1900. This can then be compared with the actual growth of the total
urban population over the same period, yielding an estimate of the percentage
of total urban population growth explained by the introduction of the coal-using
technologies of the Industrial Revolution:

                                          P  g               P
                                       ln P op i1900       ln P opiP ost
                  Total E↵ect = 1        P                   P                         (6)
                                       ln P opi1900        ln P opiP ost


                                           28
where the P ost term refers to the treatment year. If the estimated coal e↵ect, ,
was zero, the numerator would equal the denominator in the second term and the
estimated e↵ect would be zero.


                               [Table 2 about here.]


     Table 2 presents the      coefficients obtained from various estimates of the
fixed treatment e↵ect model. Once again we present results both including and
excluding UK cities. Given that one can make a case for several treatment dates,
we present comparable estimates when three cut-o↵s are used: post-1750, post-

1800, and post-1850. Finally, we present both OLS and IV estimates. Thus,

the table presents results from twelve regression models overall. Once again, we
omit the relevant indicators of weak instruments from the table, but we find no
evidence (see Appendix B) that the Carboniferous variable interacted with the

post-treatment e↵ect indicator su↵ers from the weak instruments problem. In
addition to the coefficients and their associated standard errors, we also include
the “Counterfactual Explained (%)” percentage calculated as above.
     Consistent with our hypothesis, proximity to coal has a positive e↵ect on
city growth in each of the specifications in Table 2. The most noticeable feature

of these results is that, as before, the IV coefficients are larger than their OLS
counterparts, a fact that we attribute to measurement error in the coal proximity
variable. Looking at the IV results with a post-1750 cut-o↵ in column (3), we see

that over 60% of the city population growth experienced between 1750 and 1900
can be attributed to the introduction of the coal-using technologies of the Industrial
Revolution. The “Counterfactual Explained” percentage usually increases as we
move the treatment year forward, a finding that is consistent with the di↵usion of

                                         29
coal-based technologies over time. Furthermore, comparing results from samples
including and excluding cities in the United Kingdom suggests that the coal e↵ect
was stronger in the UK, but di↵used spatially over time. This result is consistent
with the fact that the coal-based technologies that drove the Industrial Revolution

first emerged in the United Kingdom.
     As mentioned earlier, our empirical modelling approach has dealt with spa-
tial spillovers in a number of ways. In particular, we have adjusted our standard
errors to reflect time-invariant spatial clustering, so that the reported standard er-

rors, hypothesis test p-values, and weak instrument test statistics are all robust to
this form of misspecification. However, there exists a literature which attempts to
model spatial interactions formally using endogenous spatial lags and spatial error
terms. Gibbons and Overman (2012) have criticised this approach, as the process
through which the identification of spatial e↵ects is achieved requires restrictive

and somewhat optimistic assumptions regarding the nature of spatial dependence.
Therefore, we have omitted such an analysis from the body of the paper. Never-

theless, we have estimated models with spatial dependence modelled formally, and
doing so does not alter any of our results (Appendix C).



7    Conclusion

The role that coal played in shaping economic development during and after the
Industrial Revolution has been the subject of considerable debate in the economic

history literature. Two schools of thought exist. The first sees coal and the
geographical distribution of coalfields as a crucial factor underpinning aggregate
and comparative development during this period. The other sees the distribu-


                                         30
tion of coal as relatively unimportant when compared with other factors, such as
intellectual and cultural traditions or the quality of political institutions. This
paper exploits the spatial variation in the location of Europe’s coalfields, and the
emergence of coal-based industrial technologies, to quantify the impact of coal on

Europe’s city populations between 1300 and 1900.
     The results indicate that Wrigley is right, and spectacularly so. No less than
60% of urban growth in Europe between 1750 and 1900 can be attributed to the
introduction of the coal-using technologies of the Industrial Revolution, even when

controlling for period fixed e↵ects, time-varying country fixed e↵ects, and many
other factors. Subject to the caveat that our data are for city populations, rather
than GDP, this is an impressive vindication of the growth hypothesis. Moreover,
the only reason that we have been able to identify this overall growth impact
is because proximity to coal mattered so much for city sizes after the Industrial

Revolution, but not before. The location hypothesis therefore emerges with flying
colours when confronted with the data.

     None of this is to suggest that access to coal was a sufficient cause of the In-
dustrial Revolution, or to deny that the underlying force driving the breakthrough
to modern economic change was technological progress. Indeed, all our results
hinge on the fact that the new coal-using technologies of the Industrial Revolution
emerged when they did. What our results do however clearly indicate is that the

technological nature of the Industrial Revolution was such that, during the 19th
century, access to coal became extremely important in driving economic develop-
ment. The ultimate sources of growth may have been elsewhere, but we cannot
ignore the role of fossil fuels in fuelling growth after the Industrial Revolution, or
of geography in determining who experienced that growth during the 19th century.

                                         31
Bibliography

Daron Acemoğlu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. The rise of Europe: At-
  lantic trade, institutional change, and economic growth. American Economic
  Review, 95(3):546–579, 2005.

Robert C. Allen. The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective. Cam-
  bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2009.

Thomas Barnebeck Andersen, Peter Sandholt Jensen, and Christian Stejner Skovs-
  gaard. The heavy plough and the agricultural revolution in medieval Europe.

  Discussion Papers of Business and Economics 6/2013, Department of Business
  and Economics, University of Southern Denmark, 2013.

Joshua D. Angrist and Jörn-Ste↵en Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An

  Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2009.

Kristine Asch. The 1:5 Million International Geological Map of Europe and Ad-

  jacent Areas. German Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources
  (BGR), Hannover, DE, 2005.

Paul Bairoch, Jean Batou, and Pierre Chèvre. The Population of European Cities

  from 800 to 1850. Librairie Droz, Geneva, CH, 1988.

Theo Balderston. The economics of abundance: Coal and cotton in Lancashire
  and the world. Economic History Review, 63(3):569–590, 2010.

Fernand Braudel. Capitalism and Material Life, 1400–1800. Weidenfeld and Nicol-
  son, London, UK, 1973.


                                      32
Davide Cantoni. The economic e↵ects of the protestant reformation: Testing the
  Weber hypothesis in the German lands. Discussion Papers in Economics 14811,
  University of Munich, Department of Economics, 2013.

Châtel and Dollfus. Atlas Châtel et Dollfus. Les Houillères Européennes. Société
  de Documentation Industrielle, Paris, FR, 1931.

Carlo M. Cipolla. The Economic History of World Population. Harvester Press,
  Sussex, UK, 1978.

Gregory Clark. A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2007.

Gregory Clark and David Jacks. Coal and the Industrial Revolution, 1700–1869.

  European Review of Economic History, 11(1):39–72, 2007.

Timothy Guy Conley. GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal

  of Econometrics, 92(1):1–45, 1999.

Nicholas Crafts. Steam as a general purpose technology: A growth accounting
  perspective. The Economic Journal, 114(495):338–351, 2004.

Nicholas Crafts and Abay Mulatu. How did the location of industry respond to

  falling transport costs in Britain before World War I? The Journal of Economic
  History, 66(3):575–607, 2006.

Nicholas Crafts and Nikolaus Wolf. The location of the UK cotton textiles indus-

  try in 1838: A quantitative analysis. Working Papers 45, European Historical
  Economics Society, 2013.



                                         33
Jan De Vries. European Urbanization, 1500–1800. Havard University Press, Cam-
  bridge, MA, 1984.

Phyllis Deane. The First Industrial Revolution. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
  bridge, UK, 1965.

Jeremiah E. Dittmar. Information technology and economic change: The impact

  of the printing press. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3):1133–1172,
  2011.

FAO/IIASA. Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ v3.0). FAO Rome, IT and
  IIASA, Laxenburg, AT, 2011.

Simen Gaure. OLS with multiple high dimensional category variables. Computa-

  tional Statistics & Data Analysis, 66:8–18, 2013.

Stephen Gibbons and Henry G. Overman. Mostly pointless spatial econometrics?

  Journal of Regional Science, 52(2):172–191, 2012.

Theresa Gutberlet. Cheap coal, market access, and industry location in Germany
  1846 to 1882. Working paper, University of Arizona, 2012.

John A. Hartigan and M. Anthony Wong. A k-means clustering algorithm. Applied

  Statistics, 28(1):100–108, 1979.

Angelo Heilprin and Louis Heilprin. Lippincott’s New Gazetteer: A Complete Pro-
  nouncing Gazetteer or Geographical Dictionary of the World. J.B. Lippincott,

  London, UK, 1906.




                                       34
Harry H. Kelejian and Ingmar R. Prucha. A generalized spatial two-stage least
  squares procedure for estimating a spatial autoregressive model with autoregres-
  sive disturbances. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 17(1):99–121,
  1998.

Harry H. Kelejian and Ingmar R. Prucha. A generalized moments estimator for the

  autoregressive parameter in a spatial model. International Economic Review,
  40(2):509–533, 1999.

Alexander Klein and Nicholas Crafts. Making sense of the manufacturing belt:

  Determinants of U.S. industrial location, 1880–1920. Journal of Economic Ge-
  ography, 12(4):775–807, 2012.

David S. Landes. The Rise of Capitalism. Collier-Macmillan, Macmillan, NY,

  1966.

Charles F. Manski. Identification of endogenous social e↵ects: The reflection
  problem. Review of Economic Studies, 60(3):531–542, 1993.

Julio Martinez-Galarraga. The determinants of industrial location in Spain, 1856–

  1929. Explorations in Economic History, 49(2):255–275, 2012.

Peter Mathias. The First Industrial Nation: An Economic History of Britain
  1700–1914. Methuen, London, UK, 1983.

Deirdre N. McCloskey. Enterprise and Trade in Victorian Britain: Essays in

  Historical Economics. Allen & Unwin, London, UK, 1981.

Deirdre N. McCloskey. Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can’t Explain the
  Modern World. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2011.

                                       35
Giovanni Millo and Gianfranco Piras. splm: Spatial panel data models in R.
  Journal of Statistical Software, 47(1), 2012.

Joel Mokyr. Industrialization in the Low Countries, 1795–1850. Yale University
  Press, New Haven, CT, 1976.

Joel Mokyr. Why Ireland Starved: A Quantitative and Analytical History of the

  Irish Economy, 1800–1850. Allen & Unwin, London, UK, 1983.

Joel Mokyr. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress.
  Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1990.

Joel Mokyr. Editor’s introduction: The new economic history and the industrial
  revolution. In Joel Mokyr, editor, The British Industrial Revolution: An Eco-

  nomic Perspective, pages 1–131. Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 1993.

Joel Mokyr. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2002.

Joel Mokyr. The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain, 1700–
  1850. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, 2009.

Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian. The potato’s contribution to population and
  urbanization: Evidence from a historical experiment. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 126(2):593–650, 2011.

Ömer Özak. Distance to the technological frontier and economic development. De-
  partmental Working Papers 1201, Southern Methodist University, Department
  of Economics, 2012.



                                        36
Sidney Pollard. Peaceful Conquest: The Industrialization of Europe 1760–1970.
  Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1981.

Kenneth Pomeranz. The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the
  Modern World Economy. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2000.

Fritz Redlich. The leaders of the German steam-engine industry during the first
  hundred years. The Journal of Economic History, 4(2):121–148, 1944.

Rolf P. Sieferle. The Subterranean Forest: Energy Systems and the Industrial

  Revolution. The White Horse Press, Cambridge, UK, 2001.

G. N. Von Tunzelmann. Steam power and British Industrialization to 1860. Claren-
  don Press, Oxford, UK, 1978.

Margaret F. J. Wilson, Brian O’Connell, Colin Brown, Janine C. Guinan, and
  Anthony J. Grehan. Multiscale terrain analysis of multibeam bathymetry data

  for habitat mapping on the continental slope. Marine Geodesy, 30(1–2):3–35,
  2007.

Nikolaus Wolf. Endowments vs. market potential: What explains the relocation

  of industry after the Polish reunification in 1918? Explorations in Economic
  History, 44(1):22–42, 2007.

Gavin Wright. The origins of American industrial success, 1879–1940. American
  Economic Review, 80(4):651–668, 1990.

Edward Anthony Wrigley. Industrial Growth and Population Change; A Regional
  Study of the Coalfield Areas of North-West Europe in the Later Nineteenth Cen-
  tury. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1961.

                                      37
Edward Anthony Wrigley. Continuity, Chance and Change: The Character of the
  Industrial Revolution in England. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
  1988.

Edward Anthony Wrigley. Energy and the English Industrial Revolution. Cam-
  bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2010.




A        Data Appendix


Variable Name: City Population Size
Variable Construction: Natural logarithm transformation to normalize vari-

able.
Variable Sources: Bairoch et al. (1988); De Vries (1984); Heilprin and Heilprin
(1906)

Data partially retrieved from: http://scholar.harvard.edu/nunn/pages/
data-0.

Note: We use the original source for the population totals in Paris and London
for 1850 as these di↵er from the digitised source.


Variable Name: Coal

Variable Construction: Minimum distance (km) from any of Europe’s major
coal fields. When a city is positioned within a coal field we assume an arbitrary
distance of 1km. We transform this value into a proximity measure by dividing
into one (inverse-distance measure). To help interpret the model coefficients and


                                        38
normalize the distribution, we use a multiplicative transformation (multiplying
the inverse distance by 10,000) and then take the natural logarithm of our inverse
distance measure.
Variable Source: Châtel and Dollfus (1931).


Variable Name: Carbon
Variable Construction: Minimum distance (km) from any onshore geological
area classified as being Carboniferous in the IGME 5000. When a city is positioned
within such an area we assume an arbitrary distance of 1km. We transform this

value into a proximity measure by dividing into one (inverse-distance measure).
To help interpret the model coefficients and normalize the distribution, we use
a multiplicative transformation (multiplying the inverse distance by 10,000) and
then take the natural logarithm of our inverse distance measure.

Variable Source: Asch (2005).


Variable Names: Latitude and Longitude.
Variable Construction: The line of absolute latitude/longitude a city is posi-

tioned on. We use these data to construct both the Coal and the Carbon variables.
Variable Source: Bairoch et al. (1988).


Variable Names: Potato, Wheat, and Oat
Variable Construction: Suitability of city location for growing specific crops.

Data were constructed as in Nunn and Qian (2011), measuring the amount of land
suitable for cultivating each particular crop within 100km of the city location.
The underlying data for these variables originates from a series of raster images

                                       39
produced by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
under the Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) assessment methodology. Our
data come from the data portal released in 2011. We use the crop suitability
index class to define whether or not land is suitable for cultivating each crop. Like

Nunn and Qian, we consider land suitability defined as very high, high, good,
and medium as suitable, and land in other classes as unsuitable. We use rain-fed
crop conditions with an intermediate input level, to capture historical conditions
as accurately as possible. The raster image that underpins these data is in a 5

arc-minute resolution, meaning that the raster cells are typically (although this
changes based on distance to the equator) 10km apart. Our suitability variable
measures the area of raster cells considered suitable for growing the crop in question
where the centroid of the raster cell lies within 100km radius of the city location.
This yields a measure in squared km. We take the natural logarithm of this value,

after adding the arbitrary value of 1 as some cities have no land suitable for a
particular crop.

Variable Sources: FAO/IIASA (2011).
Data retrieved from: http://gaez.fao.org/Main.html#.


Variable Name: Altitude
Variable Construction: These values were extracted from a raster image pro-
duced by the FAO, and relate to the median meters above sea level measured
within each raster cell. We take the natural logarithm of this value, after adding
the arbitrary value of 5m as some cities are slightly below sea level.
Variable Sources: FAO/IIASA (2011).
Data retrieved from: http://gaez.fao.org/Main.html#.

                                         40
Variable Names: Ruggedness
Variable Construction: A terrain ruggedness index. These data were con-
structed by measuring the average terrain ruggedness within 100km of the city
location. The underlying data for this variable originates from the altitude raster

image produced by the FAO. Our data come from the data portal released in
2011. We convert this altitude raster image to terrain ruggedness indices using
the method proposed in Wilson et al. (2007), where each cell represents the mean
of the absolute di↵erences between the value of that cell and the value of its 8

surrounding cells. The raster image that underpins these data is in a 5 arc-minute
resolution, meaning that the raster cells are typically (although this changes based
on distance to the equator) 10km apart. We take the natural logarithm of this
value.
Variable Sources: FAO/IIASA (2011).

Data retrieved from: http://gaez.fao.org/Main.html#.


Variable Name: Temperature

Variable Construction: The mean annual temperature for each city. The un-
derlying data were extracted from a GIS raster image showing the mean annual
temperature calculated over the period 1961–1990. We then take the natural log-
arithm of this value.
Variable Sources: FAO/IIASA (2011).
Data retrieved from: http://gaez.fao.org/Main.html#.


Variable Names: Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast, and Rivers

                                        41
Variable Construction: We use 1:10m Physical Vector data on coastlines and
rivers and measure the minimum distance from each city to each of these individual
features. The minimum distance to the coast relates to all coasts worldwide, and
we separate the Atlantic from the Baltic and Mediterranean seas at the most

northerly point of Denmark and most southerly point of Spain respectively. We
then transform these measures into proximity values by inverting, before taking
the natural logarithm to normalize the distribution.
Data retrieved from: http://bit.ly/1caWOLk


Variable Names: Historic Borders
Variable Construction: We digitize a series of maps that chart the evolution of

European borders over the period 1500–2008. We geo-reference and make shape-
files for the following border years (roughly) corresponding to the population data:

1500, 1618, 1699, 1748, 1804, 1848, and 1908.
Data retrieved from: http://www.iegmaps.de/map2-4.htm and
     http://www.iegmaps.de/map2-1.htm.




B     First-Stage Regressions

                               [Table 3 about here.]

                               [Table 4 about here.]

                               [Table 5 about here.]

                               [Table 6 about here.]

                                        42
C     Models With Spatial Dependence

In this appendix we estimate a spatial regression model in the spirit of Kelejian
and Prucha (1998), introducing both a spatially lagged dependent variable and a
spatially correlated error term to control for spatially interrelated cross-sections in

the panel. Formally, we revise eq. 2 as follows:

                                                                               1900
                                                                               X
ln(P opit ) = (W ⌦ IT ) ln(P opit ) + ↵i +    t   + ln(Coali )I   P ost
                                                                          +            X0 i Ijt   j   + uit
                                                                              j=1400
                                                                                                       (7)
                              uit = ⇢(W ⌦ IT )uit + "it                                                (8)

where IT is the identity matrix corresponding to the number of time periods T

(nine in our case), W is a cross-section spatial weights matrix, and the error term

uit has been modified so that it permits spatial correlation alongside the usual
                                   2
idiosyncratic error: "it ⇠ N (0,   " ).   Our row-standardized spatial weights matrix
W categorizes cities as neighbours if they lie within 50km of one another. We found

that this scheme worked well, since it strikes a balance between cities having too
many or too few neighbours (the median number of neighbours each city in our
sample had is 5).

     Complications exist when estimating the models in eq. 7 and eq. 8 due to
simultaneity, as the spatial lag term is an endogenous regressor. This simultaneity
arises due to the reflection problem (Manski, 1993): a city’s neighbour’s population
influences the city’s population, but the city’s population itself, in turn, influences
neighbouring cities. Kelejian and Prucha (1998) show how this spatial model can
be estimated via a Generalized Moments (GM) framework using what they call
Generalized Spatial Two-Stage Least Squares (GS2SLS)—a three step estimator


                                             43
analogous to the Cochrane-Orcutt procedure used in time-series econometrics. In
the first step we estimate eq. 7 via 2SLS, using both first and second order spatial
                                     P1900                       P1900
lags of the exogenous variables (       j=1400   WX0 i Ijt and    j=1400   W2 X0i Ijt ) as instru-
ments for the spatially lagged dependent variable.17 The second step estimates
the spatial error coefficient via the GM procedure originally proposed in Kelejian
and Prucha (1999). The final step uses the estimated ⇢ parameter to transform

both the dependent variables and regressors, before applying the first step again
on the transformed variables.
       The use of a spatial panel methodology necessitates the use of balanced panels
Millo and Piras (2012). However, our source for city populations (Bairoch et al.,
1988) does not contain population values for every year in each city. To reconcile

our data with the structure required for spatial panel analysis we interpolate these

missing values.
       Our imputation algorithm begins by examining all cities that have a popula-
tion value for the year 1300. For each of these cities we iteratively interpolate the
city populations by regressing logged population on year and, for cities containing

5 or more data points, year squared. The missing values thus correspond to the
predictions from these models. At the next step we perform an equivalent calcula-

tion for cities that have an observation in 1400, but not in 1300. We do not predict
missing values in 1300 for this group in this manner; our imputation method for
these observations is described later. After calculating predictions for the missing

values in the sample of cities with a population value in 1400 but missing data
thereafter, we replicate our procedure for 1500, 1600, 1700, 1750, and 1800.
  17
     In our case, we omit the historical state border by year interactions from the vector of
exogenous variables because we are using the Gaure (2013) technique to estimate these fac-
tor/categorical variables as fixed e↵ects.

                                             44
     The cities are then divided into 10 geographic clusters based on their con-
temporary isocodes. These clusters were chosen in order to balance considerations
of geographical proximity (we want the cities close to each other) and sample size
(we want a sufficient number). The remaining missing data points were calcu-

lated by once again iteratively examining each individual city, finding the nearest
available data point, and then interpolating using the median growth rate for each
particular cluster.


Cluster 1: Albania, Greece, Croatia, Macedonia, Slovenia, Yugoslavia, and Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Cluster 2: Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Moldova, Romania, Slo-

vakia, and Poland.
Cluster 3: Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Latvia,

Russia, and Ukraine.
Cluster 4: Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
Cluster 5: Switzerland, and Germany.

Cluster 6: Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Finland.

Cluster 7: Spain, Portugal, and Gibraltar.
Cluster 8: France.
Cluster 9: Ireland and Great Britain.
Cluster 10: Italy and Malta.


     Table 7 presents the results obtained when we estimate the spatial model
outlined above. The use of unbalanced spatial panels can be problematic (this is
equivalent to assuming that each missing observation has a value of zero) and thus


                                        45
we only use samples including interpolated populations, where the interpolation
algorithm is outlined in the above. Including interpolated city populations does
not imply results substantially di↵erent from those show in Tables 1 and 2.18


                                     [Table 7 about here.]


        The results shown in Table 7 are stratified in a number of ways. There are
six columns. Within these six columns the results separated into three groups of
two. The three groups indicate di↵erent post-year cut-o↵ points (1750, 1800, and
1850), whereas within each of these these groups we compare what the results look

like when cities that were in the UK are included and excluded from the estimation

sample. The results are further separated based on the horizontal lines indicating if
the coal post-year interaction term is modelled as either exogenous or endogenous.
In cases where this variable is endogenous, we include an additional first-stage re-
gression of the coal post-year interaction on the set of spatially-lagged instruments
and the Carboniferous post-year interaction in the GS2SLS framework.

        The results in Table 7 are similar to those presented in Table 2. Once again,
we see that the conditional relationship between coal and city population size is

positive. The coefficient on the spatially lagged dependent variable is positive in
all the models. This result is unsurprising as we would expect there to be positive
externalities from population growth in neighbouring cities. Interestingly, the spa-
tial error lag is quantitatively small, indicating the absence of a spatial relationship
in any of the model’s residuals. As before, the “Counterfactual Explained (%)”
provides a measure of the economic impact of our results. In this case the figure

has been adjusted to account for the relevant spatial multipliers, so that all of
  18
       These results available upon request.


                                               46
the figures in Table 7 relate to counterfactuals in a full spatial equilibrium. These
counterfactual e↵ects again indicate that coal was indeed an important element
driving urban growth during the Industrial Revolution, with the e↵ect again being
weaker if we exclude the UK from the analysis.




                                         47
Figure 1: Bivariate Relationship between Proximity to Coalfields and British and
Irish Coal Prices in 1843–1845 (R2 = 0.744).

                                  6.0
                                                             ● ●
                                                           ●
                                                           ●    ● ●
                                                         ● ● ●
                                                      ● ●●    ●                       ●
                                                                                  ●
                                        ●                  ●   ●●        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                              ●           ●●●●                                   ●                 ●
                                                                                                                                                  ●●         ●
     ln Coal Price in 1843−1845




                                                 ●●    ●                      ●
                                                                              ●                          ●                                                                  ●
                                                       ●             ●        ●                                  ●
                                  5.5                      ●
                                                                ●●●●
                                                                                                 ●                   ●               ●            ●●                                                  ●


                                        ●    ●                 ● ●            ●                      ●
                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                     ●                   ●●
                                                                                      ●  ●                       ●                                                                                    ●
                                                  ●        ●     ● ●      ●●●
                                                                            ●         ● ●●               ●●              ●       ●                                  ●                                 ●
                                                                                      ●    ●                                         ●                                                        ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                        ●


                                  5.0                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                           ●● ● ●       ●       ●   ● ●               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                            ●●
                                             ●        ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●                                  ●●
                                                                                                                         ●● ●            ●●                                 ●                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                            ●                          ●
                                                                                                                             ●                                                            ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●       ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●

                                  4.5                                                                                                                                                         ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●




                                        4                                  5         6         7        8                                                                                         9
                                                                         ln Proximity to Coal Field Measure




                                                                                                                             48
                 Figure 2: City’s Proximity to Coalfields or Carboniferous Strata (Grey Areas) in Europe.
                              (a) Coalfields                                                (b) Carboniferous Strata



            70                                                                  70


            60                                                                  60




49
            50                                                                  50




     Latitude
                                                                         Latitude
            40                                                                  40


                  −10     0       10      20    30     40                             −10     0      10      20        30   40
                                  Longitude                                                          Longitude
                 Log Minimum Inverse Distance                                        Log Minimum Inverse Distance
                 to Coal Field (km+1)         2 4 6 8                                to Carboniferous Strata (km+1) 2 4 6 8
Figure 3: Bivariate Relationship between Proximity to Carboniferous Strata and
Proximity to Coalfields (R2 = 0.574).

                                                                                                     ●                 ●          ●●
                                                                                                                            ●●●● ●●   ● ●● ● ●●●
                                                                                                                                    ● ●        ●●       ●
                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                    ● ●●●
                                                                                                                                                 ●● ●    ●● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●      ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●●●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●●● ● ●●● ●●●●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                      ●              ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                         ●●● ●●                                       ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●●●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                    ●      ●
                                                                                                                                                         ●                                ●                                                           ●
         ln Proximity to Coal Field Measure




                                                                                                                                                             ●                 ●
                                                                                                                                              ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                   ●                 ●                                                ●
                                                                                                                    ● ●                                                       ●               ●
                                                                                                                                      ●                       ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●                                                                                      ●

                                          8                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●           ●●
                                                                                                                                                               ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                  ● ● ●                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                 ●                         ● ●   ●                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                            ●            ●                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                           ●    ●     ●                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●                                         ●                          ●               ● ●                                     ●
                                                                                                                                     ●                       ●                                                                                        ●
                                                                                    ●                                                                         ●              ●                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                   ●    ● ●●                                            ● ●                                                   ●                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                             ●                                ●●                      ●
                                                                       ●                       ●                                                             ● ●                      ●         ●●                              ●
                                                                                                                      ●                    ●●           ●            ●      ●
                                                                                                                                  ●●             ●●
                                                                                                                                                  ●● ●         ● ●●●  ●                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●        ●● ●
                                                                                                                             ● ●● ●                      ●            ●                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                 ● ●                          ●                                                                 ●                 ●                   ●
                                                                                                                              ●                                ● ●                  ●●                                              ●                 ●
                                                                                                                              ● ●           ●         ●      ●              ●                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                    ● ●● ●●●      ●                ●●     ●  ●                     ●                          ●
                                                                                                                 ●       ●●        ●● ● ●           ●●●            ●●                ●           ●        ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●      ●                   ●
                                                                                         ●                                        ●●                ●●    ●               ●       ●●●                                                                 ●
                                                                                                             ● ●●                            ●●                        ● ●● ● ●                                                   ●
                                          6                                   ●
                                                                                       ●

                                                                                       ●
                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                               ● ●●
                                                                                                                   ●●

                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                ● ●
                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                               ● ●●
                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                     ● ●●● ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                    ● ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                     ● ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                           ● ●● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                   ● ● ● ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                            ●●    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●● ●●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                ●●●●               ●          ●● ●● ●    ● ●● ●                                                                       ●
                                                                              ●                  ● ●●           ● ●
                                                                                                                ●                         ● ● ●● ●●● ● ●● ●              ●                           ●    ●                                           ●
                                                                                               ● ●● ●    ●             ●●●●      ●● ● ●●●●    ●          ●●                               ●                       ●          ●●     ●                 ●
                                                                                          ●●            ● ●● ● ●         ● ●   ●              ● ●●●   ●●   ● ●                   ●      ●                  ●●                                    ●    ●
                                                                                  ● ●                       ●                 ●     ●
                                                                                                                                    ●●●● ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                 ●                                                   ●                                                ●
                                                                                               ●        ●●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                           ●●● ●● ● ●●● ●
                                                                                                                      ●  ●    ●● ●    ●
                                                                                                                                        ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                               ●   ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                      ●●    ● ● ●       ●●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                                                                            ●●       ●    ●●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●● ●             ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                 ● ●    ● ●●                  ●                                                                                       ●
                                                                               ●       ●
                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                       ●● ●●   ●
                                                                                                                 ●● ●●
                                                                                                                    ●● ●
                                                                                                                          ●●●●
                                                                                                                          ●  ●●● ●●  ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                     ●● ●●●● ●●●● ●● ● ●●●●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                   ●                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                               ●        ●
                                                                                                            ●   ●  ●        ●                     ●●   ●         ●  ●●              ●                                          ●                      ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                          ● ● ● ● ●●              ● ●●
                                                                                                                ● ●●
                                                                                                                ●       ●●● ●●    ●●●  ● ●
                                                                                                                                     ●●●           ●●          ●                               ●● ● ●         ●        ●                              ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●●      ●●●●●●●●● ●●  ●● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                    ●●●
                                                                                                                                          ●●                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                                          ●● ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                               ●      ●● ● ● ●                                               ●
                                                                         ●                ●   ●● ●             ●       ● ●   ●●●
                                                                                                                             ● ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                           ● ● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●●●● ● ●●                                             ●                ●         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                ●          ●●●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                                ●● ● ●●
                                                                                                 ●        ●●●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                                                                                       ●● ●●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                             ●         ●● ●        ● ●●● ●                          ● ●● ● ●          ●●                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                       ●      ●●       ●●    ●●
                                                                                               ● ●●●    ●●     ●●●●●
                                                                                                                   ●●●  ●●●    ●●●● ●●    ●●●●●● ●●● ●●       ●● ● ● ●● ●                 ●                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                               ●●       ●●●
                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                             ●  ●●●● ●●●
                                                                                                    ●●●●●●●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●     ●●●●●
                                                                                                                           ●● ●●  ●●   ●● ●   ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                 ●●            ●●       ●●      ● ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●               ●                               ●    ●
                                                                     ●● ●            ●
                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                       ●●      ●
                                                                                               ●     ●   ●●●●
                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                               ●●●●
                                                                                                                      ●   ●
                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                          ●●   ●●●  ●● ●●●       ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                        ●  ●           ● ●                         ●       ●                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                            ● ●●     ●● ●●●●●      ●     ●
                                                                                                      ●●●●●●   ●        ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                           ● ● ●● ●                 ●     ●    ●●● ●                   ●  ●                  ●          ●                             ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                ● ●● ●    ●●●●● ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                    ●●● ●●●●●●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                              ●●●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●      ●  ● ● ●●       ●●
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                         ●●  ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                   ●       ●    ●   ●    ●    ●●          ●      ● ●                       ●
                                                                                             ●●
                                                                                              ● ●●●●● ●●
                                                                                                    ●      ● ●●● ●●●           ●●           ●●●●        ●     ●  ●                                              ●                                     ●
                                                                  ● ●            ●●● ●
                                                                                     ●●●●
                                                                                      ●● ●●●
                                                                                           ● ●●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                               ●●●● ●●  ● ●   ●
                                                                                                              ●●●  ● ●●●●●   ●●   ●● ●   ● ● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ●                                            ● ● ●
                                                                       ●        ●●●●●●
                                                                                     ●●    ●●●     ●●● ●●● ●●                  ● ● ●                                          ●            ● ●● ●
                                          4          ●
                                                        ●
                                                              ●● ●
                                                                  ●

                                                             ● ● ●● ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                 ● ●●●
                                                                                 ●● ●●
                                                                          ●●●● ● ●●
                                                                          ●●● ●●● ●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●    ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                                      ●●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●

                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                           ●
                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                         ●● ●
                                                                                           ●   ●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                               ●●●●●
                                                                                            ● ●●●●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                         ● ●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●●
                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                              ●●●●
                                                                                                                  ●●●●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                             ●● ●●● ●
                                                                                                            ●●●●●●● ●●
                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                    ● ●●●●
                                                                                                                          ●●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                               ● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                                              ●● ●
                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                      ● ● ●

                                                                                                                                                           ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ●

                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                      ● ●   ●
                                                                         ● ● ●● ●          ●●      ●   ●
                                                                                              ●● ●● ● ●●●  ●                ●      ●                    ●              ●           ● ●
                                                            ● ●
                                                             ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●● ●
                                                                           ●●● ●●     ●● ●   ● ●●
                                                                                                                ●●●● ●●
                                                                                                                       ● ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●●● ●         ● ●                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                  ●          ●    ● ●● ●●
                                                                           ● ●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                              ●●●●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                   ●●●
                                                                                     ●● ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●                  ● ●●
                                                                                                         ●     ●● ●● ●        ●         ●● ● ●● ● ● ●             ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                            ● ●●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                              ●                              ● ●                                      ●
                                                  ●●            ●   ●       ●●●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                ●   ●●●●●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                                                            ●● ●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                    ●         ●  ● ●● ●                        ●●       ●                                           ●
                                                     ●                 ●  ●
                                                                         ●●● ●●●●
                                                                           ●        ●      ● ●            ● ●● ●●                          ●             ●●● ●●                                                          ●
                                                  ●●● ●●●   ●●
                                                             ●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●●● ●  ●
                                                                    ●●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●●●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●●●●
                                                                           ●   ●●  ●
                                                                                    ●
                                                                                    ●●● ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●
                                                                                      ●        ● ●●●
                                                                                              ●●                ●                 ● ●
                                                         ●●● ●●● ●●●
                                                                 ●  ●●
                                                                    ●
                                                                    ● ●●
                                                                       ●●●
                                                                        ● ●●●●●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●      ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●● ●    ●●●
                                                                                                 ●● ●●● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●                              ● ●                                         ●
                                                                    ●●●
                                                                    ● ●● ● ●● ●●
                                                                         ●                                                              ●               ●                                                                                              ●
                                                  ●●●● ● ● ●   ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ● ●●
                                                                   ●
                                                                   ●
                                                                 ●●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                ●●  ●●●●●
                                                                        ●●●●●
                                                                          ●
                                                                          ●   ●●●●  ●●  ●
                                                                                    ● ●●● ●●●● ●●
                                                                                                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                          ●                                              ● ●                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●  ●  ●                                                                                                                ●    ●                                                  ●
                                                          ●●      ● ●●● ●●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●
                                                                           ●●●
                                                                            ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●●●
                                                                                ● ● ●●   ●● ● ●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                        ● ●            ●          ●                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●
                                                             ● ●                             ● ●                ●●                ● ●                    ●                            ●                                 ●                              ●
                                                                        ●●              ● ●   ●                                               ●●         ●                  ●                                   ●                                      ●
                                                                             ●                 ●                     ●                                          ●         ●          ● ●                                         ●                   ● ●
                                                             ● ● ●●                                                     ●                                                                 ● ●         ● ●           ●                                  ●
                                                                  ● ●●  ●
                                                                        ●●●
                                                                         ●● ●●
                                                                             ●●
                                                                             ●● ●
                                                                                ●●●              ●             ●
                                                                                                                  ●● ●
                                                                                                                      ●●  ●● ● ●●● ●    ● ●● ●                            ●                                                                            ●
                                                          ●● ●             ●
                                                                           ●●●
                                                                             ● ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●● ●●
                                                                                  ●  ●
                                                                                     ●●  ●  ●●●
                                                                                              ●●●
                                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                 ● ●●●
                                                                                                   ●   ●●●● ●●  ●
                                                                                                                ●●                                                                       ●                                                             ●
                                                      ●●                   ● ●●   ● ●●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                     ● ●●●●●● ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                        ●        ● ●                ●           ● ●● ● ●

                                          2   ●
                                                           ●
                                                                                                   ●




                                                                   4               6               8
                                                             ln Proximity to Carboniferous Strata Measure




                                                                                                                                        50
     Figure 4: Bivariate Relationship between Proximity to Coal Fields or Proximity to Carboniferous Strata and City
     Population.
                                                                                            (a) Coalfields (R2 = 0.372)                                                                                                                                                                                               (b) Carboniferous Strata (R2 = 0.337)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                                             ●               ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                              ●                                                                                                                                                                           ●                                                                 ●                                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                         ●                             ●                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                       ●              ●                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●                           ●
                                                                                                                      ●                                                                                           ●                       ●                                                                                              ●                                                                                                         ●                       ●
                                                                                                                 ●         ●                                       ●                                                                                                                                                                             ● ●                                             ●
                                                                  ●                                                     ●                                                                                                 ● ●             ●                                                                                              ●                                                   ●                                      ●   ●                                  ●
                                                                                                                          ●                                            ●                                 ●                                ●                                                                                                                          ●                            ●                                           ●                            ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●●                                                                                 ●                                                                                                                                         ●●                   ●   ●
                                                   4                                                ●                  ●●                      ●                                                                                          ●                                                 4                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●                                                             ●                    ●                                        ●         ●
                                                                                                ●                                   ●                       ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                    ●                ● ●            ●              ●                                                                  ●                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●●                                                                               ●                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                       ●            ●                           ●                                      ●●                                 ●                                                                                                            ●       ●                                                                                  ●                        ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                       ●                                               ●                ●               ●       ●
                                                                                                                     ●     ●         ●                                                                                                    ●                                                                                                              ●     ●          ●                                                 ●                                              ●
                                                                                                            ●● ● ●                                 ●                                                                                      ●                                                                                                            ●                  ●                   ●       ●    ●
                                                                           ●                     ●                                                                                                            ●                                                                                                                  ● ●                             ●      ●                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                       ●● ● ●            ●                                      ●                                                                          ●                                                                                                     ● ●●                                                                   ●                                                  ●
                                                                                              ● ●              ●               ●                          ●             ●    ●                     ●                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●                                                                                                 ●●         ●●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●                                                             ●
                                                                                                       ●      ●       ● ●               ●                ●●                                                                               ●●                                                                    ●                                                   ●           ●           ●           ● ●                    ●●                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                        ●                        ●       ● ● ●                  ●                                                                                                          ●                                                                                  ●              ●          ●●      ● ● ●                            ●                                                                         ●
                                                                                                             ● ●●            ●●●                                                                                                           ●                                                                                         ●                ●●                               ●                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                           ● ● ●●                                     ● ●       ●                   ●                   ●                         ●     ●                                                                                                    ●                ●                 ●                       ●● ●                 ●                         ●                   ●
                                                       ●                                        ●     ●      ●                    ●                           ●                               ●                           ●             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●                                                       ●                                ●           ● ● ●●  ●                ●                                            ●                  ●          ●                         ●
                                                                        ●●                                 ●              ●●●                                                                        ●                                  ●                                                                                                 ●                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●                                ●                              ●
                                                                                                           ●●●                          ●●
                                                                                                                                         ● ●                                              ●               ● ●                           ●                                                                              ●                ●         ● ●● ● ● ●                       ●               ●             ●   ●                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                       ●● ●
                                                                                                               ● ●●● ●●
                                                                                                                            ●                          ● ●      ●              ●           ●                                            ●                                                                                            ●                                    ●●                        ●   ●● ●           ● ●                 ●     ●              ●          ●
                                                             ●                                                      ●● ●●                                  ● ●                                                                                                                                                  ●                     ●                  ●        ●           ●                     ●     ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●                                                ●      ●● ●●  ●       ●
                                                                                                                                              ●        ●                   ●     ●      ●                                               ●                                                                                                                 ● ● ● ●               ●●              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ● ● ●●                 ●             ●                       ●             ●
                                                                   ●            ● ● ● ●●
                                                                                                        ● ● ●                                                ● ●                             ●                                          ●                                                                               ●●●                          ● ● ●                                 ● ●●         ●● ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●                                   ●
                                                             ●●●                                     ●                             ●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                   ●                 ●              ●                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●●●                                ●      ●                         ●                                                                   ●
                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●●         ●                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●●         ● ●●●              ●         ●               ●        ●                                 ●                ●   ●   ●
                                                                ●           ●           ●● ●                           ● ● ● ● ●● ●● ●●                                 ●                         ●                                                                                                                            ● ● ● ●                                                      ●                        ●●                                                    ●
                                                           ●●                    ● ●
                                                                                 ●                ●                        ●●        ●●
                                                                                                                                                                               ●                       ●                                ●                                                                                  ● ●        ● ●●●            ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●                                              ●        ●                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                             ●                   ●                                                                                ● ●                           ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●  ●               ● ● ●● ● ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●               ●   ●




51
                                                             ●       ●●● ● ●         ●●●●                  ● ●●●● ●●● ●   ●
                                                                                                                          ●● ●●●  ● ●         ● ● ● ●●                                            ●                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ● ●     ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ● ●       ●●     ●  ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●●         ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●      ● ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●       ●  ●     ●  ●            ●                                              ●
                                                                          ●      ● ●
                                                                                                                      ● ●      ●                        ●      ●                                                                                                                                                                                               ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●                                  ● ●                                          ●                           ●
                                                   2              ●                  ● ●● ● ●                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                                            ●                              ●         ●          ●      ●                                ●                                                   2                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●●●           ● ●● ● ●● ●    ●●         ● ●              ● ●     ●       ●                                         ●     ●                         ●
                                                             ●       ●       ●● ●●● ● ●●    ●●            ● ●● ●● ● ● ●        ●      ●●●● ●●         ● ● ● ● ●       ●                                                                                                                                             ● ● ●● ● ●● ● ●● ●             ● ● ●● ●● ●● ●●                           ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●                                         ●
                                                            ●●            ●●                           ●     ●       ● ● ● ●●    ● ●  ●●                          ● ●                                                                   ●                                                               ●                     ●●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●● ●        ●●●●       ● ●● ●   ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●                 ●         ●    ●                             ●
                                                                ●                 ●     ●●●●
                                                                                                       ●     ● ●   ● ●  ●       ● ●●●    ● ●● ●● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                     ●●     ●                                         ● ●                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ●           ●● ●      ●           ●●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●    ●●                ●       ●     ●                                         ●
                                                                ●         ●        ●● ●
                                                                                      ●●●● ●
                                                                                           ●                             ● ● ●●     ●    ●            ●    ●●             ●  ●                    ●                                                                                                                           ●●● ●●●             ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●●         ●●● ● ●    ●          ●                             ●                                         ●
                                                            ●                  ●  ●
                                                                                  ●●         ●                        ●
                                                                                                                      ●●   ●   ●        ● ●  ●●                    ●          ●                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●● ●●●       ●                 ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●● ●                       ●                             ●
                                                             ●●●
                                                             ● ● ● ● ●              ●●● ●● ●● ● ●● ●● ●
                                                                                                              ●           ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                ●●● ●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                       ● ●●               ●●                                                  ●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●● ● ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●● ●●       ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ● ●   ● ●● ● ●         ●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ● ● ● ●     ●● ●          ●              ●                        ●             ●
                                                             ●●                              ●   ●●●● ●    ●●
                                                                                                        ●● ● ●●● ●●●●● ●      ●●●● ●● ●                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●                       ●                                             ●                                                         ●               ●● ●●●     ●●●●●    ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●  ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●● ● ●  ●                                                        ●
                                                             ●
                                                             ●
                                                             ●    ●●     ● ●      ● ●● ●
                                                                                         ●●●
                                                                                         ● ●
                                                                                             ●●●
                                                                                            ● ●             ●●
                                                                                                                                 ● ●● ●● ●       ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                               ●                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ● ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●       ●●●● ● ● ● ●●●●●  ● ● ●●  ●●          ●●●● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●● ● ●                     ●● ●               ●
                                                               ●●            ●     ● ●●              ●●●● ● ● ●●● ●               ●●● ●● ●●                     ●●      ●           ●● ●                  ●                               ●                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●         ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ● ● ●● ● ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●                      ●                ●                       ●                   ●
                                                             ●
                                                             ●● ●
                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                 ●          ● ● ●   ●●      ●●● ●●
                                                                                                                                ●    ●● ●●●     ●                                     ●        ●                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●●●●● ●      ●●●●    ● ●● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ● ●●●●●●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●     ●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●  ●●                                                          ●                                   ●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                             ● ●●●●● ●● ● ●       ●● ●● ●●     ●● ●    ● ●●     ●
                                                                                                                                ●●          ● ●●●● ● ●            ● ● ●●                                                                                                                                           ●●  ●●  ●  ● ●     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●      ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ● ●●●●● ● ●  ●  ● ●●● ●● ●   ●    ●● ●●●● ●        ●     ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●           ●              ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●          ●                         ●
                                                              ● ●
                                                                ●●
                                                                ●
                                                                           ●●●● ●●                         ● ●●● ●         ●
                                                                                                                            ● ●    ●
                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                   ●●● ●●                   ●                                                ●                    ●       ●                                                                             ●● ●        ●    ●                      ●                           ● ●● ● ●● ●                                   ●                                ●
                                                             ●●●                  ●● ● ● ● ●●
                                                                                        ●                       ●  ●
                                                                                                                    ●● ●●
                                                                                                                     ●  ●  ●  ●● ●   ●  ●●
                                                                                                                                         ●  ●● ● ● ●   ●                    ●      ● ●                                                    ●                                                                           ●●●            ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●●● ●● ●●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●       ●●  ●●● ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●● ●● ● ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●  ●  ● ●    ●         ●                    ●● ●                  ●         ●
                                                             ●  ●             ● ● ●            ● ● ●●●●● ●●●
                                                                                                              ●● ●●●                      ●                               ●       ●                                                       ●                                                                                    ●●● ●               ● ● ●             ●          ●                 ●●                 ●       ● ●                    ●
                                                              ● ●
                                                               ●●                ●● ●         ●●●●● ●● ● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                   ●●●●●
                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                         ●● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                           ● ●         ●       ●     ●
                                                                                                                                                     ●         ●  ●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●            ●         ●                                                                                                                                   ●● ●● ●   ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●                    ●●● ●● ●● ● ●●             ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ● ●  ●       ●      ●●                                                  ●
                                                             ●   ●          ●●   ●    ●   ●     ●
                                                                                              ●● ● ● ●● ●     ●                                                   ●  ●                      ● ●                                                                                                                       ● ● ● ●●           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ●●● ● ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●                                                                                  ●       ●                         ●
                                                             ●●
                                                              ● ●
                                                                ●●●                                    ● ●●   ●
                                                                                                              ●●● ●● ●    ● ●●● ●●● ●● ●● ● ● ●                               ●                                                           ●                                                                        ● ●●  ●●      ● ● ●●  ●●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●●●  ●●●      ●●● ● ●● ●● ● ●                                   ●                ●●
                                                             ●
                                                             ● ●●● ●
                                                                          ● ● ● ● ●●           ●           ●     ● ● ●●                                       ●● ●                                                                        ●                                                                              ● ●      ●●●●● ●●●   ●●●     ● ●●● ● ●● ● ●        ● ●●●● ● ● ● ●● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●●                ●        ●●                                      ●
                                                                ●                     ●
                                                                                               ● ●● ●●●●
                                                                                             ● ●              ●
                                                                                                              ●● ● ● ●  ●  ● ● ●● ●●
                                                                                                                        ●●● ●       ●            ●● ●              ●●                                                                     ●                                                                                   ●●●         ● ●●   ●● ●●          ●                       ●●                                        ●                                        ●
                                                             ●● ● ●●                 ●           ● ●● ●
                                                                                                                             ● ● ●●             ●                           ●        ●                                                                                                                                           ●● ●     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●●● ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●               ● ● ●            ●● ●
                                                               ●●●                            ●       ●● ●       ●     ● ●● ●         ●            ●                                   ●                                                  ●                                                                              ●● ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●● ● ●     ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●●● ● ● ●● ●● ●                                                                                           ●                     ●
                                                             ●● ●        ●                                   ●●       ●● ● ●                       ●    ●        ●                                                                                                                                                         ●●               ● ● ●●         ●●            ●● ●●      ●  ●
                                                             ●  ●
                                                                ●
                                                                                      ● ● ●● ●
                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                               ● ● ●●
                                                                                                                  ● ● ●●●   ●               ●        ●                                                                                ●                                                                                      ●● ●    ●●● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●      ●       ●                      ● ●         ●       ●
                                                              ●●                  ●                  ●●         ●●         ●● ●●             ● ●  ●●●           ● ●                                        ●                                                                                                            ●                    ●●  ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●                                        ●
                                                                                                    ●●                      ●●           ●                                        ●                                                                                                                                                    ● ●  ●   ●  ● ●● ●● ● ●● ●●●● ●● ●
                                                               ●                                      ● ●●● ● ●
                                                                                                      ●       ●● ●                                  ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●               ●           ●                                                   ●                ●
                                                                                                  ●                        ●                                                                                                              ●                                                                                              ● ● ●● ●        ●●                                                              ●                    ●
                                                               ●●                                                      ● ●●● ●                                ●                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●            ●     ● ●                         ●
                                                   0            ●                              ●                   ● ●●   ●                                                                                                                                                                 0                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●●●                                                        ●            ●
                                                                                ●                                                 ●                                                                                                                                                                                 ●                                         ●
                                                                                                                           ● ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●                                                     ●
                                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                    ●          ●                              ●                                                                                                                                                                                  ●             ●                             ●
                                                                                            ●                ●                     ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●      ●                          ●
                                                                                                         ●    ●                     ●    ●                                                                                                                                                                                           ●   ●                           ●                                                          ●




                                                                                                                                                                             ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




      Difference in ln Populations, 1700 to 1900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Difference in ln Populations, 1700 to 1900




                                              −2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −2
                                                       2                                4             6             8                                                                                                                                                                                         4               6               8
                                                                                  ln Proximity to Coal Field Measure                                                                                                                                                                                    ln Proximity to Carboniferous Strata Measure
                                                                      Figure 5: Coal Coefficients from Flexible Models.
                                                        (a) Model without Controls.                                                                      (b) Model with Full Controls.

                                      0.4
                                            Specification                                                                                       Specification
                                            ● IV                                                                                          0.4   ● IV
                                              OLS                                                                                                 OLS
                                                                                                     ●
                                      0.2                                                        ●                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                           ●                                              0.2                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●

                                                    ●                                 ●                                                                                                  ●
                                            ●




52
                                      0.0                      ●                                                                                                 ●        ●
                                                                        ●        ●                                                        0.0                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                        ●


                                                                                                                                      −0.2
                                  −0.2




     Log Coal Proximity Coefficient
                                                                                                         Log Coal Proximity Coefficient



                                                   1400               1600                1800                                                         1400             1600                 1800
                                                                      Year                                                                                              Year

                                                               Shaded areas indicate 95% cluster robust confidence intervals.
          Table 1: Flexible Regression Estimates, OLS and IV: Full Controls with Border ⇥ Year Fixed E↵ects.

                                                    OLS                                                          IV
     Coal Variables            (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)             (7)         (8)
     Coal ⇥ Year=1300          0.062         0.027                                       0.046         0.053
                              (0.051)       (0.058)                                     (0.113)       (0.142)
     Coal ⇥ Year=1400          0.008         0.020                                       0.101         0.103
                              (0.047)       (0.047)                                     (0.095)       (0.117)
     Coal ⇥ Year=1600          0.039         0.039         0.035         0.045           0.013         0.025           0.005       0.033
                              (0.032)       (0.040)       (0.033)       (0.042)         (0.079)       (0.117)         (0.077)     (0.114)
     Coal ⇥ Year=1700          0.014         0.032         0.013         0.044           0.026         0.032           0.040       0.040
                              (0.036)       (0.043)       (0.038)       (0.049)         (0.080)       (0.115)         (0.081)     (0.113)
     Coal ⇥ Year=1750          0.022         0.017         0.020         0.025           0.073         0.068           0.063       0.056
                              (0.038)       (0.040)       (0.039)       (0.043)         (0.082)       (0.113)         (0.084)     (0.111)




53
     Coal ⇥ Year=1800          0.053         0.013         0.051         0.022           0.158⇤⇤       0.110           0.141⇤      0.094
                              (0.041)       (0.038)       (0.043)       (0.042)         (0.072)       (0.102)         (0.072)     (0.100)
     Coal ⇥ Year=1850          0.104⇤⇤       0.047         0.101⇤⇤       0.057           0.175⇤⇤       0.106           0.162⇤⇤     0.100
                              (0.043)       (0.039)       (0.045)       (0.043)         (0.077)       (0.108)         (0.076)     (0.103)
     Coal ⇥ Year=1900          0.134⇤⇤⇤      0.074⇤        0.133⇤⇤⇤      0.085⇤⇤         0.243⇤⇤⇤      0.239⇤⇤         0.223⇤⇤⇤    0.222⇤⇤
                              (0.041)       (0.039)       (0.041)       (0.039)         (0.072)       (0.101)         (0.070)     (0.095)
     Excludes UK                N             Y             N            Y                N            Y               N           Y
     Num. obs.                10773          9799          9877         8968            10773         9799            9877        8968
     The table presents estimates of the e↵ect of coal field proximity on log city population size. All regressions include both year and
     city fixed e↵ects. Standard errors and p-values have been corrected to account for clustering as detailed in the text. *** p<0.01,
     **
        p<0.05, * p<0.1. These regressions also include year interactions with the following variables: Latitude, Longitude, Potato,
     Wheat, Oat, Ruggedness, Altitude, Temperature, Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast, Rivers, Atlantic2 , Mediterranean2 , Coast2 ,
     and Rivers2 . The border ⇥ year fixed e↵ects are as follows: 1500 borders ⇥ 1400, 1500 borders ⇥ 1500, 1618 borders ⇥ 1600,
     1699 borders ⇥ 1700, 1748 borders ⇥ 1750, 1804 borders ⇥ 1800, 1848 borders ⇥ 1850, and 1908 borders ⇥ 1900.
Table 2: Fixed Treatment Regression Estimates, OLS and IV: Full Controls with
Border ⇥ Year Fixed E↵ects.

                                                OLS                            IV
                                         (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)
   Coal ⇥ Post-1750                      0.089⇤⇤⇤      0.032           0.196⇤⇤⇤       0.151⇤⇤
                                        (0.031)       (0.030)         (0.054)        (0.067)
                                        [0.035]       [0.021]         [0.047]        [0.055]
   Counterfactual Explained (%)         30.562        11.195          65.401         51.950
   Coal ⇥ Post-1800                      0.095⇤⇤⇤      0.049⇤          0.156⇤⇤⇤       0.134⇤⇤
                                        (0.027)       (0.026)         (0.050)        (0.056)
                                        [0.027]       [0.016]         [0.037]        [0.043]
   Counterfactual Explained (%)         39.207        20.253          63.424         54.818
   Coal ⇥ Post-1850                      0.090⇤⇤⇤      0.054⇤          0.162⇤⇤⇤       0.180⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.027)       (0.029)         (0.048)        (0.052)
                                        [0.023]       [0.017]         [0.034]        [0.040]
   Counterfactual Explained (%)         60.226        32.521         105.549        105.680
   Excludes UK                            N             Y               N              Y
   Num. obs.                            10773          9799           10773           9799
   The table presents estimates of the e↵ect of coal field proximity on log city population
   size. All regressions include both year and city fixed e↵ects. Clustered standard errors
   in parentheses. Standard errors and p-values have been corrected to account for clus-
   tering as detailed in the text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Conley standard errors are
   reported in square brackets. Spatial autocorrelation is assumed to exist among obser-
   vations that are within five degrees of each other. These regressions also include year
   interactions with the following variables: Latitude, Longitude, Potato, Wheat, Oat,
   Ruggedness, Altitude, Temperature, Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast, Rivers, Atlantic2 ,
   Mediterranean2 , Coast2 , and Rivers2 . The border ⇥ year fixed e↵ects are as follows:
   1500 borders ⇥ 1400, 1500 borders ⇥ 1500, 1618 borders ⇥ 1600, 1699 borders ⇥ 1700,
   1748 borders ⇥ 1750, 1804 borders ⇥ 1800, 1848 borders ⇥ 1850, and 1908 borders ⇥
   1900.




                                                54
     Table 3: Flexible Regression, First-Stage Estimates Corresponding to Column (5) of Table 1: Full Controls with
     Border ⇥ Year Fixed E↵ects.

                                                                             Dependent Variable: Coal ⇥ Year=
                                              1300          1400          1600       1700         1750        1800              1850          1900
      Carbon Variables                         (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1300                       0.411⇤⇤⇤      0.005        0.001         0.007         0.005        0.005         0.006         0.003
                                              (0.077)       (0.005)      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.008)      (0.019)       (0.013)       (0.015)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1400                       0.002         0.390⇤⇤⇤     0.001         0.003         0.005        0.011         0.015         0.011
                                              (0.005)       (0.087)      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.011)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1600                       0.002         0.003        0.394⇤⇤⇤      0.004         0.001        0.008         0.005         0.013
                                              (0.006)       (0.004)      (0.067)       (0.009)       (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.011)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1700                       0.002         0.004        0.001         0.449⇤⇤⇤      0.002        0.012         0.012         0.001
                                              (0.007)       (0.003)      (0.007)       (0.066)       (0.010)      (0.016)       (0.014)       (0.017)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1750                       0.005         0.002        0.003         0.007         0.320⇤⇤⇤     0.037⇤        0.034⇤        0.017
                                              (0.007)       (0.003)      (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.067)      (0.020)       (0.019)       (0.014)




55
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1800                       0.006         0.001        0.009         0.003         0.021        0.331⇤⇤⇤      0.029         0.025
                                              (0.007)       (0.004)      (0.007)       (0.011)       (0.013)      (0.066)       (0.019)       (0.016)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1850                       0.006         0.001        0.008         0.001         0.024⇤       0.035         0.322⇤⇤⇤      0.026
                                              (0.006)       (0.003)      (0.007)       (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.022)       (0.062)       (0.018)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1900                       0.002         0.001        0.006         0.004         0.006        0.011         0.004         0.403⇤⇤⇤
                                              (0.006)       (0.004)      (0.007)       (0.011)       (0.009)      (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.058)
      Excludes UK                              N             N             N             N            N             N             N            N
      A-P Multivariate F -test Statistic     36.990        25.835        44.854        59.320       28.542        31.676        32.988       61.409
      Num. obs.                              10773         10773         10773         10773        10773         10773         10773        10773
      The table presents the first-stage estimates of the e↵ect of Carboniferous strata proximity on coal field proximity for various interaction
      years. All regressions include both year and city fixed e↵ects. Standard errors, p-values, and F -test statistics have been corrected to account
      for clustering as detailed in the text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. These regressions also include year interactions with the following
      variables: Latitude, Longitude, Potato, Wheat, Oat, Ruggedness, Altitude, Temperature, Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast, Rivers, Atlantic2 ,
      Mediterranean2 , Coast2 , and Rivers2 . The border ⇥ year fixed e↵ects are as follows: 1500 borders ⇥ 1400, 1500 borders ⇥ 1500, 1618
      borders ⇥ 1600, 1699 borders ⇥ 1700, 1748 borders ⇥ 1750, 1804 borders ⇥ 1800, 1848 borders ⇥ 1850, and 1908 borders ⇥ 1900.
     Table 4: Flexible Regression, First-Stage Estimates Corresponding to Column (6) of Table 1: Full Controls with
     Border ⇥ Year Fixed E↵ects.

                                                                             Dependent Variable: Coal ⇥ Year=
                                              1300          1400          1600       1700         1750        1800              1850          1900
      Carbon Variables                         (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1300                       0.361⇤⇤⇤      0.003        0.003         0.009         0.003        0.011         0.004         0.002
                                              (0.076)       (0.005)      (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.009)      (0.021)       (0.014)       (0.018)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1400                       0.003         0.326⇤⇤⇤     0.001         0.003         0.006        0.006         0.012         0.012
                                              (0.006)       (0.095)      (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.009)       (0.013)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1600                       0.002         0.001        0.323⇤⇤⇤      0.002         0.002        0.005         0.003         0.023⇤
                                              (0.008)       (0.005)      (0.070)       (0.010)       (0.008)      (0.012)       (0.009)       (0.012)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1700                       0.006         0.002        0.002         0.320⇤⇤⇤      0.004        0.000         0.001         0.025
                                              (0.008)       (0.003)      (0.008)       (0.074)       (0.009)      (0.016)       (0.011)       (0.018)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1750                       0.010         0.000        0.007         0.009         0.250⇤⇤⇤     0.026         0.024         0.027⇤
                                              (0.008)       (0.004)      (0.007)       (0.009)       (0.070)      (0.020)       (0.017)       (0.016)




56
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1800                       0.011         0.003        0.015⇤⇤       0.009         0.021⇤       0.233⇤⇤⇤      0.020         0.040⇤⇤
                                              (0.009)       (0.004)      (0.007)       (0.009)       (0.012)      (0.070)       (0.017)       (0.018)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1850                       0.011         0.003        0.014⇤⇤       0.010         0.023⇤       0.026         0.224⇤⇤⇤      0.041⇤⇤
                                              (0.008)       (0.004)      (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.013)      (0.022)       (0.062)       (0.020)
      Carbon ⇥ Year=1900                       0.002         0.000        0.010         0.007         0.004        0.006         0.001         0.332⇤⇤⇤
                                              (0.008)       (0.004)      (0.007)       (0.009)       (0.008)      (0.014)       (0.011)       (0.068)
      Excludes UK                              Y             Y             Y             Y            Y             Y             Y            Y
      A-P Multivariate F -test Statistic     29.590        15.353        27.670        24.312       16.087        14.486        16.521       30.910
      Num. obs.                               9799          9799          9799          9799         9799          9799          9799         9799
      The table presents the first-stage estimates of the e↵ect of carboniferous strata proximity on coal field proximity for various interaction
      years. All regressions include both year and city fixed e↵ects. Standard errors, p-values, and F -test statistics have been corrected to account
      for clustering as detailed in the text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. These regressions also include year interactions with the following
      variables: Latitude, Longitude, Potato, Wheat, Oat, Ruggedness, Altitude, Temperature, Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast, Rivers, Atlantic2 ,
      Mediterranean2 , Coast2 , and Rivers2 . The border ⇥ year fixed e↵ects are as follows: 1500 borders ⇥ 1400, 1500 borders ⇥ 1500, 1618
      borders ⇥ 1600, 1699 borders ⇥ 1700, 1748 borders ⇥ 1750, 1804 borders ⇥ 1800, 1848 borders ⇥ 1850, and 1908 borders ⇥ 1900.
     Table 5: Flexible Regression, First-Stage Estimates Corresponding to Column (7) of Table 1: Full Controls with
     Border ⇥ Year Fixed E↵ects.

                                                                      Dependent Variable: Coal ⇥ Year=
                                                    1600          1700        1750         1800        1850            1900
             Carbon Variables                        (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1600                      0.394⇤⇤⇤     0.007         0.001        0.015        0.009         0.018
                                                    (0.067)      (0.010)       (0.008)      (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.014)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1700                      0.001        0.453⇤⇤⇤      0.003        0.004        0.008         0.006
                                                    (0.009)      (0.073)       (0.010)      (0.018)      (0.015)       (0.020)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1750                      0.005        0.011         0.320⇤⇤⇤     0.046⇤⇤      0.038⇤⇤       0.025
                                                    (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.072)      (0.021)      (0.018)       (0.018)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1800                      0.012        0.002         0.022        0.340⇤⇤⇤     0.034⇤        0.034⇤
                                                    (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.014)      (0.073)      (0.018)       (0.019)
                                                     0.011        0.003         0.025⇤       0.043⇤⇤      0.326⇤⇤⇤      0.035⇤




57
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1850
                                                    (0.008)      (0.012)       (0.014)      (0.022)      (0.068)       (0.021)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1900                      0.008        0.000         0.007        0.019        0.007         0.410⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.010)      (0.019)      (0.015)       (0.056)
             Excludes UK                             N             N            N             N            N             N
             A-P Multivariate F -test Statistic    45.107        51.255       24.910        27.624       28.722        70.257
             Num. obs.                              9877          9877         9877          9877         9877          9877
             The table presents the first-stage estimates of the e↵ect of carboniferous strata proximity on coal field prox-
             imity for various interaction years. All regressions include both year and city fixed e↵ects. Standard errors,
             p-values, and F -test statistics have been corrected to account for clustering as detailed in the text. *** p<0.01,
             **
                p<0.05, * p<0.1. These regressions also include year interactions with the following variables: Latitude, Longi-
             tude, Potato, Wheat, Oat, Ruggedness, Altitude, Temperature, Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast, Rivers, Atlantic2 ,
             Mediterranean2 , Coast2 , and Rivers2 . The border ⇥ year fixed e↵ects are as follows: 1500 borders ⇥ 1400, 1500
             borders ⇥ 1500, 1618 borders ⇥ 1600, 1699 borders ⇥ 1700, 1748 borders ⇥ 1750, 1804 borders ⇥ 1800, 1848
             borders ⇥ 1850, and 1908 borders ⇥ 1900.
     Table 6: Flexible Regression, First-Stage Estimates Corresponding to Column (8) of Table 1: Full Controls with
     Border ⇥ Year Fixed E↵ects.

                                                                      Dependent Variable: Coal ⇥ Year=
                                                    1600          1700        1750         1800        1850            1900
             Carbon Variables                        (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1600                      0.394⇤⇤⇤     0.007         0.001        0.015        0.009         0.018
                                                    (0.067)      (0.010)       (0.008)      (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.014)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1700                      0.001        0.453⇤⇤⇤      0.003        0.004        0.008         0.006
                                                    (0.009)      (0.073)       (0.010)      (0.018)      (0.015)       (0.020)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1750                      0.005        0.011         0.320⇤⇤⇤     0.046⇤⇤      0.038⇤⇤       0.025
                                                    (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.072)      (0.021)      (0.018)       (0.018)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1800                      0.012        0.002         0.022        0.340⇤⇤⇤     0.034⇤        0.034⇤
                                                    (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.014)      (0.073)      (0.018)       (0.019)
                                                     0.011        0.003         0.025⇤       0.043⇤⇤      0.326⇤⇤⇤      0.035⇤




58
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1850
                                                    (0.008)      (0.012)       (0.014)      (0.022)      (0.068)       (0.021)
             Carbon ⇥ Year=1900                      0.008        0.000         0.007        0.019        0.007         0.410⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.008)      (0.011)       (0.010)      (0.019)      (0.015)       (0.056)
             Excludes UK                             Y             Y            Y             Y            Y             Y
             A-P Multivariate F -test Statistic    29.339        21.548       15.209        14.592       16.816        40.528
             Num. obs.                              8968          8968         8968          8968         8968          8968
             The table presents the first-stage estimates of the e↵ect of carboniferous strata proximity on coal field prox-
             imity for various interaction years. All regressions include both year and city fixed e↵ects. Standard errors,
             p-values, and F -test statistics have been corrected to account for clustering as detailed in the text. *** p<0.01,
             **
                p<0.05, * p<0.1. These regressions also include year interactions with the following variables: Latitude, Longi-
             tude, Potato, Wheat, Oat, Ruggedness, Altitude, Temperature, Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast, Rivers, Atlantic2 ,
             Mediterranean2 , Coast2 , and Rivers2 . The border ⇥ year fixed e↵ects are as follows: 1500 borders ⇥ 1400, 1500
             borders ⇥ 1500, 1618 borders ⇥ 1600, 1699 borders ⇥ 1700, 1748 borders ⇥ 1750, 1804 borders ⇥ 1800, 1848
             borders ⇥ 1850, and 1908 borders ⇥ 1900.
     Table 7: Spatial Econometric Fixed Treatment E↵ects, GS2SLS: Full Controls with Border ⇥ Year Fixed E↵ects.

                                                  Post-Year=1750              Post-Year=1800               Post-Year=1850
            Coal ⇥ Post-Year is Exogenous         (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
            Coal ⇥ Post-Year                      0.062  ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                0.037  ⇤
                                                                              0.077   ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                             0.053  ⇤⇤
                                                                                                           0.083  ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                         0.061⇤⇤
                                                 (0.021)       (0.021)       (0.024)        (0.024)       (0.027)       (0.028)
            Spatial Lag ( )                       0.276⇤⇤⇤      0.283⇤⇤       0.279⇤⇤⇤       0.277⇤⇤       0.276⇤⇤⇤      0.278⇤⇤
                                                 (0.104)       (0.114)       (0.103)        (0.113)       (0.105)       (0.114)
            Spatial Error Lag (⇢)                 0.160         0.145         0.158          0.144         0.162         0.144
            Spatial Error Variance ( ✏2 )         0.188         0.178         0.188          0.177         0.189         0.178
            Counterfactual Explained (%)         27.403        16.143        39.190         26.244        66.783        43.927
            Coal ⇥ Post-Year is Endogenous
            Coal ⇥ Post-Year                      0.100⇤⇤⇤      0.066         0.116⇤⇤⇤       0.086⇤        0.122⇤⇤⇤      0.102⇤⇤
                                                 (0.038)       (0.041)       (0.041)        (0.046)       (0.041)       (0.046)
            Spatial Lag ( )                       0.222⇤⇤       0.269⇤⇤       0.216⇤⇤        0.262⇤⇤       0.229⇤⇤       0.262⇤⇤




59
                                                 (0.111)       (0.116)       (0.109)        (0.114)       (0.111)       (0.115)
            Spatial Error Lag (⇢)                 0.161         0.143         0.162          0.143         0.164         0.143
            Spatial Error Variance ( ✏2 )         0.189         0.178         0.189          0.178         0.189         0.178
            Counterfactual Explained (%)         40.497        28.258        53.403         41.031        90.856        70.649
            Excludes UK                            N             Y              N             Y             N             Y
            Num. obs.                            19305         17613          19305         17613         19305         17613
            The table presents estimates of the e↵ect of coal field proximity on log city population size. The results displayed
            in the top panel model the Coal ⇥ Post-Year interaction as an exogenous regressor whereas the results below
            instrument this variable with the Carbon ⇥ Post-Year interaction as before. All regressions include both year and
            city fixed e↵ects. Standard errors and p-values have been corrected to account for clustering as detailed in the
            text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. These regressions also include year interactions with the following variables:
            Latitude, Longitude, Potato, Wheat, Oat, Ruggedness, Altitude, Temperature, Atlantic, Mediterranean, Coast,
            Rivers, Atlantic2 , Mediterranean2 , Coast2 , and Rivers2 . The border ⇥ year fixed e↵ects are as follows: 1500
            borders ⇥ 1400, 1500 borders ⇥ 1500, 1618 borders ⇥ 1600, 1699 borders ⇥ 1700, 1748 borders ⇥ 1750, 1804
            borders ⇥ 1800, 1848 borders ⇥ 1850, and 1908 borders ⇥ 1900.
