NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POWERFUL INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS
Kathy Fogel
Liping Ma
Randall Morck
Working Paper 19809
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19809
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

We are grateful for helpful comments by Olubunmi Faleye, Wayne Lee, Tomas Jandik, Johanna Palmberg,
Jingxian Wu, Tim Yeager, seminar participants at Bentley University, National University of Singapore,
Oklahoma State University, Université Laval, University of Alberta, University of Arkansas, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and University of New Hampshire; and conference participants at
the Board Options 2014 Seat at the Table Program, 2014 Boston Area Finance Symposium, 2014 Management
Association, the Ratio Colloquium for Young Social Scientists, the Southern Finance Association
2013 meetings ("Outstanding Paper in Corporate Finance" award), Sunbelt XXXIV meeting of the
International Network for Social Network Analysis Annual Conference; Financial Research Network
Conference at the University of New South Wales. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Bank of Canada, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, the National Science
Foundation and the Arkansas Science and Technology Authority, with resources managed by the Arkansas
High Performance Computing Center. These are the views of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kathy Fogel, Liping Ma, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Powerful Independent Directors
Kathy Fogel, Liping Ma, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 19809
January 2014, Revised September 2014
JEL No. D85,G02,G3,G34,G38,K22,L2,Z13
ABSTRACT
Shareholder valuations are economically and statistically positively correlated with independent directors’
power, gauged by social network power centrality. Powerful independent directors’ sudden deaths
reduce shareholder value significantly; other independent directors’ deaths do not. More powerful
independent directors Granger cause higher valuations; the converse is not true. Further tests associate
more powerful independent directors with less value-destroying M&A, less free cash flow retention,
more CEO accountability, and less earnings management. We posit that more powerful independent
directors better detect and counter CEO missteps because of better access to information, greater credibility
in challenging errant top managers, or both.
Kathy Fogel
Sawyer Business School
Suffolk University
Boston MA 02108
kfogel@suffolk.edu
Liping Ma
Naveen Jindal School of Management
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080
Liping.Ma@utdallas.edu

Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
CANADA
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

1.

Introduction

Using network theory (Proctor & Loomis 1951; Sabidussi 1966; Bonacich 1972; Freeman 1977
1979; Watts & Strogatz 1998; Hanneman & Riddle 2005; Jackson 2008) we map a social
network comprising over 12 million connections between over 300,000 directors and top
executives of listed US firms from 1998 to 2009. We say two individuals become connected
when they serve at the same firm in the same year, and that connections, once created, persist.
Using a supercomputer, we gauge each person’s social power by combining four standard
power centrality measures: degree centrality (number of direct connections), closeness centrality
(mean degrees of separation1 from all others in the network), betweenness centrality (number of
shortest paths of connections linking other pairs of people that pass through her), and eigenvector
centrality (a recursive measure in which each individual’s social power as a weighted average of
the social power of her direct connections). We interpret greater power centrality as more access
to information and more capacity for influencing others – that is, as more power.
We say an individual is powerful if and only if at least three of her four power centrality
measures fall within the top quintiles of their respective distributions. This is justifiable for three
reasons. First, requiring at least three centrality measures in their top quintiles excludes
pathological cases, such as a director whose many connections all go through her well-connected
CEO. Such a director might have high closeness and eigenvector centralities, but her low degree
and betweenness centralities would preclude her being classified as powerful. Second, the
different centrality measures are differently robust to incomplete data (Borgatti et al. 2006).
Third, differences in interpreting these alternative measures are incompletely understood, so
requiring a majority of them to concur constitutes a conservative approach to defining power.
We say a firm has a powerful independent board if a majority of its directors are legally
independent and a majority of these are powerful.
We find that firms with powerful independent boards have economically and statistically
significantly higher firm valuations. A baseline panel regression point estimate links a powerful
independent board to a 6.58% higher Tobin’s Q all else equal. An event study reveals significant
negative abnormal returns on news of powerful independent directors’ sudden deaths, but not on
1

Milgram (1967) famously reports the mean closeness centrality between random pairs of Americans as “6º of
separation”. That is, the average American is connected to every other American by a six-person chain of
acquaintances of acquaintances. Closeness centrality is the mean length of the shortest such chains linking the
individual and every other individual.

2

the sudden deaths of other independent directors. Further tests show that more powerful
independent boards also “Granger cause” shareholder valuations, and a rough exercise to
quantify this corroborates the point estimate above. A final set of results link more powerful
independent boards to significantly fewer value-destroying takeover bids, less free cash flow
retention, more abnormal CEO turnover after poor performance, more performance-related CEO
pay, and less earnings manipulation. These findings are collectively consistent with more
powerful independent boards more effectively monitoring and disciplining errant CEOs.
The findings are highly robust. All panel regressions include industry and year fixedeffects and cluster by firm. The findings are robust to reasonable changes in key variables’
definitions, control variables, and winsorization thresholds. Jointly or separately including
controls for the social power of the CEO (Adams et al. 2010; El-Khatib et al. 2015; Fracassi &
Tate 2012), the CEO not chairing the board (Fama & Jensen 1983; Jensen 1993), the social
power and independence of a non-CEO chair, or the social power of inside directors does not
materially change the main findings. Moreover, neither a powerful CEO nor a powerful nonCEO chair, independent or not, has a statistically robust correlation with valuation.2 The findings
are also robust to broader social networks. For example, recalculating the power centralities
using an expanded network of all directors and top managers of all listed and unlisted generates
results qualitatively similar to those in the tables. In contrast, redefining the network as current
interlocks (connections disappear when the individuals are no longer at the same firm) generates
generally insignificant results, with some signs inverted. Thus, director interlocks, elsewhere
used to gauge director or CEO busyness (Ferris et al. 2003; Fich & Shivdasani 2006), do not capture
the phenomenon we study. Controlling for director business or other characteristics – experience
(Kang 2014) or intense monitoring (Faleye et al. 2012) likewise preserves our main results.

2.

Controversies Regarding Independent Directors

Fama (1980, p. 294) entrusts self-interested independent directors, valued for their reputations
for maximizing shareholder value, with informing and, if necessary, disciplining errant CEOs.
Independent directors with damaged reputations hold fewer subsequent directorships and court
2

Such a chair can be a strong voice of dissent against an errant CEO (Morck, Shleifer & Vishny 1989; Finkelstein
& D'Aveni 1994), though CEOs as chairs add value in some firms (Anderson & Anthony 1986; Stoeberl &
Sherony 1985; Rechner & Dalton 1991; Baliga et al. 1996; Brickley et al. 1997; Dalton et al. 1998; Goyal & Park
2002; Faleye 2007; Coles et al. 2013).

3

personal liability (Srinivasan 2005; Fos & Tsoutsoura 2013; Brochet & Srinivasan 2013).
However, but empirical evidence linking more independent directors to higher shareholder
valuations is inconsistent (Weisbach 1988; Daily & Dalton 1992; Yermack 1996; Dalton et al.
1998; Bhagat & Black 1999, 2002; Heracleous 2001; Shivdasani & Zenner 2004; Dulewicz &
Herbert 2004; Erickson et al. 2005; Weir & Laing 2001; Cai et al. 2009; though see also Duchin,
Matsusaka, & Ozbas 2010). Overall, Hermalin and Weisbach’s (2003) assessment “there does
not appear to be an empirical relationship between board composition and firm performance”
remains generally accepted (Adams, Hermalin & Weisbach 2010).
If shareholder value maximization leaves all firms with optimal mixes of CEO incentives,
no cross-sectional relationship need be evident between firms’ governance characteristics and
valuations (Demsetz & Lehn 1985; Hermalin & Weisbsch 1998, 2003). However, correlations
between shareholder valuations and other aspects of governance are evident (Yermack 1996;
Gompers et al. 2003; Faleye 2007; Bebchuk et al. 2009; Bhagat & Boulton 2013; and others),
suggesting a balance between shareholder value maximization and insider utility maximization
that varies across firms (Jensen & Meckling 1976; Stulz 1988; Hermalin & Weisbach 1998).
Such reasoning leads Bebchuk and Fried (2006), Cohen et al. (2013) and others to argue
that corporate insiders gain utility by limiting outside shareholders’ influence; and do so by
compromising the actual independence of legally independent director. Mace (1971, p. 99)
quotes CEOs explaining their preferences for directors who are ”friendly, if you will” and “nonboat-rockers”, and defending “selecting outside directors … much like a trial lawyer goes about
the selection of a jury”. Mace (1976) quotes a depiction of an ideal director thus:
“I have one friend that’s just greatest agreer that there ever was, and he is on a dozen
boards. I know other fellows that have been recommended to some of the same
companies as directors, but have never gotten anywhere on the list to become directors.
Because if a guy is not a yes man – no sir, he is an independent thinker – then they are
dangerous to the tranquility of the board room. Company presidents are afraid of them –
every damn one of them.”
In the UK, Higgs (2003, p. 39) reports that
“Almost half of the non-executive [independent] directors surveyed … were recruited to
their role through personal contacts or friendships. Only 4% had had a formal interview,
and 1% had obtained their job through answering an advertisement. This situation … can
4

lead to an overly familiar atmosphere in the boardroom.”
Bebchuk and Fried (2006), Cohen et al. (2013), and others view the US situation similarly.
Regulations and best practice guidelines fill US boards with nominally independent directors, but
if these are selected for timidity, they are unlikely to challenge a utility maximizing CEO.
Recent work thus uses criteria other than legal independence to gauge director
effectiveness (Shivdansani & Yermak 1999; Ferris, et al. 2003; Faleye et al. 2012; Knyazeva et
al. 2013; Coles et al. 2014). We further this line of research by gauging how powerful each
director is, positing that more powerful directors are more likely to shift CEOs away from
maximizing their private benefits and towards maximizing shareholder value.
Our findings also accord with Ngyuen and Nielsen’s (2010) finding that share prices fall
on news of independent directors’ sudden deaths. We find larger and more significant negative
abnormal returns on powerful independent directors’ sudden deaths, and insignificant abnormal
returns on the sudden deaths of non-powerful independent directors. Their weighted average
approximates Ngyuen and Nielsen’s price effect for all independent director sudden deaths.
We posit a behavioral theory of independent director effectiveness. Because more
powerful independent directors have more, and more important, connections, they have better
information and more influence. Mace (1971, p. 186) recounts directors explaining that they
avoid criticizing the CEO “to avoid looking like idiot”. Better information removes this
impediment (Bouwman 2011). Mace cites CEOs explaining that they “do not want penetrating,
issue-provoking questions, but only those that are gentle, supportive and an affirmation that the
board approves of him” and how “board members should manifest by their queries, if any, that
they approve of the management. If a director feels he has any basis for doubts or disapproval …
he should resign.” More powerful directors, with their more extensive webs of connections, can
more effectively challenge an errant CEO, rally others to action, and (if necessary) resign
without materially reducing their positions.

3.

Data and Variables

3.1

Construction of the Social Network

A social network represents each of N individual as a node and each connection between two
individuals as a line segment connecting their nodes. We use 1998 through 2009 BoardEx data to
construct annual social networks, whose nodes represent the 305,904 top executives and
5

directors of 5,947 listed US firms.
We infer a connection between two individuals if they ever served as a director or top
executive at the same firm in the same year. Once a connection forms, we assume it persists.
Formally, this makes the network a one-mode network: once lines form, they are permanent.3 As
a result, the network grows monotonically from 191,049 nodes and 5,438,006 connections
between nodes in 1998 to 313,958 nodes and 11,639,006 connections in 2009.4 About three
fourths of these are identified from BoardEx; the rest are from computerized matching on career
overlap based on itemized job histories from BoardEx director work history data. Including the
latter was deemed necessary because inspection of how the initial network represented directors
at randomly sampled large firms revealed prominent business leaders to be missing.
The network excludes non-business connections, such as shared alma maters, ethnicity,
hometowns, or other common experiences because Chidambaran et al. (2012) find non-business
ties qualitatively different from business connections. Another reason for using only business
connections is that the data, from proxy statements and annual reports, are objective, comparable
across individuals, and free of self-selection bias. A potential cost is that our representation of
the network may miss many connections in individuals’ true (unobservable) networks.5 Of
course, we cannot know if connected individuals are dear friends, mere acquaintances, or
enemies, or if they talk daily, every ten years, or are not on speaking terms. Nonetheless, our
network is far more extensive and dense than the network of current director interlocks, used
elsewhere to define busy directors (Ferris et al. 2003; Fich and Shivdasani 2006).

3

4
5

Robustness checks, discussed below, rebuild the network in various ways to account for the strength of links:
dropping links that persist for fewer than three years, that were formed five or more years ago, or both. These
exercises generate qualitatively similar to those shown.
See Appendix Table A1 for more details.
Robustness checks, discussed below, add connections formed at unlisted firms and non-profits. This denser
network of some 21 million connections yields qualitatively similar results

6

3.2

Description of Power Centrality Measures

Social network theory (Milgram 1967; Proctor & Loomis 1951; Sabidussi 1966; Bonacich 1972;
Freeman 1977, 1979; Watts & Strogatz 1998) provides measures of the power centrality of each
individual in such a network. These measures are intuitively plausible representations of social
power and are empirically validated in diverse contexts (Padgett & Ansell 1993; Banerjee et al.
2012). Each year, we calculate four power centrality measures for each individual. These are:
Individual i’s degree centrality in year t (Di,t) is simply the number of direct connections
she has with other individuals. Thus, Di,t is an integer between 0 and Nt – 1, with Nt the number
of nodes in the network in year t. A director with more direct connections plausibly has more
direct sources of information and more contacts to influence.
The next two measures, closeness and betweenness centralities, turn on the concept of the
shortest social distance, or geodesic distance, between two individuals. If i is directly connected
with j in year t, the shortest path linking them is the single line segment connecting them, so the
geodesic distance between i and j is gi,j,t = 1. If i is not directly connected to j, but is connected
with k, who is connected with j, then the shortest social path from i to j is i – k – j, which
contains two line segments, so gi,j,t = 2. In general, the shortest path between two individuals is
the chain of line segments linking them that passes through the fewest nodes possible. 6 Shortest
paths need not be unique, but the geodesic distance between them (the length of the shortest
paths from one to the other) is always well defined.
Individual i’s betweenness centrality in year t (Bi,t) is the fraction of the geodesics linking
all ½(Nt – 1)(Nt – 2) pairs of other people in that year’s network that contain her. Intuitively, a
director with a higher Bi,t has more power to connect people with each other or not, and more
power to provide information about people to each other or not.7
An individual’s closeness centrality (Ci,t) is the inverse of her mean degrees of separation
from all other individuals; that is, one over the mean length of the Nt – 1 geodesics linking her to
everyone else in the network. Intuitively, closer indirect connections to more people provide
readier access to their information and more potential to influence them.
6

Geodesic distance between two individuals is the smallest “n” in the “n degrees of separation” concept of Milgram
(1967).
7
Padgett and Ansell (1993) use high betweenness to explain Medici dominance in 15 th century Florence: other elite
families were generally connected to each other only via the Medici.

7

A fourth measure, eigenvector centrality (Ei,t) is recursively calculated. Intuitively, Ei,t is
a weighted average of the importance of the individual’s direct contacts, with weights
determined by the importance of their direct connections, with weights … and so on.
Together, these variables meaningfully measure an individual’s power in a wide range of
situations (Hanneman and Riddle 2005, Chapter 10). Higher power centrality lets individuals tap
more information from more and better-informed connections, and then pass it along, or not,
strategically. Higher power centrality also means more and stronger influence with more and
better-positioned people from whom to draw support. All of this plausibly mitigates the costs of
challenging an errant CEO.

3.3

Construction of Power Centrality Measures

Individual i’s degree centrality in year t is defined as the number of unique and direct
connections she has with other individuals that year. That is,
[1]

Di,t ≡

where xi,j,t = 1 if individuals i and j have a connection that year, and zero otherwise.
An individual’s closeness centrality is one over the mean of the lengths of the Nt – 1
geodesics between her and the Nt – 1 other individuals in the network that year. This is
[2]

Closenessi,t =

if the entire network is connected; that is, if at least one path links every two nodes.
Our network contains some small sub-networks unconnected to the rest of the nodes.
Setting the shortest distance between unconnected nodes to

in such cases is untenable

because one infinite value in the denominator of [2] reduces all affected closeness measures to
zero. Excluding infinite

is also problematic. Individual A in a small network might have a

much higher closeness than individual B in a large network, but A might have much less power
than B, whose influence extends across many more people. As an extreme case, consider a subnetwork with two connected individuals. Dropping all unconnected nodes leaves each with the
highest possible closeness of one; yet they have negligible social influence because they are
unconnected to the remaining 300,000+ people.
To account for these issues, we modify [2] and instead define closeness centrality as

8

[3]

Ci,t ≡

where nt is the size of the connected sub-network individual i belongs to in year t, and Nt is the
total number of individuals in the entire network that year. This modification rescales the
closeness measure [2] by the size of each individual’s connected subnetwork to more accurately
reflect her overall social power. It follows that individuals in a larger connected subnetwork have
higher closeness values than those in smaller connected subnetworks, all else equal.
Betweenness is the incidence of the individual being on the shortest path between pairs of
other members of the network. For every possible triplet of individuals i, j and k in year t, define
the indicator variables
[4]
The betweenness centrality of k is then
[5]

Bi,t ≡

where

is the number of geodesics linking i and j that year. Scaling the numerator by

is necessary because, although the length of the geodesics linking two individuals is unique,
there can be more than one equally short path.
Eigenvector centrality is recursively calculated. Individual i’s eigenvector centrality is
her importance, weighed by the similarly calculated importance of all her direct contacts, each
weighted by the importance of their direct connections, and so on. More formally, assume the
existence of this measure for person i in year t, and denote it Ei,t. In matrix notation, with the
vector of individuals’ eigenvector centralities Et ≡ [E1,t, … Ei,t, … EN,t], the recursions collapse
into the condition that λtEt′Et = Et′AtEt. Thus, Et is an eigenvector of the matrix of connections
At, and λt is its associated eigenvalue. To ensure that Ei,t ≥ 0 for all individuals, the modified
Perron-Frobenius theorem is invoked and the eigenvector centrality values of the individuals in
the network are taken as the elements of the eigenvector
eigenvalue,

associated with At’s principal

. Repeating this exercise for each individual each year generates the individual-

year panel variable Ei,t.
To make the centrality measures comparable with each other and over time, we rank the
raw values of each centrality measure of all individuals each year and assign a percentile value,
with 1 the lowest and 100 the highest, to each individual’s centrality measures each year. In other
9

words, regardless of the size of the network, a person with a higher valued centrality percentile is
more centrally positioned in the network than a person with lower value. We denote these
normalized rank-transformations of Di,t, Bi,t, Ci,t, and Ei,t as di,t, bi,t, ci,t, and ei,t respectively. In
some of the discussion below, we also consider the simple mean of the four percentile measures,
and denote this pi,t.

3.4

S&P 1500 Officers and Directors Sample

Hereafter, we focus on officers and directors with S&P 1500 firms in 1998 to 2009, as flagged
by RiskMetrics. We retrieve annual data including firms’ CUSIPs and GVKEYs from
COMPUSTAT and match these with RiskMetrics data by CUSIP and year. We then merge these
data with the power centrality measures described above, matching by GVKEY and year, and
then by individuals’ first and last names. This yields a 132,020 individual-year panel dataset of
S&P 1500 officers and directors. The matching by names was first done electronically, then
double checked (concatenating names and sorting by distance) to flag near misses, and then
checked again by manually examining all non-matches to correct for nicknames and other name
variant forms. Each observation then contains RiskMetrics data about the individual’s position,
legal independence, board committee membership, and other characteristics as of that year, as
well as her power centrality measures as estimated above.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the power centrality measures of all S&P 1500
officers and directors. Panel A summarizes the raw power centrality measures: Di,t, Bi,t, Ci,t, and
Ei,t. Their mean betweenness of 0.00973% means the typical director sits on about one in ten
thousand shortest paths between pairs of other individuals in the full network (top executives and
directors at listed firms). Note that, even within the S&P 1500, the distribution is skewed: the
mean exceeds the 75th percentile and the maximum is 0.677%; so the most powerful person is on
one of every 150 shortest paths between all pairs of other listed firm top managers and directors.
The typical S&P 1500 director’s mean closeness is 25.3%, indicating he is about four (1/0.253 =
3.94) degrees of separation from any other randomly chosen top manager or director of a listed
firm. The median degree centrality of 197 indicates that the median S&P 1500 director has direct
ties with 197 other individuals in the network. The raw eigenvector centrality measures are not
amenable to intuitive explanation.
Panel B of Table 1 presents analogous summary statistics for S&P 1500 firm officers and
10

directors’ percentile social power measures: di,t, bi,t, ci,t, and ei,t. The means of all four measures
are in their top quartiles. Thus, S&P 1500 directors are more powerful on average than are
officers and directors of listed firms in general – the larger sample used to construct individuals’
percentile scores. Still, all four measures range from the lowest or second lowest to the top
percentile, so S&P 1500 directors span the full range from negligible to paramount social power.
S&P 1500 CEOs and non-CEO chairs (not shown) are similarly more powerful than the
average top manager or director, and likewise span the full range from slight to dominant social
power. The mean social power measures of S&P 1500 directors uniformly exceed those of S&P
1500 CEOs, regardless of the power centrality measure used. Directors who chair the board have
uniformly higher mean power centrality than directors in general.

3.5

Defining Powerful Independent Directors

We define a director as an independent director (ID) of a firm if she is so designated in the
firm’s SEC filings as tracked in RiskMetrics data. The legal definition of an independent director
mandates “no relationship with the company, except the directorship and inconsequential
shareholdings, that could compromise independent and objective judgment” (Securities and
Exchange Commission 1972). Note that an individual’s independence is a firm-dependent
individual-level variable. The same person can be an independent director one firm’s board and
an insider director on another’s board.
We define an individual as powerful in terms of a centrality measure in a given year if her
value in that measure lies within the top quintile of its empirical distribution across all top
executives and directors in the full network of top managers and directors of all listed firms. To
operationalize this, we define four individual-year indicator variables, one for each percentile
centrality measure. We set each indicator to one if the individual’s percentile measure that year
falls in the top quintile of its distribution across the full network, and to zero otherwise. Thus, we
denote whether or not individual i is powerful in terms of her degree centrality using
[6]
and define δ(bi,t ≥ 80), δ(ci,t ≥ 80), and δ(ei,t ≥ 80) analogously.
We must next combine the four power centrality measures to make composite individuallevel social power measures. Table 1 Panel C presents the correlation matrix of the centrality

11

measures across all S&P 1500 CEOs, non-CEO chairs, and directors. The four centrality
measures are highly correlated, with correlation coefficients averaging 64%, and statistical
significance under 0.01. Typical in this regard is Jeffrey Garten, who served at Blackstone and
Lehman Brothers, and has high centrality by all four measures. His mean di,t over the sample
period is at the 94th percentile, his mean bi,t is at the 98th, his mean ci,t, and ei,t are both at the 93rd
percentile. This highly positive correlation justifies using the means of the four measures as in
individual-level general social power measure.
However, the four measures disagree in other cases. Inspection of the data shows that
these cases are often individuals with a small number of connections, but at least some of which
to extremely powerful people. In such cases, low degree (few direct connections to other people)
and betweenness centrality (she is an endpoint in most of the shortest that contain her)
accompany high closeness (her powerful connections link her in a few steps to many other
people) and eigenvector (her connections are powerful, as are theirs, and so on) centrality. For
example, Ray Wilkins Jr., a director at H&R Block in 2000, ranked in the 83 rd percentile by
closeness and the 88th by eigenvector centrality, but only in the 66th percentile by degree
centrality and the 68th by betweenness centrality. He is therefore not a PID in 2000 (though he
does attain PID status subsequently).
The highest correlation for directors in the Table 1 Panel C is that between percentile
closeness and percentile eigenvector power centrality ( = 0.94), the same pattern evident above.
Moreover, betweenness correlates best with degree centrality ( = 0.81). However, individuals’
power measures are not cleanly split along these lines, for degree centrality correlates most
highly with closeness centrality.
Unfortunately, drawing nuanced distinctions between the four power centrality measures
is problematic in this context. For example, connections might proxy for access to information
(Freeman 1979; Freeman et al. 1980; Hossain et al., 2007; Kiss and Bichler 2008). If so, degree
centrality implicitly assumes that information decays completely after one degree of separation
(Bolland 1988), while the closeness and eigenvector measures assume a gradual decay as degrees
of separation increase. Betweenness is then interpretable as capturing the number potentially
distinct information flows the individual can tap. In contrast, if power is primarily ability to
influence other people’s decisions, different considerations arise. For example, Borgatti (2006)
argues that individuals with higher closeness can better propagate information, but those with
12

higher betweenness can better disrupt the flow of information to others. Thus, Lee et al. (2010)
argue that betweenness best captures “power as influence”. However, the number of one’s direct
connections might also count the number of people one can directly influence, and the closeness
and eigenvector measures potentially then capture how easily one can persuade friends to
influence friends. A range of strategic issues arises in either case, the modeling of which is
beyond the scope of this study.
Also, sampling omissions can destabilize some measures more than others. Costenbader
and Valente (2003, 2004) find degree centrality the most stable and eigenvector centrality the
least stable. Because we may well miss some links between individuals in this network, sampling
omission is a potential concern.
Given these conflicting and incompletely resolved issues, and the high empirical
correlations between the four measures in our data, we follow Hossain et al. (2007) and employ
composite measures. The two composite measures of an individual’s social power that we use in
the tables include one dichotomous indicator and one continuous measure. The dichotomous
composite social power measure requires a clear majority of the individual’s four centrality
measure to concur that she is powerful. It therefore define individual i as powerful if three or
more of her power centrality measures fall into the top quintiles of their distributions in year t.8
That is,
[7]
If, in a given year, a firm’s director is both powerful (

and independent, we say she is

a powerful independent director (PID) at that firm that year.
The same individual’s continuous composite social power measure is the mean of her
three highest power centrality percentile measures,
[8]

.
The robustness section below shows that the results that follow are not dependent on

these specific ways of combining the four individual power centrality measures into a composite
measure. Reasonable alternatives to [7] and [8] generate very similar results. For example,
8

All four of the centrality measures of 39.7% of directors in the firms we ultimately use in our regressions fall in
the top quintiles of the centrality measures’ distributions based on all network nodes. This sample thus contains a
disproportionate fraction of powerful directors. All four centrality measured tend to be high in unison. For
example, only 6.7% of the directors in our sample make the top quartiles in only Bi, Ci and Di; only 2% do so in
only Bi, Ci and Ei; and a mere 1% do so in only Bi, Di and Ei.

13

requiring all four individual measures to be in their top 20% in [7] and using the mean of all four
measures in [8] generate identical patterns of signs and significance to those in the tables below.
So does using the first principal component of

. Using cut-offs slightly

different from 20% also generates similar results.

3.6

Identifying Firms with Powerful Independent Boards

Aggregating to the firm-level, we designate firm h’s board as an independent board (IB) in year t
if a majority of its directors are listed as independent directors in its disclosure documents, and
record this with the firm-year indicator variable
[9]
We then set the firm-level indicator variable PINh,t to one if a majority of firm h’s independent
directors are PIDs that year and to zero otherwise:
[10]
The product of these is a third firm-level indicator variable flagging a powerful independent
board (PIB) for firms with a majority of independent directors, a majority of whom are PIDs:
[11]
Thus,

is one in a given year for firm h if and only if most of its directors are independent

directors and most of these are powerful.
The alternative continuous firm-level measure of independent director centrality is
[12]
This variable is the mean across all mh,t of firm h’s independent directors in year t of the
composite power centrality measure, pi,t, as defined in [8]
Also, we say a firm has a non-CEO chair and set the indicator NCCh,t to one if firm h’s
CEO does not chair its board that year, and to zero otherwise. To indicate whether or not firm h
has a powerful non-CEO chair, we define
[13]
Thus, firm h has a powerful non-CEO chair if the chair is powerful, in that at least three of her
four centrality measures fall into the top quintiles of their distributions, and is not the CEO.
14

As a continuous analog of [13], we retain mean of the chair’s top three individual power
centrality measures, her pi,t, if she is not also the CEO. We denote this firm-level variable
NCCCh,t, and set it to zero if the CEO chairs the board.
Finally, we analogously identify a firm as having a powerful CEO (PCEO) in year t if
three or more of its CEO’s four centrality measures fall within the top quintiles of their
individual-level distributions that year. Thus, we define
[14]
We also retain mean of the CEO’s three highest power centrality measures, her pi,t, and denote
this firm-level variable CEOCh,t. The S&P 1500 CEOs’ mean composite social power is the 74th
percentile of the individual-level distribution of composite social power; their median is the 80th.
Table 2 lists and defines variables used in the tables below.
For each year from 1998 to 2009, Table 3 tallies fractions of firms with majority
independent boards and powerful independent boards, fractions of firms that separate the CEO
and chair jobs, and fractions of firms that appoint a powerful director as the non-CEO chair. The
fraction of boards whose directors are mostly independent rises monotonically, as does fraction
whose independent directors are mostly powerful. An increasing fraction of firms also separate
the CEO and chair jobs and name a powerful director to be chair. The importance of powerful
independent directors on key board committees also rises steadily through time.

3.7

Financial and Governance Data

We obtain financial accounting data from Compustat and stock return data from CRSP for our
sample of S&P 1500 firms from 1999 to 2010. CEO compensation data are from ExecuComp
and additional data on directors on S&P 1500 firms’ boards are from Risk Metrics. These include
her age and assignments to audit, nominating, and compensation committees. We require firms
to have at least three years of financial data. Merging these with the dataset described above
generates our final firm-year panel contains 15,889 firm-years spanning 1,956 firms.
We measure shareholder valuation by Tobin’s Q, the book value of total assets plus the
market value of common shares minus book value of equity and deferred taxes, all divided by
the book value of total assets. We denote this Qh,t.

15

Our main regressions include control variables known to affect Tobin’s Q. These include
variables shown elsewhere to correlate with Tobin’s Q (Morck et al. 1988; Hall 1993; Yermack
1996): size, the logarithm of total assets; leverage (total debt over total assets), profitability (net
operating cash flow plus depreciation and amortization over total assets); growth (net capital
expenditure over net property, plant and equipment), and intangibles (advertising and R&D
expenditure, both scaled by total assets and set to zero if unreported). We also control for key
corporate governance variables shown elsewhere to affect Tobin’s Q. These include the logs of
CEO age (Morck et al. 1988) and board size (Yermack 1996), as well as the e-index of Bebchuk,
Cohen, and Farrell (2009). The last is a composite index reflecting the absence or presence of
economically important management entrenchment devices: supermajority rules for amending
corporate charters, similar requirements for mergers, limits on amending bylaws, staggered
boards, poison pills, and golden parachutes. All explanatory variables are lagged one year.
Tobin’s Q in our sample of S&P 1500 firms has a mean of 1.58 and a standard deviation
of 1.55. The average board has nine directors. Independent directors are a majority in 91% of all
firm-year observations, but a majority of these are powerful in only 52% of all observations. The
mean independent director centrality is at the 81th percentile of its distribution based on all listed
firms’ directors and top managers. The summary statistics of the other variables accord other
studies using these data. Details are provided in Appendix Table A2.

4.

Empirical Results and Discussion

We hypothesize that a predominance of powerful independent directors might correlate with
elevated shareholder value. In exploring this hypothesis, we also consider the presence of a
powerful CEO, powerful non-CEO chair, or powerful non-independent directors.

4.1

Board Power Structure and Shareholder Valuation

Table 4 summarizes OLS regressions of Tobin’s Q on industry and year fixed-effects and a
standard set of control variables, allowing for firm-level clustering. The control variables attract
typical coefficients and significance levels. Larger firms, larger boards, more levered firms, and
firms with more entrenched managers (indicated by a higher e-index) all have significantly lower
shareholder valuations. Firms with more capital investment, higher R&D spending, and higher
profitability tend to have higher Tobin’s Q.
16

Regressions 4.1 through 4.3 shows that shareholders attach a statistically significant
valuation premium to firms with powerful independent boards, but not to firms with a powerful
CEO or a powerful director other than the CEO chairing the board. Regressions 4.4 through 4.6
show that more powerful independent directors correlate with higher valuations, but that more
powerful CEOs and non-CEO chairs do not. Regressions 4.7 and 4.8 include three firm-level
power centrality measures, the discrete and continuous variants respectively, and show that only
the power centrality of the independent directors correlates with higher shareholder valuations.
The coefficients on independent director power in Table 4 are highly economically
significant. Regression 4.2 implies that shareholders attach a premium of 4.2% (0.0658 over the
mean Q of 1.58) to the market value of a firm with a powerful independent board.
These results contrast starkly with otherwise similar regressions using standard measures
of board independence and the separation of the CEO and chair roles. Panel A of Table 5 shows
negative or insignificant coefficients for the fraction of directors designated independent in proxy
statements, the dummy for a majority of directors so designated, and the dummy for a two-thirds
majority of independent directors. These regressions suggest that powerful independent directors
predominating correlates with elevated valuations, but that legally independent directors
predominating does not. The dummy for the CEO not chairing the board is also insignificant.
Panel B of Table 5 compares powerful independent directors to powerful insider
directors. Regressions 5B.1 and 5B.2 show that a majority of insider directors being powerful, a
dummy constructed analogously to the PIBh,t, dummy for a majority of independent directors
being powerful, correlates with elevated valuation. Regressions 5B.3 through 5B.5 show that a
powerful insider other than the CEO chairing the board also correlates with higher valuation, but
a powerful independent director doing so does not. Regressions 5B.6 and 5B.7 run horseraces
between all these indicators. These reveal both indicators to be highly significant. At face value,
these results point to power mattering more than independence for directors, and power
mattering for a non-CEO chairing the board, but only if the chair is an insider.

4.2

Identification Discussion

The panel regressions in Tables 4 and 5 are consistent with powerful independent directors,
powerful non-independent directors, and powerful non-independent non-CEO chairs elevating
shareholder valuations (direct causality). However, high valuations might also help firms attract
17

and retain powerful directors (reverse causality), or other factors might both elevate shareholder
valuations and draw powerful directors (latent factor causality). Controls proxying for plausible
latent factors mitigate the last problem. This section undertakes a series of tests to distinguish
direct from reverse causality.
The first is an event study of stock price reactions to directors’ sudden deaths, which
Nguyen and Nielsen (2010) argue are exogenous. LexisNexis and Google searches flag directors
in our sample who die in office, and the date and the of death. We exclude deaths coincident with
confounding events, such as earnings or M&A announcements, or the 9-11 attacks; as well as
deaths after long illnesses. We define decedent directors as independent or not, and as powerful
or not, as above. Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) are daily total returns minus market
model estimates, the parameters estimated using data for pre-event days -300 through -46. This
exercise is repeated using value- and equal-weighted CRSP total market returns.
Figure 1 summarizes the event study results, defining abnormal returns as stock returns
minus the CRSP equal-weighted index return. Firms’ stock prices drop significantly and
substantially on news of a powerful independent director’s sudden death. In contrast, cumulative
abnormal returns (CARs) are insignificant on news of other independent directors’ sudden deaths
and positive on powerful insider directors’ sudden deaths.
Panel A of Table 6 begins a statistical investigation of the patterns in Figure 1 by
replicating the findings of Nguyen and Nielsen (2010): on average, stocks fall on news of
independent directors’ sudden deaths. However, regardless of the event window, and of how the
CARs are weighted, Panel A shows that stock prices drop only on news of the sudden death of a
powerful independent director, and actually rise on news of the sudden death of a non-powerful
independent director. Nguyen and Nielsen’s finding is thus the average of two distinct effects.
The panel reports market model CARs using CRSP value-weighted market returns. Equal
weighted CARs make [-1, +2] difference between powerful and non-powerful independent
director deaths insignificant (p = 0.11), but uniformly boost the point estimates and significance
of the positive CARs around powerful insider director sudden deaths and the significance of the
difference in CARs between powerful and non-powerful insider directors. In particular, the plevel for that difference drops from +0.12 to 0.08 for the [-1, +1] window.
Each column of Panel B summarizes a regression of CAR on main-effects of the
decedent director being powerful (PD) and independent (ID), and on their cross product, which
18

equals the powerful independent director (PID) indicator. The main-effect of the independent
director dummy is uniformly insignificant, indicating that independent director sudden deaths do
not move the stock price unless the decedent is powerful.
The main-effect of the powerful director dummy is uniformly positive and significant in
three of the eight regressions. Because the regressions all also include the PID cross-product,
these positive and intermittently significant main-effect coefficients indicate that stocks do not
fall, and may even rise, on news of the sudden death of a powerful insider director. The
interaction, the PID dummy, attracts a significant negative coefficient in every case, except the
value-weighted analysis using the seven-day window [-3, +3], which attracts a similar point
estimate with a p-level of 14%. The negative coefficients on PID are uniformly larger than the
positive coefficients on PD, so the net reaction to powerful independent director deaths is
negative. In the three regressions where PD attracts a significant positive coefficient, the net
effect on news of the death of a powerful independent director is negative but insignificant.
Thus, five of the eight regressions in Panel B suggest a negligible stock price reaction to the
sudden death of a powerful insider director and a significant negative stock price reaction to the
sudden death of a powerful independent director. The other three regressions point to a
significantly positive reaction to the sudden death of a powerful insider director and negligible
reaction to the sudden death of a powerful independent director. We have only twelve sudden
deaths of powerful insider directors; but the mean cumulative abnormal return around these
events is positive and significant, with CAR[-1,3] = 1.61% (p = 0.02), suggesting that powerful
insider directors depress shareholder valuations.
These findings are consistent with interpreting Tables 4 and 5 as powerful independent
directors elevating shareholder value and elevated shareholder value attracting more powerful
insiders on the board. The effects in Panels A and B are economically significant. For example,
the sudden death of a powerful independent director triggering a 2% drop share price drop
implies a loss in shareholder value of over $200 million, given the average market capitalization
of $11.64 billion in the relevant sample of firms.
Two caveats merit discussion: First, the event study results are valid only if sudden
director deaths are exogenous. Nguyen and Nielsen (2010) make a strong case for exogeneity.
Endogeneity would have directors dying because the share price moved. For example, directors
might commit suicide because of impending bad news about the firm. The sudden deaths include
19

four suicides – one by a powerful independent director and three by non-powerful independent
directors. Rerunning all the event study tests dropping these observations generates result
virtually identical to those in the tables and Figure 1. The sudden deaths include no murders, but
some might go unreported.9 The roughly two percent negative abnormal returns, though
substantial to shareholders, seem insufficient to induce heart attacks or other adverse shocks
sufficient to kill directors. Moreover, such an interpretation of our findings would have to
explain why powerful independent directors die when the share price drops, other independent
directors die randomly, and powerful insider directors die when the share price rises.
Second, the CARs gauge the value shareholders attach to powerful independent directors
relative to likely replacements. Thus, normal returns might occur on powerful independent
director deaths if shareholders expect equally powerful independent replacements. Succession
studies reveal regressions to the mean in CEO ability (Brown 1982; Harrison, Richard & Max
Bazerman. 1995), and shareholders might expect something analogous in director power. That is,
unusually powerful directors would be replaced by directors of more average power. To explore
this, we use Boardex director announcement data to identify the directors who replaced a random
sample of 49 (40 independent and 9 non-independent) directors who suddenly died. A clear
regression to the mean is evident. Powerful independent director’s replacements are more
powerful than average, but significantly less powerful than the deceased directors they replace.10
Replacements are also significantly younger (mean age 55 at appointment) than the deceased
directors (mean age 69 at death). Thus, shareholders might well expect very powerful
independent directors’ replacements to be more powerful than average, but less powerful than
the decedents. If so, the CARs in Table 6 usefully predict the sign of the valuation shareholders
attach to powerful independent directors, but may understate its magnitude.
A second approach employs Granger causality tests. The variable X Granger-causes the
variable Y if lagged values of X significantly explain Y in regressions controlling for lagged
values of Y. Here, X and Y are alternately a measure of director power and the firm’s Tobin’s Q,
and the regressions use firm-level clustering and industry and year dummies.
Consistent with powerful independent directors Granger causing high shareholder
valuations, the left panel of Table 7 shows all combinations of lags of the two independent

9
10

We are grateful to an anonymous referee for suggesting this line of argument.
We are grateful to Nagpurnanand Prabhala and Michael Weisbach for suggesting these tests.

20

director power measures, PIBh,t and IDCh,t, significant in regressions explaining shareholder
valuation. The right panel finds no evidence of shareholder valuations Granger causing the
continuous independent director power measure, IDCh,t; and only a three-year lag of the
powerful independent board dummy, PIBh,t, significant in regressions explaining Tobin’s Q. In
contrast, the right panel reveals high shareholder valuations Granger causing powerful nonindependent directors and non-CEO chairs; while the left panel shows none of them Granger
causing shareholder valuation.
Granger causality tests are circumstantial evidence of causality only. However, their
consistency with the event study strengthens the case for powerful independent directors raising
shareholder valuations.
As noted above, event study CARs can understate the true value shareholders attach to
powerful independent directors if director power regresses to the mean around successions. The
CARs might also mismeasure economic significance if further news about directors’ true power
emerges subsequently. Lengthening the event window can capture this, but adds noise from other
shifting determinants of valuation. Granger causality tests can help detect causation, but are also
ill-suited to quantifying economic significance. As a naïve first-pass, we run first differences of
Q on lagged first differences in the number of powerful independent directors and controls from
Table 4. The results (not shown) associate one additional PID with a statistically and
economically significant five to six percent increase in shareholder valuation. In contrast, neither
another powerful non-independent director (ΔPNID) nor gaining a powerful non-independent
non-CEO chair correlates with a change in valuation, and a powerful independent director
becoming chair actually correlates with a 2.5% drop in valuation.
The combined results of Tables 6 and 7 weigh in favor of more powerful independent
directors elevating shareholder valuations, but of powerful non-independent directors and chairs
not doing this. Identification is never conclusive in econometrics, but these exercises strongly
favor interpreting Tables 4 and 5 as powerful independent directors boosting valuations and high
valuations attracting powerful insider directors and non-CEO chairs.

4.3

How Powerful Independent Directors Matter

This section explores channels through which powerful independent directors might raise
valuations. This exercise considers situations in which the potential for corporate governance
21

problems is plausibly large and explores the importance of powerful independent boards in each.

M&A
Mergers and acquisitions rank among CEOs’ most important decisions. Many acquisitions
reduce bidder shareholder value, and boards not providing sound advice, or not reining in CEOs
who ignore it, are often blamed (Moeller et al. 2004, 2005).
If powerful independent directors render boards more effective, their presence ought to
check value-destroying M&A bids. However, Byrd and Hickman (1992) link board
independence to low bidder abnormal returns; suggesting that legally independent directors do
not help in this context. Nonetheless, powerful independent directors might behave differently.
A sample of acquisitions of listed firms by S&P 1500 firms from 2000 to 2009 for which
Securities Data Company (SDC) data are available lets us estimate bidder cumulative abnormal
returns (CARs) and overall shareholder valuation effects (size-weighted averages of bidder and
target CARs). Cumulative abnormal returns are measured from three days prior to the
announcement date until three days after it, and denoted CAR [-3, 3]. This exercise excludes
acquirers with pre-acquisition majority ownership or post-acquisition ownership below 100% to
eliminate effects associated with stalled takeovers. The final sample comprises 632 takeover bids
by 379 distinct acquirers.
Table 8 presents OLS regressions of bidder CARs or bidder and target weighted average
CARs on merger announcement on either the powerful independent board dummy, PIB, or mean
independent director power centrality, IDC. Controls include the log of CEO age (Jenter and
Lewellen 2011), the log bidder size (Moeller et al. 2004, 2005), the E-index entrenchment
measure of Bebchuk et al. (2009), dummies for the target and bidder being in the same industry
(Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny 1990) and for the payment being primarily in the bidder’s stock
(Myers and Majluf 1984), as well as year and bidder industry fixed-effects. Also, the size of the
deal is measured as deal value over bidder size in regressions explaining the bidder CAR, but as
deal value over combined size in regressions explaining the combined CAR. Finally, because ElKhatib, Fogel, and Jandik (2015) find firms with better-connected CEOs more prone to launch
value-destroying M&A bids, we control for the dummy indicating a powerful CEO, PCEOh,t, in
regressions where the dummy PIBh,t measures independent director power, and for the
continuous CEO power centrality measure, CEOCh,t, in regressions where the continuous
22

variable IDCh,t measures independent director power. In general, the controls attract coefficients
consistent with prior studies. In particular, the CEO power measures are significant and negative,
with point estimates consistent with El-Khatib et al. (2015).
The coefficients of interest show acquirers with powerful independent boards making
statistically and economically significantly better M&A decisions. A powerful independent
board correlates with a bidder CAR higher by 1.6% and a combined CAR higher by 1.5%. Given
number and sizes of the deals in our sample, this constitutes an economically significant addition
of $498 million to acquirer shareholder wealth and of $495 million to overall shareholder wealth.

Free Cash Flow
Jensen (1986) argues that self-interested managers are apt to retain earnings and invest
excessively from shareholders perspective, and thus to pay lower dividends than shareholders
would prefer. This free cash flow agency problem is more evident in firms with lower
shareholder valuations, higher cash flows, and lower dividend payouts (Lang and Litzenberger
1989; Lang, Stulz, and Walkling 1991; La Porta et al. 2000). Our proxy for likely free cash flow
problems is therefore an indicator variable set to one if the firm has all of the following: a below
median Tobin’s Q, an above median cash flow to property, plant and equipment ratio, and a
below median dividend payout ratio; and to zero otherwise.
Jensen (1986) argues that free cash flow agency problems are larger in firms where
boards are less effective in advising and monitoring the CEO. To explore this, Table 9 presents
probit regressions of the likely free cash flow problem dummy on either the powerful
independent board dummy, PIBh,t, or the continuous independent director power centrality
variable, IDCh,t. As in previous studies, lower leverage and greater managerial entrenchment also
correlate significantly with likely free cash flow problems.
Consistent with Jensen’s argument, both independent director power measures attract
significant negative coefficients. The point estimates are economically significant. For example,
a powerful independent board corresponds to a 22% lower likelihood of a firm being designated
as likely to suffer from free cash flow problems.

CEO successions and pay
Weisbach (1988) reports weak past financial performance increasing the odds of forced CEO
23

exit in firms with more independent boards.11 To investigate forced CEO successions, we follow
Vancil (1987), who argues that a board satisfied with the departing CEO generally selects a
senior officer – one of the old CEO’s team - as successor so as to disturb existing policies as
little as possible. Vancil views a new CEO from outside as reliably indicates dissatisfaction with
the status quo. To exclude normal CEO retirements, we follow Morck et al. (1990) in using a
subsample of CEO successions with departing CEOs aged 60 or younger. We flag as abnormal
successions firm-year observations in which a successor from outside the firm replaces a CEO
aged 60 or younger.
Table 10 presents probit regressions of a dummy variable, set to one for abnormal
successions and zero otherwise, on the firm’s total stock return the prior year, RETh,t-1, an
independent director power measure, and, following Weisbach (1988), their interaction. The
alternative power measures are: the powerful independent board dummy, PIBh,t-1, a powerful
independent nominating committee dummy variable, PIBNh,t-1, set to one if a majority of the
independent directors on the nominating committee are powerful independent directors (PIDs),
the continuous mean independent director centrality measure, IDCh,t-1, and an analogously
defined mean of the power measures of independent directors on the nominating committee,
IDCNh,t-1. Weisbach (1988) argues that the coefficient on the interaction reflects the board’s
propensity to fire an underperforming CEO. In Table 10, these coefficients are uniformly
negative, and two of the four, those of the interactions of lagged stock returns with PIBh,t-1 and
PIBNh,t-1 are statistically significant.
To assess economic significance, we follow Norton, Wang, and Ai (2004) and construct
distributions of firm-year observation-level estimated changes in the conditional probability of
forced CEO turnover per unit change in past stock return - first with, and then without, a
powerful independent board or nominating committee. The differences in the distributions’
means range from -20.8% to -0.863% using 10.1; and from -24.8% to +0.264% using 10.2. The
means of the implied interactions are -18.3% and -21.2% for 10.1 and 10.2, respectively; and
both are statistically signiﬁcant. Their economic significance can be summarized as follows: The
mean change in the predicted conditional probability of a forced CEO turnover, given a one unit
worse past return (i.e. a return of -50% versus +50% return), is about eighteen percentage points

11

See also Warner, Watts and Wruck (1988). These findings are extensively replicated and extended (e.g. Parrino
1997; Goyal and Park 2002; Hermalin and Weisbach 2003; Hazarika et al. 2012; Kaplan and Minton 2012).

24

higher with a powerful independent board than without one, all else equal. The equivalent
difference in 10.2 is a twenty-one percentage point higher probability of a forced CEO turnover
with a powerful independent nominating committee versus without one, all else equal.
Including additional controls for CEO power and non-CEO chair power and independence leaves
the results in the table virtually unchanged, and the added controls are uniformly insignificant.
Other regressions (not shown) explain logs of cash, equity, and total CEO pay, all from
ExecuComp, with the interaction of the prior year’s stock return with one of: the PIBh,t dummy;
the continuous independent director power measure, IDCh,t; a powerful independent
compensation committee dummy, PIBCh,t, set to one if firm h’s compensation committee has a
majority of PIDs in year t and to zero otherwise; or the mean power centrality of all the
independent directors on that committee that year, IDCCh,t. In each case, the purpose is to see if
past stock returns correlate more strongly with CEO pay in firms which more powerful
independent directors in general or on the compensation committee.
All of these regressions control for the main effects of the independent director power
measure used, the prior year stock return (Murphy 1985), CEO power (Renneboog & Zhao 2011;
Engelberg et al. 2013; El-Khatib et al. 2015), CEO age (McKnight 2000), the E-index for CEO
entrenchment (Bebchuk, et al. 2009; Borokhovich et al. 1997; Core et al. 1999), firm size
(Murphy 1985), board size (Yermack 1996), leverage (Ortiz-Molina 2007), profitability (Deckop
1988), and capital and R&D spending (Cheng 2004). The control variables’ coefficients and plevels all affirm previous results. Notably, the independent director power main effects show
more powerful independent boards and compensation committees paying CEOs more in total, in
equity-linked pay, and in cash pay. These findings elaborate on the positive link between CEO
pay and director independence found by Ryan and Wiggins (2004) by showing independent
director power to matter as well. We also reproduce the positive link between CEO power and
all measures of CEO pay found by Renneboog and Zhao (2011) Engelberg et al. (2013), and ElKhatib et al. (2015).
The coefficients of interest, those on the interactions of independent director power with
the prior year’s stock return, are only intermittently positive and significant in explaining equitylinked and are insignificant in regressions explaining total pay and cash compensation.
Insignificant main effects on the prior year’s stock returns suggest that even that tenuous link is
absent in firms whose boards and compensation committees contain relatively few powerful
25

independent directors or relatively powerless independent directors.
In summary, CEO pay may be more performance-related if the full board or
compensation committee is more powerful independent director-dominated, but these findings
are not robust to different measures of independent director power. However, more powerful
independent directors dominating the full board or nominating committee does boost the odds of
an underperforming CEO being fired and replaced by an outsider, rather than a member of the
CEO’s team, an outcome Vancil (1987) characterizes as a rebuff to the CEO.

Earnings Management
Empirical evidence links more earnings manipulation to less effective internal controls (Doyle et
al. 2007), less disciplinary executive turnover (DeAngelo 1988; Dechow and Sloan 1991), and
less independent boards and audit committees (Klein 2002). We estimate abnormal earnings
accruals following Jones (1991), but adjusting for growth in credit sales (Dechow et al. 1995),
and benchmarking against control firms – those with the closest ROA in the same industry that
year (Kothari et al. 2005).
Each regression in Table 11 explains abnormal earnings accruals with an independent
director power measure: either the dummy PIBh,t or the continuous measure IDCh,t for the full
board; or their analogs gauging the power of independent directors on the audit committee, the
dummy variable PIBAh,t and the continuous measure IDCAh,t. The table reveals significantly
lower abnormal accruals in firms with powerful independent boards or audit committees in five
of the eight specifications, and coefficients bordering on significance (p ≈ 0.11) in two more. The
point estimate in 11.1 is economically significant: it corresponds to roughly half the overall mean
of the abnormal accruals measure. The coefficients on the controls show more earnings
management if the CEO is older or less powerful, or if the firm undertakes less capital
investment. Reported earnings are also higher in firms that manage earnings more aggressively.
These findings are consistent with powerful independent directors elevating shareholder
valuations by limiting earnings management.

5.

Robustness Checks

The results above survive a battery of robustness checks, in that re-estimating the tables using
alternative estimation approaches, variable constructions, and other reasonable variants yields
26

qualitatively similar results. By this, we mean the powerful independent director measures’
coefficients have patterns of signs and significance identical to those in the tables and
magnitudes consistent with those in the tables. The results fail a few specific robustness checks,
thereby highlighting aspects of the social network that appear critical. The following applies to
all of the tables, except where specific table numbers are mentioned.
The results are not driven by outliers. All continuous variables are windsorized, and
outlier tests reveal no observations with undue influence.
The results are not driven by the general way we build the social network. The power
centrality measures in the tables assume connections formed in one year persist thereafter. As
robustness checks, we construct alternative networks assuming connections form only after three
years of overlap, assuming connections break after five years of non-overlap, and both.
Qualitatively similar results to those in the tables ensue in each case.
However, the results are not robust to using only current interlocks on S&P1500 boards
to define connections. Using only current connections formed at all firms (S&P 1500 firms and
non-S&P1500 firms) generates qualitatively similar results, except that IDC loses significance in
explaining the combined bidder plus target abnormal return in Table 8 and the PIB interaction
with prior return loses significance in explaining forced CEO turnover in Table 10. Using current
and past service together at large (S&P1500) firms preserves some results, but the IDC power
measure loses significance in Table 4 and neither measure remains significant in Tables 7, 8 and
11. Using only current service together at S&P1500 firms – that is, dropping both connections
formed through past work together anywhere and connections formed at non-S&P1500 boards –
leaves a much sparser network in which virtually none of the results survive. Redefining
“powerful” independent directors to include only the top 10%, 5% or 1% of the power centrality
measures distributions in this network does not restore the results. Non-robustness here may be
economically meaningful: current interlocks on S&P1500 boards work well as measures of
director busyness (Ferris et al. 2003; Fich and Shivdasani 2006). Power centrality in the denser
and larger network used in the tables may better reflect director power. The two are very
different concepts, so a lack of robustness is reasonable.
The results are not driven by the precise ways we define individuals’ social power. The
tables define a powerful independent director (PID) as having at least three of the four centrality
measures in the top quintiles of their empirical distributions, constructed using the centrality
27

measures of all officers and directors of listed firms covered by BoardEx. Using the top 15% or
25%, rather than top quintiles, of the distributions also generates qualitatively similar results.
Qualitatively similar results also ensue if we use top quintiles of distributions based on all
officers and directors of both listed and unlisted firms, rather than of listed firms only.
Qualitatively similar results to those in all the tables ensue if we require all four power
centrality measures to be in their top quintiles to classify an individual as powerful: the number
of powerful independent directors falls, the Table 6 significance levels improve, however the
PIB dummy in Table 4 and Panel B of Table 5 loses significance. Otherwise, the results are
qualitatively similar to those in the tables. All of the tables are robust to redefining the
continuous independent director power centrality measure as the mean across independent
directors of the means of all four of their individual social power measures, rather than of the
means of their three highest social power measures.
The results are not driven by the precise way we combine individual independent
directors’ power measures to construct overall independent director power measures at the firmlevel. The tables are robust to changing the fraction of independent directors who must be
powerful for the indicator variable PIBh,t to be one. Other reasonable values, such as 3/5, 2/3, 3/4,
or 4/5, yield qualitatively similar results. Using a PID ratio, defined as the fraction of
independent directors who are powerful, also yields results qualitatively similar to the tables.
Principal components analysis is another approach to estimating a single summary power
measure for each individual from her four power centrality measures. At the director-year level,
the resulting first principal component captures 86% of the variation of the four rescaled
centrality measures (bi, ci, di and ei,). The first principal component using the raw centrality
measures (Bi, Ci, Di and Ei,) accounts for 62% of their total variance. In both cases, the first
principal component approximates an equally weighted mean of the four individual centrality
measures. Substituting the mean first principal component values of the firm’s independent
directors, constructed using either the four raw centrality measures or the four percentile
centrally measures, for IDCh,t in regressions explaining Q generates results qualitatively similar
to the tables. The first principal component estimate of CEO power, if also included in these
regressions, is insignificant.
The results are not driven by the time window. However, using different windows
exposes the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) reforms, implemented in 2003, as a possible institutional
28

break-point.12 Post-SOX data yield results qualitatively similar to those in the tables. In contrast,
the pre-SOX subsample generates insignificant coefficients in Table 4 and Panel B of Table 5,
though Panel A of Table 5 is preserved. As a further robustness check, we run year-by-year
cross-section regressions for each of 2000 through 2010 using the Table 4 specifications. The
coefficients on PID and IDC are always positive, but attain significance only intermittently –
PID in 2007, 2009 and 2010 and IDC in 2001, 2003, 2005, 2007 and 2010. The lack of
significance in the cross sections and pre-SOX subsample may reflect fewer observations.
The specific way we estimate Tobin’s Q does not drive our results. The tables take
Tobin’s Q as the book value of total assets plus the market value of common shares minus the
book values of equity and deferred taxes, all divided by the book value of total assets. As a
robustness check, we recalculate Tobin’s Q using as numerator the sum of market value of
common shares, book value of short-term and long-term debts, liquidation value of preferred
shares, and deferred taxes and investment tax credit, while using the same denominator: total
book assets. Qualitatively similar results ensue.
The regressions cluster standard errors by firm to control for firm-level persistence and
include industry fixed-effects to control for unobserved time invariant latent industry-level
factors. Clustering by industry, which also allows for cross-correlations among firms within each
industry, generates qualitatively similar results to those in the tables.
The results are not dependent on the inclusion of the control variables; though dropping
them also provides additional information. Dropping the control variables and retaining only
year and industry fixed-effects generates qualitatively similar results to those in the tables, except
that a powerful CEO becomes significantly associated with higher Tobin’s Qs. Restoring the
controls one-by-one reveals R&D spending critical in rendering the CEO’s power insignificant.
R&D intensive firms have both unusually high Tobin’s Q and unusually powerful CEOs.
However, including both variables leaves R&D still significant and CEO power insignificant.
Powerful CEOs have a higher median age, but dropping the CEO age variable does not
qualitatively change the results.
Controlling for other board characteristics does not change the results. Including a
dummy for an intensive monitor board, which Faleye et al. (2012) define as having a majority of
independent directors on at least two of its three main monitoring committees, does not
12

We are grateful to Nagpurnanand Prabhala for suggesting these tests.

29

qualitatively change the results. No qualitative changes ensue from including a dummy for a
busy board, which Fich and Shivdasani (2006) define as a board in which a majority of
independent directors serve on three or more other boards. Including a measure of independent
director experience, defined as in Kang (2014) as the independent directors’ mean years of
experience on boards of publicly traded companies also leaves our results qualitatively
unchanged. Controlling for high independent director share ownership (Bhagat and Bolton 2013)
also generates results qualitatively similar to the tables. Controlling for the experience or share
ownership of all directors, rather than just independent directors, likewise leaves our results
qualitatively unchanged.
Table 8, which shows the positive link between powerful independent directors and
bidder and total M&A announcement CARs, is subjected to additional robustness checks. The
Table 8 regressions include CEO power measures because El-Khatib et al. (2013) find that CEOs
with high social network centrality supervise value destroying M&A activity. Table 8 is the sole
set of results in which CEO power is significant. Moreover, not including CEO power in Table 8
leaves the PIBh,t dummy insignificant and the continuous independent director power measure,
IDCh,t, insignificant in explaining bidder returns and significantly (p = 0.08) negative in
explaining combined bidder and target returns. These results suggest that the interplay between
powerful CEOs and powerful independent directors may be uniquely important in takeover bids.
Including all the control variables in Table 4 in the Table 8 regressions yields qualitatively
similar results; and the additional control variables are all insignificant. Including variables from
Table 5 – the indicator variables or continuous power centrality measures for powerful nonindependent directors and/or independent and/or non-independent non-CEO chairs – in these
regressions also yields qualitatively similar results, and the additional power measures are again
all insignificant, save that the powerful non-independent board dummy, PNIBh,t, attracts a
negative and significant sign if PCEOh,t is dropped.
Including CEO power measures in Tables 9 and 10 generates qualitatively similar results
to those shown. Tables 8, 9 and 10 are robust to including the extra explanatory variables used in
Table 4. Qualitatively similar results also ensue after including a dummy for a powerful director
other than the CEO chairing the board and/or dummies for that individual being independent or
not.
Table 10 drops CEO successions where the departing CEO is over 60 to exclude normal
30

CEO retirements and ensure that an outsider as successor more reliably indicates a forced
turnover event. Using 65, rather than 60, renders the coefficients associated with powerful
independent directors insignificant, as does using all CEO turnover events regardless of the
exiting CEO’s age.

6.

Conclusions and Potential Implications

Collectively, these results are consistent with powerful independent directors elevating
shareholder valuations, in part at least, by deterring value-destroying CEO decisions such as
economically unsound merger bids and excessive free cash flow retention, by forcing out
underperforming CEOs and meaningfully linking CEO pay to firm performance, and by
discouraging earnings manipulation. The results are also consistent with independent directors
who are not powerful failing to do these things.
These findings extend the use of social power measures in finance beyond the pioneering
work of Hwang and Kim (2009), who show that CEOs with strong social ties to their
independent directors have more scope for self-interested behavior. We use social power
measures in an entirely different way that highlights director heterogeneity. These findings thus
supplement other work on other forms of director heterogeneity (e.g. Ferris et al. 2003; Faleye et
al. 2012; Knyazeva et al. 2013).
The high incidence of powerless independent directors in the data is consistent with many
CEOs selecting independent directors for timidity (Mace 1971; Hwang and Kim 2009). Post
mortems of corporate governance shipwrecks suggest this has not changed greatly in many
boards, often describing corporate cultures that equated dissent with disloyalty. For example, an
Enron executive describes an “atmosphere of intimidation” in which many worried about the
firm, but none dared confront the CEO (Cohan 2002). We posit that more powerful independent
directors are less apt to be timid “yes men” in such situations because their social networks
provide information that lets them more reliably identify CEO waywardness as well as influence
that lets them more effectively challenge a wayward CEO.
Our findings support models of director decision-making based on behavioral finance
(Bebchuk and Fried 2006, p. 4) or bounded rationality.13 For example, our findings are
13

See Bernardo and Welch (2001). Obedience to a leader or group is arguably a form of bounded rationality, akin to
an information cascade (Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandaqni et al. 1992).

31

potentially consistent with Kahneman’s (2011) thesis that people default to “rule of thumb”
decision making (thinking fast) and resort to the more metabolically costly rational analysis of
alternative options (thinking slow) only if thinking fast fails to converge. Here, the rule of thumb
(acquiescing to the CEO) fails to converge if other credible authorities (a sufficient number of
sufficiently powerful independent directors) voice disagreement. This interpretation of our
findings is also supported by work in social psychology. Milgram (1967, 1974) finds that
humans reflexively obey authority, and cites Darwin’s (1871) thesis that such a reflex elevated
the survival odds of prehistoric hominids and therefore may be biologically innate. However, he
also finds that voiced dissent, especially if the voice carries authority, can interrupt unthinking
obedience. Voiced dissent also interrupts conformity to group opinions (Asch 1951) and other
forms of “groupthink” (Janis 1971). We posit that more powerful independent directors
constitute a more informed and credible potential voice of dissent, and can more reliably
interrupt reflexive obedience to a wayward CEO in the full board and in board committee.
Our regressions include year fixed-effects, and consequently net out any overall time
trend. However, the rising incidence of powerful independent directors in Table 3 is consistent
empirical findings (Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick 2003; Kaplan and Minton 2012; Bebchuk et al.
2013) suggesting a secular shift in the balance of power favoring public shareholders over
corporate insiders in large US listed firms in these years.
To the extent that shareholder value maximization is a public policy objective, corporate
governance regulations might be evaluated for their ability to instill optimal dissent in boards.
Obviously, boards cannot be debating societies. CEOs selected for expertise necessarily know
things others do not, and excessively active boards can unduly curtail trailblazer CEOs (Adams,
Almeida, and Ferreira 2005). Our findings suggest that reforms to director nomination and
selection processes might be evaluated, in part at least, for their propensity to screen out “yes
men” while protecting legitimate CEO discretion.
Finally, our results suggest a framework for analyzing business ethics in corporate
boards. Hirschman (1970) explains that people, confronted with unethical or inept behavior in an
organization, have three response options: exit, voice, and loyalty. By selecting independent
directors for impotence, a discreditable CEO leaves them only two choices: exit (resignation) or
loyalty (becoming a “yes man”). As Milgram (1974) discusses at length, the “loyalty” option
typically does not nullify the individual’s ethical sense. Milgram’s subjects administered electric
32

shocks to a stranger (a confederate) when ordered to do so, and explained their actions as “doing
my duty”, “doing what was expected of me”, “loyalty to the experimenter”, and “not making a
scene” in exit interviews.14 Milgram describes this behavior as an agentic shift - a deontological
(duty-based) norm displacing a teleological (outcomes-based) norm, rather than as a suspension
of ethical norms.15 In boards, “yes men” directors might come to view themselves as more
ethical if they better fulfill their duty to support their CEO. Discussions of business ethics on
boards might usefully consider the economic implications of deontological ethics and the
feasibility and implications of fostering teleological ethical thinking.

References
Adams, R., Almeida, H., Ferreira, D. 2005. Powerful CEOs & their impact on corporate performance.
Review of Financial Studies 18, 1403–1432.
Adams, R., Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M. 2010. The role of boards of directors in corporate governance: a
conceptual framework & survey. Journal of Economic Literature 48, 58-107.
Anderson, C., Anthony, R. 1986. The New Corporate Directors, New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Asch, S. 1951. Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modification & Distortion of Judgment. In: H.
Guetzkow, ed. Groups, Leadership & Men. Pittsburgh: Carnegie Press.
Baliga, B. R., Moyer, R. C. & Rao, R. S. 1996. CEO Duality & Firm Performance: What’s the fuss?
Strategic Management Journal, 17, 41–53.
Banerjee, A. 1992. A simple model of herd behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107:797-817.
Banerjee, A., Chandrasekhar, A., Duflo E., Jackson, M. 2012. The diffusion of microfinance. NBER
working paper 17743.
Bebchuk, L., Cohen A., Ferrell, A. 2009. What matters in corporate governance? Review of Financial
Studies 22, 783-827.
Bebchuk, L.A., Fried, J. 2006. Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive
Compensation. Harvard University Press. Cambridge, MA.
Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., Wang, C.C.Y. 2013. Learning & the Disappearing Association between
Governance & Returns. Journal of Financial Economics 108, 323-348
Bernardo, A., Welch, I. 2001. On the evolution of overconfidence & entrepreneurs. Journal of Economics
& Management Strategy 10, 301-330.
Bhagat, S., Black, B. 1999. The uncertain relationship between board composition & firm performance.
Business Lawyer 54, 921-963.

14
15

These results are extensively replicated (see Blass 2004; Packer 2008; Morck 2009, 2010).
See Sheridan and King (1972); Martin et al. (1976); Miller (1986); Merritt and Helmreich (1996); Blass (1998,
2000, 2004); Tarnow (2000) and others. Burger (2009) reproduces the agentic shift, but not its interruption; and
acknowledges this may reflect their more limited experimental framework.

33

Bhagat, S., Black, B. 2002. The non-correlation between board independence & long-term firm
performance. Journal of Corporation Law 27, 231-274.
Bhagat, S., Bolton, B. 2013. Director ownership, governance & performance. Journal of Financial &
Quantitative Analysis 48, 105-135.
Bikhchandaqni, S., Hirschleifer, D., Welch, I. 1992. A theory of fashion, custom & cultural change.
Journal of Political Economy 100, 992-1026.
Black, B., Cheffins, B., Klausner, M. 2006. Outside director liability. Stanford Law Review 58:1055-159.
Blass, T. 1998. A cross cultural comparison of studies of obedience using the Milgram Paradigm.
Unpublished working paper.
Blass, T. 2000. The Milgram Paradigm after 35 years: some things we know about obedience to authority.
In: Blass, T., ed. Obedience to Authority – Current Perspectives on the Milgram Paradigm.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Blass, T. 2004. The Man Who Shocked the World: The Life & Legacy of Stanley Milgram. Basic Books.
Bolland, J. M. 1988. Sorting out centrality: an analysis of the performance of four centrality models in
real & simulated networks. Social Networks 10(3)233-253.
Bonacich, P. 1972. Factoring & weighting approaches to status scores & clique identification. Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 2, 113-120.
Borgatti, S.P. 2006. Identifying sets of key players in a social network. Computational & Mathematical
Organization Theory 12, 21-34.
Borgatti, S.P., Carley, K.M., Krackhardt, D. 2006. On the robustness of centrality measures under
conditions of imperfect data. Social Networks 28 (2006) 124–136.
Bouwman, C. H. S. 2011. Corporate governance propagation through overlapping directors. The Review
of Financial Studies, 24(7)2358.
Brickley, J., Coles, J., Jarrell, G. 1997. Leadership structure: separating the CEO & chairman of the
board. Journal of Corporate Finance 3 (1997)189-220.
Brochet, F., Srinivasan, S. 2013. Accountability of independent directors: Evidence from firms subject to
securities litigation. Journal of Financial Economics 111, 430-449.
Brown, M. C. 1982. Administrative Succession & Organizational Performance: The Succession Effect.
Administrative Science Quarterly 27(1)1-16
Burger, J. 2009. Replicating Milgram: would people still obey today? American Psychologist 64, 1-11.
Byrd J., Hickman K. 1992. Do outside directors monitor managers? Evidence from tender offer bids.
Journal of Financial Economics 32:195-222.
Cai J., Garner J., Walkling R. 2009. Electing directors. Journal of Finance 64, 2389-421.
Cheng, S. 2004. R&D expenditures & CEO compensation. The Accounting Review 79, 305-328.
Chidambaran, N. K., Kedia, S., Prabhala, N.R. 2012. CEO-Director Connections & Corporate Fraud: Not
just whether you are connected but how. University of Maryland working paper.
Cohan, J. 2002. "I didn't know” & "I was only doing my job": Has corporate governance careened out of
control? A case study of Enron’s information myopia. Journal of Business Ethics 40(2)275-299.
Cohen, L., Frazzini A., Malloy, C. 2013. Hiring cheerleaders: board appointments of "independent"
directors. Unpublished working paper. Harvard Business School.

34

Coles, J., Daniel, N., Naveen, L. 2014. Co-opted boards. Review of Financial Studies, Review of
Financial Studies 27(6)1751-1796.
Coles J., Daniel N., Naveen L. 2008. Boards: does one size fit all? Journal of Financial Economics
87:329-56
Core J., Holthausen R., Larcker D. 1999. Corporate governance, chief executive officer compensation &
firm performance. Journal of Financial Economics 51:371-406
Costenbader, E., Valente, T. W. 2003. The stability of centrality measures when networks are sampled.
Social networks 25(4)283-307
Costenbader, E., Valente, T. W. 2004. Corrigendum to "the stability of centrality measures when
networks are sampled". Social networks 26(4)351
Daily, C. M., Dalton, D. R. 1992. The relationship between governance structure & corporate
performance in entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 375–386
Dalton, D., Daily, C., Ellstrand, A., & Johnson, J. 1998. Metaanalytic review of board composition,
leadership structure & financial performance. Strategic Management Journal 19, 269–90
Darwin, C., 1871. The Descent of Man. London: John Murray.
DeAngelo, L. 1988. Managerial competition, information costs & corporate governance: the use of
accounting performance measures in proxy contests. Journal of Accounting & Economics 10:3-36
Dechow, P., Sloan, R. 1991. Executive incentives & the horizon problem: an empirical investigation.
Journal of Accounting & Economics 14, 51–89
Dechow, P., Sloan, R., Sweeney, A. 1995. Detecting earnings management. Accounting Review 70:193225
Deckop, J. 1988. Determinants of chief executive officer compensation. Industrial & Labor Relations
Review 41:215-226.
Doyle, J., Ge, W., McVay, S. 2007. Accruals quality & internal control over financial reporting.
Accounting Review 82:1141-70.
Duchin, R., Matsusaka, J., Ozbas, O. 2010. When are outside directors effective? Journal of Financial
Economics 96 195–214.
Dulewicz, V., Herbert, P. 2004. Does the composition & practice of boards & directors bear any
relationship to the performance of their companies? Corporate Governance: An International
Review 12(3)263-80
El-Khatib, R., Fogel, K., Jandik, T. 2013. CEO network centrality & merger performance. Journal of
Financial Economics 116 (2)349–382
Engelberg, J., Gao, P, Parsons, C. 2013. The Price of a CEO's Rolodex. Review of Financial Studies
26(1)79-114
Erickson, J., Park, Y., Reising, J., Shin, H. 2005. Board composition & firm value under concentrated
ownership: the Canadian evidence. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 13(4)387-410
Faleye, O. 2007. Classified boards, stability & strategic risk taking. Financial Analysts Journal 65:54-65
Faleye, O., Hoitash R., Hoitash U. 2012. The cost of intense board monitoring. Journal of Financial
Economics. 101:160-181
Fama, E. F. 1980. Agency problems & the theory of the firm. Journal of Political Economy 88, 288-307
Fama, E., Jensen, M. 1983. Separation of ownership & control. Journal of Law & Economics 26:301-25
35

Ferris, S., Jagannathan, M., Pritchard, A. 2003. Too busy to mind the business? Monitoring by directors
with multiple board appointments. Journal of Finance, 58, 1087–1112
Fich, E., Shivdasani, A. 2006. Are busy boards effective monitors? Journal of Finance, 61(2)689‐ 724
Finkelstein, S., D’Aveni, R. 1994. CEO Duality as a double-edged sword: how boards of directors
balance entrenchment avoidance & unity of command. Academy of Management Journal 37
(5)1079-08.
Fos, V., Tsoutsoura, M. 2013. Shareholder democracy in play: career consequences of proxy contests.
Unpublished working paper. University of Illinois Business School
Fracassi, C., Tate, G. 2012. External Networking & Internal Firm Governance. Journal of Finance
67:153-194
Freeman, L. 1977. Set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry 40, 35-41
Freeman, L. 1979. Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Social Networks 1:215-39
Freeman, L. C., Roeder, D., Mulholland, R. R. 1980. Centrality in social networks: II. Experimental
results. Social Networks 2(2)119-41
Gompers, P., Ishii, J. J, Metrick, A. 2003. Corporate governance & equity prices. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118(1)107-55
Goyal V., Park C. 2002. Board leadership structure & chief executive turnover. Journal of Corporate
Finance 8:49-66
Hall, B. 1993. The value of intangible corporate assets: An empirical study of the components of Tobin's
Q. NBER working paper 93207
Harrison, R., Bazerman, M. 1995. Regression to the Mean, Expectation Inflation, & the Winner's Curse in
Organizational Contexts.In Roderick Kramer & David Messick, eds. Negotiation as a Social
Process, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 69-95
Hazarika S., Karpoff J., Nahata R. 2012. Internal corporate governance, CEO turnover, & earnings
management. Journal of Financial Economics 104:44-69
Hanneman, R., Riddle, M. 2005. Introduction to Social Network Methods. University of California,
Riverside. CA. Available in digital format at http://faculty.ucr.edu/~hanneman
Heracleous, L. 2001. What is the impact of corporate governance on organisational performance?
Corporate Governance: An International Review 9, 165–173
Hermalin, B. , Weisbach, M. 1998. Endogenously chosen boards of directors & their monitoring of the
CEO. American Economic Review 88, 96-118
Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M. 2003. Boards of directors as an endogenously determined institution: a
survey of the economic literature. Economic Policy Review 9, 7-26
Higgs, D. 2003. Review of the role & effectiveness of non-executive directors. Available at
http://www.bis.gov.uk/files/file23012.pdf
Hirschman, A. O. 1970. Exit, Voice & Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations & States.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Hossain, L., Chung, K., Murshed, S. 2007. Exploring temporal communication through social networks.
In: Baranauskas, C., Palanque, P., Abascal, J., Barbosa, S. eds. Human-Computer Interaction –
INTERACT 4662, 19-30). Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Springer
Hwang, B., Kim, S. 2009. It pays to have friends. Journal of Financial Economics 93:138-158.
36

Jackson, M. 2008. Social & Economic Networks. NY: Princeton University Press
Janis, I. 1971. Groupthink. Psychology Today 5(6)43–46, 74–76.
Jensen, M. 1986. Agency cost of free cash flow, Corporate Finance & Takeovers, American Economic
Review 76(2)323-29
Jensen, M. 1993. The modern industrial revolution, exit & the failure of internal control systems. Journal
of Finance 48:831-80
Jenter, D., Lewellen, K. 2011. CEO preferences & acquisitions. NBER working paper 17663
Jones, J. 1991. Earnings management during import relief investigations. Journal of Accounting Research
29:193–228
Kahneman, D. 2011. Thinking, fast & slow. Farrar, Straus & Giroux: New York
Kang, S. 2014. Experienced independent directors. Unpublished working paper. University of Michigan
Kaplan S., Minton B. 2012. How has CEO turnover changed? International Review of Finance 12:57-87
Kelman, H., Hamilton, V. 1989. Crimes of obedience. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press
Kiss, C., Bichler, M. 2008. Identification of influencers - measuring influence in customer networks.
Decision Support Systems 46(1)233-53
Klein, A. 2002. Audit committee, board of director characteristics & earnings management. Journal of
Accounting & Economics 33, 375–400
Knyazeva, A., Knyazeva, D., Masulis, R. 2013. The supply of corporate directors & board independence.
Review of Financial Studies 26(6)1561-605
Kothari, S., Leone, A., Wasley, C. 2005. Performance matched discretionary accrual measures. Journal of
Accounting & Economics 39, 163–197
La Porta, R., Florencio, L., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. 2000. Agency problems & dividend policies around
the World. Journal of Finance 55(1)1-33
Lang, L., Litzenberger, R. 1989. Dividend announcements. Journal of Financial Economics 24(1)181- 91
Lang, L., Stulz, R., Walkling, R. 1991. A Test of the free cash flow hypothesis: the case of bidder returns.
Journal of Financial Economics 29(2)315-35
Lee, S. H. M., Cotte, J., Noseworthy, T. J. 2010. The role of network centrality in the flow of consumer
influence. Journal of Consumer Psychology 20, 66-77
Mace, M. 1971. Directors - Myth & Reality. Harvard business School Press
Martin, L., Chapman, G., Spillane, R. 1976. Obedience under conditions demanding self-immolation.
Human Relations 29(4)345
McKnight, P. 2000. CEO age & top executive pay: A UK empirical study. Journal of Management &
Governance 4 (3)173-87
Merritt, A., Helmreich, R. 1996. Human factors of the flight deck: the influence of national culture.
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 27:5-24
Milgram, S. 1974. Obedience to Authority. Harper & Row
Milgram, S. 1967. The small world problem. Psychology Today 1(1)60- 7
Miller, A. 1986. The obedience experiment: A case study of controversy in social science. Praeger: NY

37

Moeller, S., Schlingemann, F., Stulz, R. 2004. Firm size & the gains from acquisitions. Journal of
Financial Economics 73 201-228
Moeller, S., Schlingemann, F, Stulz, R. 2005. Wealth destruction on a massive scale: A study of acquiring
firm returns in the merger wave of the late 1990s. Journal of Finance 60:757-82
Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. 1988. Management ownership & market valuation. Journal of
Financial Economics 20: 293-315
Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. 1989. Alternative mechanisms for corporate control. American
Economic Review 79: 842–52
Morck, R. 2010. Loyalty, Agency conflicts & corporate governance. In: Baker, H., Nofsinger, J. eds.
Behavioral Corporate Governance. John Wiley & Sons, 453-74
Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. 1990. Do managerial motives drive bad acquisitions? Journal of
Finance 45:31-8
Morck, R. 2009. Behavioral finance in corporate governance – economics & the ethics of the Devil’s
advocate. Journal of Management & Governance 12:179-200
Murphy, K. 1985. Corporate performance & managerial remuneration: an empirical analysis. Journal of
Accounting & Economics 11-42
Myers, S., Majluf, N. 1984. Corporate financing & investment decisions when firms have information
that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13:187 – 221
Nguyen, B., Nielsen, K. 2010. The value of independent directors: evidence from sudden deaths. Journal
of Financial Economics 98, 550-67
Norton, E., Wang H., Ai C. 2004 Computing interaction effects & standard errors in Logit & Probit
models, the Stata Journal 4, 2, 154-67
Ortiz-Molina, H. 2007. Executive compensation & capital structure: the effects of convertible & straight
deb. Journal of Accounting & Economics 43, 69-93
Packer, D. 2008. Identifying systematic disobedience in Milgram's obedience experiments: A metaanalytic review. Perspectives on Psychological Science 3(4)301-4
Padgett, J., Ansell, C. 1993. Robust action & the rise of the Medici, 1400-1434. American Journal of
Sociology 98 (6):1259-1319
Parrino R. 1997. CEO turnover & outside succession: A cross-sectional analysis. Journal of Financial
Economics 46:165-97
Proctor, C., Loomis, C. 1951. Analysis of sociometric data. In: Holland, P. W., Leinhardt, S., eds.
Research Methods in Social Relations 561–86. Dryden Press, New York
Rechner, P., Dalton, D. 1991. CEO duality & organizational performance: A longitudinal analysis.
Strategic Management Journal 12:155–61
Renneboog, L., Zhao, Y. 2011. Us knows us in the UK: on director networks & CEO compensation.
Journal of Corporate Finance 17(4)1132-57
Ryan H., Wiggins R. 2004. Who is in whose pocket? Director compensation, board independence, &
barriers to effective monitoring. Journal of Financial Economics 73:497-524
Sabidussi, G. 1966. Centrality Index of a Graph. Psychometrika 31:581
Securities & Exchange Commission. 1972. Standing Audit Committees composed of Outside Directors;
Release 123
38

Sheridan, C., King, K. 1972. Obedience to authority with an authentic victim. Proceedings of the 80th
Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association 7:165-56
Shivdasani, A., Zenner, M. 2004. Best practices in corporate governance: What two decades of research
reveals. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 16:29–41
Srinivasan, S. 2005. Consequences of financial reporting failure for outside directors: evidence from
accounting restatements & audit committee members. Journal of Accounting Research 43:291334
Stoeberl, P., Sherony, B. 1985. Board efficiency & effectiveness, In: Mattar, E., Ball, M., eds. Handbook
for Corporate Directors, McGraw-Hill, New York, 12.1-10
Tarnow, E. 2000. Self-destructive obedience in the airplane cockpit & the concept of obedience
optimization. In: Blass, T. ed. Obedience to Authority – Current Perspectives on the Milgram
Paradigm. Psychology Press
Vancil, R. 1987. Passing the Baton. Harvard Business School Press
Warner J., Watts R., Wruck K. 1988. Stock prices & top-management changes. Journal of Financial
Economics 20(1/2)461-92
Watts, D., Strogatz, S. 1998. Collective dynamics of 'small-world' networks. Nature 393 (6684)440–442
Weir, C., Laing, C. 2001. Governance structures, director independence & corporate performance in the
UK, European Business Review 13(2)86- 95
Weisbach, M. 1988. Outside directors & CEO turnover. Journal of Financial Economics 20:431 – 460.
Yermack, D. 1996. Higher market valuation of companies with a small board of directors. Journal of
Financial Economics 40:185-211

39

Figure 1: Cumulative abnormal returns on news of director sudden deaths
Directors are classified as powerful (three of their four power centrality measures lie in their distributions’
top quintiles) or not, and as legally independent (as reported by RiskMetrics) or not. This partitions
decedent directors into four groups. Cumulative abnormal returns are total returns minus market model
estimated returns using the CRSP value-weighted return to proxy for the market. Market model
parameters are estimated using data from days -200 to -46, with day 0 the date of the sudden death of one
of its directors.
1.75%

1.50%

Powerful independent director deaths (101 obs.)
Non-powerful independent director deaths (71 obs.)
Powerful insider director deaths (12 obs.)
Non-powerful insider director deaths (42 obs.)

1.25%

1.00%

0.75%

0.50%

0.25%

0.00%
-1

0

1

-0.25%

-0.50%

40

2

3

Table 1: S&P 1500 Officer and Director Power Centrality Measure Characteristics
Power centrality measures are based on a social network whose nodes all individual directors and
executives included in Boardex. Connections between two individuals in the network form when they
serve at the same listed firm in the same year and persist thereafter. The network is followed from 1998,
when it has 191,049 individual nodes and 5,438,006 connections between nodes, to 2009, when it has
313,958 nodes and 11,639,006 connections. Each individual’s four power centrality measures are: degree
centrality (no. of direct connections), closeness centrality (mean degrees of separation from all others in
the network), betweenness centrality (no. of shortest paths of connections linking other pairs of people
that pass through her), and eigenvector centrality (a recursive measure in which each individual’s social
power as a weighted average of the social power of her direct connections). Statistics describe the 19,223
unique S&P 1500 firm directors only, a panel of 132,020 director-years from 1998 to 2009. Panel A
summarizes their raw power centrality measures; Panel B summarizes their power centralities’ positions
within the full network. Panel C presents Pearson correlation coefficients, clustered at individual level, of
the individual centrality measures with each other. The upper triangle (above the diagonal line) uses raw
measures and the lower triangle (numbers in italics) uses percentile measures. All correlation coefficients
are significant at 1% or better. More detail is provided in Appendix Table A1.
Panel A: Characteristics of Raw Power Centrality Measures
Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

25th

Median

75th

Max

Betweenness

Bi

0.00973%

0.0229%

0.00%

0.000147%

0.00216%

0.00905%

0.677%

Closeness

Ci

25.3%

3.20%

0.000688%

23.2%

25.4%

27.6%

34.4%

Degree

Di

197

245

1

43

104

245

2,211

Eigenvector

Ei

0.0581%

0.371%

0.00%

0.000129%

0.00213%

0.0117%

4.15%

Panel B: Characteristics of Power Centrality Measure Percentage Ranks
Betweenness

bi

79.8

25.7

1

73

90

98

100

Closeness

ci

78.2

21.3

1

66

85

95

100

Degree

di

77.0

22.4

1

63

86

95

100

Eigenvector

ei

76.5

20.9

1

65

81

94

100

Panel C: Pearson Correlation of CEO and Director Centrality Measures
Betweenness

Closeness

Degree

Eigenvector

Betweenness

bi

1.00

0.388

0.780

0.273

Closeness

ci

0.748

1.00

0.616

0.232

Degree

di

0.809

0.887

1.00

0.501

Eigenvector

ei

0.677

0.942

0.813

1.00

41

Table 2: Variables and Definitions
Variable

Definition

Measures of Director Independence and Power

Powerful Non-Independent Board (PNIB)
Independent Director Centrality (IDC)

Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if over 50% of directors are so listed in proxy, 0 otherwise.
Director-level variable set to 1 if at least three of director’s four centrality measures are in their
distributions’ top quintiles
Annual firm-dependent director-level dummy set to 1 if director is both powerful (PD = 1) and listed
as independent in proxy, 0 otherwise
Firm-dependent director-level dummy set to 1 if director is both powerful (PD = 1) and listed as a
non-independent (insider) in proxy, 0 otherwise
Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if board is both an independent (IB = 1) and majority of
independent directors are powerful independent directors, 0 otherwise
Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if majority of insider directors are powerful, 0 otherwise
Annual firm-level mean of means of each independent director’s highest 3 centrality measures

Non-Independent Director Centrality (NIDC)

Annual firm-level mean of means of each non-independent director’s highest 3 centrality measures

Independent Board (IB)
Powerful Director (PD)
Powerful Independent Director (PID)
Powerful Non-Independent Director (PNID)
Powerful Independent Board (PIB)

Measures of Chair Independence and Power
Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if CEO does not chair board, 0 otherwise
Annual firm-level variable equal to mean of chair’s top 3 percentile centrality measures if CEO is
Non-CEO Chair Centrality (NCCC)
not chair, 0 otherwise
Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if chair is powerful director (PD = 1) and not CEO, 0 otherwise
Powerful Non-CEO Chair (PNC)
Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if chair is powerful independent director (PID = 1), 0 otherwise
Powerful Independent Non-CEO Chair (PINC)
Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if chair is powerful non-independent director (PNID = 1) and not
Powerful Non-independent Non-CEO Chair (PNINC)
CEO, 0 otherwise
Annual firm-level variable equal to mean of chair’s highest 3 percentile centrality measures if chair is
Independent Non-CEO Chair Centrality (INCC)
an independent director, 0 otherwise
Annual firm-level variable equal to mean of chair’s highest 3 centrality measures if chair is nonNon-independent Non-CEO Chair Centrality (NINCC)
independent director other than CEO, 0 otherwise
Non-CEO Chair (NCC)

Measures of CEO Power
Powerful CEO (PCEO)
CEO Centrality (CEOC)

Annual firm-level dummy set to one if CEO is powerful, in that at least three of her four centrality
measures are in their distributions’ top quintiles
Annual firm-level variable equal to the mean of the CEO’s highest 3 percentile centrality measures

Regression Variables (all are annual firm-level variables)
Tobin’s Q (Q)

Book value of assets minus book value of equity plus market value of equity minus deferred tax
obligations, all over book value of assets

42

CEO Age (CEOA)
Board Size (BSIZE)
E-Index (ENDX)
Assets (ASSETS)
Leverage (LEV)
Probability (PROF)
Tangibility(TANG)
Capital Investment(CAPEX)
Cash Flows(CF)
Research & Development (R&D)
Advertising (ADV)

CEO age
Total number of directors on board
Entrenchment Index (Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell 2009)
Total assets, in billions of dollars
Total debt over total assets
Net income over total assets
Property, Plant, and Equipment over total assets
Net Capital expenditure over last year’s property, plant and equipment
The sum of net income, depreciation, and amortization over last year’s property, plant and equipment
Research & Development expense over total assets
Advertising expense over total assets

Event Study Variables
Cumulative Abnormal Return (CAR)
Sudden Death (DEATH)

Stock’s daily return minus NYSE/AMSE/NASDAQ value-weighted market return, compounded
Firm dummy set to one on date of a powerful independent director sudden death and zero otherwise

Measures of Changing Independent Director Power (all are annual firm-level variables)
PID Addition (PIDA)
PID Deletion (PIDD)

Dummy set to 1 if at least one new PID joins the board and 0 otherwise
Dummy set to 1 if at least one new PID leaves the board and 0 otherwise.

Measures of Independent Directors’ Power in Specific Decisions
Powerful Independent Nominating Committee (PIBN) Dummy set to 1 if majority nominating committee are powerful independent directors, 0 otherwise
Powerful Independent Auditing Committee (PIBA) Dummy set to 1 if majority auditing committee are powerful independent directors, 0 otherwise
Powerful Independent Compensation Committee (PIBC) Dummy set to 1 if majority compensation committee are powerful independent directors, 0 otherwise
Centrality of Nominating Comm. Members (IDCN) Mean of the top 3 centrality measures for independent directors on nominating committee
Mean of the top 3 centrality measures for independent directors on auditing committee
Centrality of Auditing Comm. Members (IDCA)
Centrality of Compensation Comm. Members (IDCC) Mean of the top 3 centrality measures for independent directors on compensation committee

Other variables
Bidder Return (BRET)
Combined Return (CRET)
Free Cash Flow (FCF)
Stock Return (RET)
Earnings Manipulation (EM)

Cumulative Abnormal Return between [-3, +3] to a bidder upon merger announcement
Cumulative Abnormal Return between [-3, +3] to the combined entity, calculated as the asset
weighted CARs of the bidder and the target, upon merger announcement
Annual firm-level dummy set to 1 if cash flow exceeds 2-digit SIC industry median, dividend payout
is below 2-digit SIC industry median, and Tobin’s Q exceeds 2-digit SIC industry median.
Annual firm-level variable equal to its stock’s total return minus the CRSP value-weighted market
total return
Annual firm-level variable equal to absolute value of discretionary accruals from modified Jones
model

43

Table 3: Characteristics of Independent Directors, Committees, Chairs and CEOs
No. firms is number of S&P 1500 firms in sample each year. Board characteristics include: PCEO is set to one if the CEO is designated as
powerful, that is having at least three of her four power centrality measures lying in the top quintiles of their overall distributions. PCEO is one if
the CEO is designated as powerful. BSIZE is the number of directors on the board; NID is the number of directors designated independent in the
firm’s SEC filings, and IB is one for firms with a majority of independent directors and zero otherwise. NPID/ID is the fraction of independent
directors designated as powerful and PIB is one for independent boards in which a majority of independent directors are powerful. Board chair
characteristics are: NCC, set to one if the CEO is not the chair and to zero otherwise, and PNC, set to one if NCC is one and if the non-CEO chair
is designated as powerful. Board committee characteristics are the means of dummies set to one if majorities of the Audit, Compensation and
Nominating committee members are powerful independent directors.
Directors on full boards
No. of
directors

Director
independence
NID
BSIZE
IB

Independent director power on

Independent
director power
NPID
ID
PIB

Audit
committee

Compensation
Committee

Nominating
Committee

CEO
power

PIBA

PIBC

PIBN

PCEO

Year

No.
Firms

1998
1999

1,110
1,233

9.74

58.7

76.9

34.5

42.3

43.6

49.1

31.4

9.58

61.8

80.2

36.2

43.8

46.0

50.4

2000

1,343

9.44

63.3

81.9

37.8

45.1

48.9

51.6

2001

1,327

9.42

65.5

86.1

39.8

49.4

50.5

2002

1,372

9.38

67.6

89.5

41.3

51.0

2003

1,384

9.36

69.7

93.1

42.0

2004

1,354

9.36

71.2

93.9

43.4

2005

1,341

9.48

71.6

94.9

2006

1,367

9.32

76.3

2007

1,417

9.43

2008

1,376

9.43

2009
All

1,265
15,889

9.44
9.44

BSIZE

CEO

Board Chair
Powerful
Non-CEO Non-CEO
as chair
as chair

44.7

NCC
30.5

PNC
17.7

31.8

46.4

29.9

17.2

33.8

46.4

30.8

18.0

52.8

38.7

46.9

30.7

17.2

52.5

54

47.8

47.1

31.9

18.1

52.4

52.9

54.6

52.2

47.3

34.5

19.8

52.8

54.5

55.8

53.1

46.5

36.6

22.0

44.6

55.9

55.2

57.3

52.8

47.7

38.3

22.5

99.1

46.9

56.6

56.9

59.5

56.7

46.2

40.5

24.7

77.2

99.1

48.0

57.8

56.8

59.6

56.8

44.8

40.9

25.8

77.2

98.8

49.2

58.5

59.0

60.8

58.1

46.2

43.0

27.5

78.3
70.1

99.3
91.4

49.9
43

59.5
52.3

59.8
53.2

61.7
55.7

59
48.1

46.1
46.4

39.8
35.8

25.7
21.4

44

Table 4: Firm Value, Powerful Independent Directors, and a Powerful Non-CEO as Chair
Shareholder valuation, measured by Tobin’s Q (Q) from 1999 to 2010 explained with OLS regressions on
one-year lagged measures of CEO, chair, and independent director presence and power as well control
variables including industry and year fixed-effects. Variables are as described in Table 2. Sample is a
13,933 observation annual panel of S&P 1500 firms. Numbers in parentheses are robust p-levels
clustering by firm. Boldface denotes significance at 10% or better.
4.1
Powerful CEO dummy
(PCEO)

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.5

4.6

0.0364
(0.26)

Powerful independent
board dummy (PIB)

4.7

4.8

0.0224
(0.50)
0.0658
(0.04)

0.0557
(0.10)
0.0499
(0.16)

Powerful non-CEO
chair (PNC)

0.0429
(0.23)
0.000189
(0.84)

CEO power centrality
(CEOC)
Independent director
power centrality (IDC)

-0.00105
(0.35)
0.00254
(0.04)

0.00322
(0.04)
0.000179
(0.63)

Non-CEO chair power
centrality (NCCC)

0.000106
(0.78)

log (ceo age)

-0.183
(0.09)

-0.160
(0.14)

-0.156
(0.14)

-0.180
(0.09)

-0.148
(0.17)

-0.169
(0.12)

-0.143
(0.19)

-0.138
(0.21)

log(board size)

-0.303
(0.00)

-0.312
(0.00)

-0.309
(0.00)

-0.302
(0.00)

-0.311
(0.00)

-0.305
(0.00)

-0.318
(0.00)

-0.310
(0.00)

e-index

-0.0597
(0.00)

-0.0605
(0.00)

-0.0589
(0.00)

-0.0593
(0.00)

-0.0601
(0.00)

-0.0588
(0.00)

-0.0605
(0.00)

-0.0592
(0.00)

log (total assets)

-0.0433
(0.00)

-0.0470
(0.00)

-0.0382
(0.01)

-0.0393
(0.01)

-0.0502
(0.00)

-0.0377
(0.01)

-0.0487
(0.00)

-0.0469
(0.00)

book leverage

-0.137
(0.26)

-0.136
(0.26)

-0.138
(0.26)

-0.137
(0.26)

-0.140
(0.25)

-0.137
(0.26)

-0.138
(0.26)

-0.140
(0.25)

profitability

5.384
(0.00)

5.376
(0.00)

5.393
(0.00)

5.391
(0.00)

5.377
(0.00)

5.393
(0.00)

5.374
(0.00)

5.378
(0.00)

investment

0.796
(0.01)

0.806
(0.01)

0.782
(0.01)

0.784
(0.01)

0.821
(0.01)

0.782
(0.01)

0.813
(0.01)

0.813
(0.01)

R&D/total assets

8.674
(0.00)

8.596
(0.00)

8.694
(0.00)

8.733
(0.00)

8.569
(0.00)

8.738
(0.00)

8.524
(0.00)

8.609
(0.00)

advertising / total assets

1.767
(0.05)

1.736
(0.05)

1.821
(0.04)

1.798
(0.04)

1.723
(0.05)

1.820
(0.04)

1.739
(0.05)

1.740
(0.05)

Industry fixed-effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Year fixed-effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

0.388

0.388

0.388

0.388

0.388

0.388

0.388

0.388

2

R

45

Table 5: Firm Value and Board Characteristics
OLS regressions explaining Tobin’s Q (Q) with measures of directors’ legal independence and
independent directors’ power, as well as all control variables from Table 4 and industry and year fixedeffects (not shown). Variables are as described in Table 2. Sample is a 13,933 firm-year panel of S&P
1500 firms from 1999 to 2010. Numbers in parentheses are robust p-levels clustering by firm. Boldface
denotes significance at 10% or better.

Panel A. Legally Independent directors versus powerful independent directors
5A.1

5A.2

5A.3

5A.4

5A.5

Powerful independent board
dummy (PIB)
Fraction of directors
independent

-0.211
(0.02)

Majority of directors independent
dummy (IB)

-0.335
(0.02)
-0.0521
(0.30)

Two-thirds of directors
independent dummy

5A.7

0.104
(0.00)

0.102
(0.00)

-0.302
(0.00)

-0.384
(0.01)

0.0461
(0.42)

0.0152
(0.79)

0.0346
(0.42)

0.0309
(0.47)

-0.0101
(0.74)

-0.0187
(0.54)

-0.0187
(0.54)

-0.0517
(0.12)

CEO does not chair the board
dummy

5A.6

Control variables

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Industry fixed-effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Year fixed-effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Adjusted R-squared

0.389

0.388

0.388

0.388

0.389

0.390

0.390

Panel B. Powerful Independent Directors versus Powerful Insider Directors
5B.1

5B.2

5B.3

5B.4

5B.5

5B.6

Powerful CEO dummy (PCEO)

5B.7
0.0163
(0.63)

Powerful independent board
dummy (PIB)

0.0530
(0.10)

Powerful non-independent board
dummy (PNIB)

0.0873
(0.00)

0.0592
(0.06)

0.0554
(0.09)

0.0588
(0.06)

0.0566
(0.08)

-0.0637
(0.21)

-0.0636
(0.21)

0.160
(0.00)

0.124
(0.01)

0.126
(0.01)

0.0951
(0.00)

Powerful independent non-CEO
chair (PINC)

-0.0551
(0.28)

Powerful non-independent nonCEO chair (PNINC)

0.153
(0.00)

-0.0751
(0.13)

Control variables

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Industry fixed-effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Year fixed-effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Adjusted R-squared

0.389

0.389

0.389

0.388

0.389

0.390

0.390

46

Table 6: Cumulative Abnormal Returns on Powerful Independent Director Sudden Deaths
Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs), in percent, for windows [-1, 1], [-1, 2], [-1, 3], and [-3, 3], with t =
0 the first news of the director’s sudden death and [t1, t2] a window from t1 to t2. CARs are actual returns
less market model estimates, parameters estimated using t = -200 to -46, using the CRSP value-weighted
total market return (Panel A) and both the equal- and value-weighted CRSP total market return (Panel B).
Panel A: Mean cumulative abnormal returns on director sudden deaths.
Boldface indicates means significantly different from zero at 10% or better. F-test assume equal variance
between pairs of groups unless noted by ǂ. Numbers in parenthesis are p-values for t-test statistics
rejecting equal group means, with boldface indicating significance level 10% or better.
(1) Director sudden deaths
Decedent is independent
Y
N
p-value

Event
window

(2) Independent director
sudden deaths
Decedent is powerful
Y
N
p-value

(3) Inside director
sudden deaths
Decedent is powerful
Y
N
p-value

[-1, +1]

-0.0197

0.618

(0.12)

-0.311

0.394

(0.09)

1.65

0.322

(0.12)

[-1, +2]

0.0602

0.219

(0.40)

-0.251

0.503

(0.10)

1.60

-0.177

(0.08)

[-1, +3]

0.0247

0.158

(0.42)

-0.252

0.419

(0.18)

1.86ǂ

-0.329

(0.01)

[-3, +3]

-0.209

0.165

(0.32)

-0.332

-0.0336

(0.36)

1.95ǂ

-0.346

(0.02)

Events

172

54

226

101

71

172

12

42

54

Panel B: OLS Regressions of CARs on decedent director independence and power indicators
CARs around 226 director sudden deaths explained with dummies for decedent director being powerful,
legally independent or both, as well as controls for director age at death and firm characteristics, as in
Table 4. Probability levels, in parentheses, are bold for significance at 10% or better.
6B.1

6B.2

6B.3

6B.4

6B.5

6B.6

6B.7

6B.8

Market return weights

equal

equal

equal

equal

value

value

value

value

Event window

[-1, +1]

[-1, +2]

[-1, +3]

[-3, +3]

[-1, +1] [-1, +2]

[-1, +3]

[-3, +3]

0.0168
(0.14)

0.0231
(0.06)

0.0288
(0.05)

0.0289
(0.10)

0.0133
(0.23)

0.0178
(0.16)

0.0219
(0.14)

0.0197
(0.17)

0.00187
(0.78)

0.00743
(0.31)

0.00866
(0.32)

0.00435 0.000720 0.00680
(0.68)
(0.91)
(0.36)

0.00748
(0.39)

0.00714
(0.40)

-0.0239
(0.06)

-0.0299
(0.03)

-0.0342
(0.03)

-0.0322
(0.10)

-0.0286
(0.08)

-0.0233
(0.14)

0.00199
(0.71)

-0.00372
(0.52)

-0.00574
(0.40)

-0.00488 0.00322 -0.00177 -0.00329 -0.00477
(0.55)
(0.54)
(0.76)
(0.64)
(0.48)

0.023

0.022

0.020

Powerful director
(PD)
Independent director
(ID)
Powerful independent
director (PID)

Intercept
R2

47

0.014

-0.0204 -0.0254
(0.10)
(0.07)

0.021

0.016

0.014

0.010

Table 7: Granger Causality Tests
The left panel runs regressions of Tobin’s Q on lags of Q and lags of X; the right panel runs X on lags of
Q and lags of X. In each row, X is one of: PIB (one if a majority of independent directors are powerful),
PNIB (one if a majority of non-independent director are powerful), PINC (one if the chair is a powerful
independent director), or PNINC (one if the chair is a powerful non-independent director) or one of the
continuous variables IDC (mean independent director power centrality), NIDC (mean non-independent
director centrality), INCC (chair’s power centrality if an independent director is chair), or NINCC (chair’s
power centrality if a non-independent director other than the CEO is chair). Regressions explaining Q are
OLS; those explaining X are probits if X is an indicator variable (PIB, PNIB, PINC, or PNINC) and OLS
if X is continuous (IDC, NIDC, INCC, or NINCC). Numbers in parentheses are p-levels for t-tests (one
lag specifications) or joint F-tests (two and three lag specifications) for rejecting the insignificance or
joint insignificance of all included lags of X (left panel) or Q (right panel).
Board power Granger causes shareholder value
Power
measure
(Xi,t) is:
PIB
PNIB
PINC
PNINC
IDC
NIDC
INCC
NINCC

Shareholder value Granger causes board power

1 lag

2 lags

3 lags

1 lag

2 lags

3 lags

3.24
(0.07)

4.84
(0.01)

3.43
(0.02)

2.64
(0.11)

4.59
(0.10)

17.82
(0.00)

0.38
(0.54)

0.91
(0.40)

1.00
(0.39)

10.69
(0.00)

2.08
(0.15)

2.00
(0.14)

0.23
(0.88)

6.48
(0.01)

10.35
(0.01)

5.17
(0.16)

1.87
(0.17)

1.13
(0.32)

0.37
(0.78)

7.89
(0.01)

10.39
(0.01)

9.79
(0.02)

4.33
(0.04)

3.97
(0.02)

4.99
(0.00)

2.05
(0.15)

1.36
(0.26)

1.16
(0.32)

0.07
(0.79)

0.62
(0.54)

2.1
(0.10)

15.49
(0.00)

3.81
(0.02)

6.60
(0.00)

0.17
(0.68)

1.90
(0.15)

1.26
(0.29)

9.77
(0.00)

7.81
(0.00)

3.69
(0.01)

3.76
(0.05)

0.96
(0.38)

0.69
(0.56)

10.81
(0.00)

10.43
(0.00)

3.91
(0.01)

48

8.30
(0. 02)

17.12
(0.00)

Table 8: Value Destroying M&A
Cumulative abnormal returns from day -3 to day +3 around dates of M&A announcement by S&P 1500
firms between 1999 and 2010, explained by OLS regressions on measures of CEO and independent
director power as well as control variables, including industry and year fixed-effects. Variables are as
described in Table 2. Numbers in parentheses are robust probability levels with clustering by bidder.
Boldface denotes significance at 10% or better.
8.1

8.2

8.3

8.4

LHS is CAR [-3, +3] of

Bidder

Bidder

Combined

Combined

PIB

0.0155
(0.04)

0.0148
(0.04)
0.000777
(0.03)

IDC
PCEO

-0.0346
(0.00)

0.000396
(0.26)
-0.0304
(0.00)

-0.00127
(0.00)

CEOC

-0.000871
(0.00)

Log (CEO age)

0.0721
(0.01)

0.0656
(0.02)

0.0387
(0.14)

0.0290
(0.27)

Log(board size)

-0.00316
(0.77)

-0.000736
(0.94)

-0.0166
(0.11)

-0.0143
(0.17)

Entrenchment
index

0.00209
(0.35)

0.00223
(0.33)

0.00297
(0.17)

0.00276
(0.21)

Same industry dummy

-0.00513
(0.43)

-0.00359
(0.58)

-0.00329
(0.60)

-0.00233
(0.71)

Stock payment dummy

-0.0174
(0.02)

-0.0164
(0.02)

-0.0169
(0.02)

-0.0166
(0.02)

Deal value over bidder size

-0.0331
(0.00)

-0.0333
(0.00)
0.0283
(0.05)

0.0281
(0.05)

Deal value over combined size
Observations
R

2

632

632

632

632

0.0592

0.0568

0.0406

0.0313

49

Table 9. Powerful Independent Directors and Free Cash Flow Agency Problems
Probit regressions of a free cash flow “danger signal” dummy on CEO, chair, and independent director
power, with controls and industry and year fixed-effects. Variables are described in Table 2. The free cash
flow “danger signal” dummy is set to one if the firm’s cash flow exceeds its Fama-French 17-industry
(FF-17) median, its dividend payout is below its FF-17 median, and its Tobin’s Q is below its FF-17
median; and to zero otherwise. Sample is 13,933 firm-years of S&P 1500 firms from 1999 to 2010.
Numbers in parentheses are robust p-levels clustered by firm. Bold denotes significance at 10% or better.

PIB

9.1

9.2

9.3

-0.217
(0.00)

-0.212
(0.01)

-0.220
(0.00)

-0.0169
(0.82)

-0.0156
(0.83)

PCEO

9.4

9.5

9.6

-0.00700
(0.00)

-0.00797
(0.00)

-0.00817
(0.00)

0.00134
(0.54)

0.00140
(0.53)

0.0674
(0.41)

PNC
IDC
CEOC

0.000568
(0.50)

NCCC
log (CEO age)

0.107
(0.65)

0.109
(0.64)

0.140
(0.55)

0.0768
(0.74)

0.0708
(0.76)

0.107
(0.65)

log (board size)

0.0961
(0.51)

0.0959
(0.51)

0.0899
(0.54)

0.0890
(0.54)

0.0847
(0.56)

0.0749
(0.61)

e-index

-0.0153
(0.57)

-0.0152
(0.58)

-0.0154
(0.57)

-0.0171
(0.53)

-0.0174
(0.53)

-0.0168
(0.54)

log (total assets)

0.0161
(0.56)

0.0174
(0.53)

0.0185
(0.50)

0.0189
(0.48)

0.0164
(0.54)

0.0188
(0.48)

book leverage

-0.432
(0.02)

-0.429
(0.02)

-0.433
(0.02)

-0.393
(0.04)

-0.399
(0.04)

-0.400
(0.04)

profitability

-0.600
(0.08)

-0.592
(0.09)

-0.588
(0.09)

-0.541
(0.12)

-0.553
(0.12)

-0.543
(0.12)

investment

1.000
(0.02)

0.997
(0.02)

1.000
(0.02)

1.006
(0.02)

1.015
(0.01)

1.017
(0.01)

R&D / total assets

-8.128
(0.00)

-8.079
(0.00)

-8.146
(0.00)

-7.950
(0.00)

-8.061
(0.00)

-8.081
(0.00)

advertising / total assets

-4.206
(0.03)

-4.200
(0.04)

-4.183
(0.03)

-4.177
(0.04)

-4.147
(0.04)

-4.102
(0.04)

R2

0.0489

0.0490

0.0493

0.0494

0.0497

0.0499

50

Table 10. Powerful Independent Directors and Forced CEO Turnover
Binomial probit regressions explain log odds of a forced CEO turnover with independent director power
measures – the powerful independent board dummy PIB or the continuous independent director power
measure IDC for the full board, or their analogs for the nominating committee, PIBN or IDCN – along
with their interactions with the prior year’s total stock return, RET and control variables including
industry and year fixed-effects. The forced CEO turnover dummy is set to one if a new CEO is brought in
from outside the firm during the year and to zero otherwise. Variables are described in Table 2. Sample
includes 212 forced turnover events and 394 non-forced turnover events from 1999 to 2010. Numbers in
parentheses are robust p-levels clustering by firm. Boldface denotes significance at 10% or better.
10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

power measure

PIB

PIBN

IDC

IDCN

power

0.0839
(0.47)

0.0296
(0.80)

0.0109
(0.02)

0.00237
(0.19)

-0.520
(0.06)

-0.611
(0.04)

-0.0112
(0.35)

0.00003
(0.99)

RET

-0.00511
(0.98)

-0.0543
(0.73)

0.669
(0.51)

-0.267
(0.22)

log (CEO age)

-0.472
(0.39)

-0.463
(0.40)

-0.460
(0.40)

-0.494
(0.36)

log (board size)

-0.287
(0.24)

-0.277
(0.27)

-0.436
(0.08)

-0.356
(0.15)

e-index

-0.0197
(0.64)

-0.0237
(0.57)

-0.0138
(0.74)

-0.0218
(0.60)

R2

0.0494

0.0499

0.0511

0.0452

power × RET

a.

a

Assessing the economic significance of interactions in probits requires exploring distributional characteristics
(across observations) of changes in implied conditional probabilities of a forced CEO turnover given a unit
change in prior stock returns as the board indicator changes from the non-powerful to the powerful category (Stata
command INTEFF). The differences in the marginal effect of past stock returns between firms with and without
powerful independent boards ranges from -20.8% to -0.863% for regression 10.1 and that between firms with and
without powerful independent nominating committees in 10.2 ranges from -24.8% to 0.264%. The mean
interactions are -18.3% for 10.1 and -21.2% for 10.2, with both statistically significant. Intuitively, 10.1 says that
the average change in predicted conditional probability of a forced CEO turnover, given a 1% worse past return, is
18.3 percentage points higher with a powerful independent board than without one, and that this difference is
statistically significant.

51

Table 11. Powerful Independent Directors and Earnings Manipulation
OLS regressions explain the absolute value of the modified Jones model discretionary accruals with
measures of independent director power – the powerful independent board dummy PIB or the continuous
independent director power measure IDC for the full board, or their analogs for the audit committee,
PIBA or IDCA. All regressions include control variables and industry and year fixed-effects. Regressions
15.4 through 15.8 also control for the corresponding CEO power measures, either the powerful CEO
dummy PCEO or the continuous CEO power measure CEOC. Variables are as described in Table 2.
Sample is a 13,933 firm-year panel of S&P 1500 firms from 1999 to 2010. Numbers in parentheses are
robust p-levels clustering by firm. Boldface denotes significance at 10% or better.
Independent
director POWER
measure is

10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

10.5

10.6

10.7

10.8

PIB

PIBA

IDC

IDCA

PIB

PIBA

IDC

IDCA

POWER

-0.00402
(0.05)

-0.00326
(0.11)

-0.00334
(0.13)

-0.00259
(0.22)

-0.00246
(0.28)

-0.00272
(0.22)

-0.000263 -0.000210
(0.00)
(0.00)

PCEO

CEOC

-0.000168 -0.000137
(0.05)
(0.06)

-0.000138 -0.000152
(0.04)
(0.02)

log (CEO age)

0.0273
(0.00)

0.0277
(0.00)

0.0251
(0.00)

0.0259
(0.00)

0.0276
(0.00)

0.0280
(0.00)

0.0255
(0.00)

0.0259
(0.00)

log (board size)

0.00379
(0.41)

0.00345
(0.45)

0.00402
(0.38)

0.00393
(0.39)

0.00378
(0.41)

0.00349
(0.45)

0.00424
(0.36)

0.00425
(0.35)

e-index
(x 103)

-0.197
(0.78)

-0.246
(0.73)

-00144
(0.84)

-0.169
(0.81)

-0.170
(0.81)

-0.208
(0.77)

-0.0479
(0.95)

-0.04.80
(0.95)

0.00139
(0.19)

0.00117
(0.25)

0.000988
(0.35)

0.000934
(0.38)

0.00176
(0.10)

0.00170
(0.11)

log (total assets) 0.000728 0.000638
(0.47)
(0.53)
book leverage

0.00395
(0.62)

0.00408
(0.61)

0.00370
(0.64)

0.00357
(0.65)

0.00385
(0.63)

0.00395
(0.62)

0.00377
(0.63)

0.00364
(0.65)

profitability

0.0670
(0.00)

0.0671
(0.00)

0.0658
(0.00)

0.0658
(0.00)

0.0669
(0.00)

0.0670
(0.00)

0.0651
(0.00)

0.0650
(0.00)

investment

-0.114
(0.00)

-0.114
(0.00)

-0.117
(0.00)

-0.116
(0.00)

-0.115
(0.00)

-0.115
(0.00)

-0.119
(0.00)

-0.118
(0.00)

R2

0.0373

0.0372

0.0383

0.0381

0.0374

0.0373

0.0388

0.0388

52

Appendix Table A1. Listed Firm Top Executive and Director Network Characteristics
Each Node is a director or business executive with at least one connection to other directors or executives.
The Listed Network includes all directors and senior managers who ever served on the board of or
worked at a listed firm covered by BoardEx from 1998 through 2009.

Year

Nodes (Individuals) in
Social Network

Connections between pairs of
Nodes (Individuals) in Social
Network

1998

191,049

5,438,006

1999

200,156

5,925,380

2000

210,220

6,483,455

2001

219,321

6,991,534

2002

228,375

7,466,223

2003

237,980

7,967,959

2004

249,126

8,511,737

2005

261,823

9,105,517

2006

276,237

9,757,497

2007

292,131

10,472,468

2008

305,399

11,156,481

2009

313,958

11,639,006

A1

Appendix Table A2. Firm-level Variable Summary Statistics
Summary statistics of variables defined in Table 2. Sample includes 15,889 firm-year observations.
Mean

Standard
deviation

Q1

Median

Q3

IB

0.914

0.281

1

1

1

PIB

0.523

0.499

0

1

1

Powerful Non-Independent Board

PNIB

Independent Director Centrality

IDC

0.313
81.1

0.464
14.9

0
74.3

0
84.9

1
92.1

55.1
0.358

35.8
0.479

0
0

66.8
0

85.3
1

0.410
0.314

0

0

0

Independent Board
Powerful Independent Board

Non-independent Director Centrality

NIDC

Non-CEO Chair

NCC

Powerful Non-CEO Chair

PNC

Powerful Independent Non-CEO Chair

PINC

0.214
0.111

0

0

0

Powerful Non-independent Non-CEO Chair

PNINC

0.103

0.304

0

0

0

Non-CEO Chair Centrality

NCCC

0

74

INCC

39.7
31.1

0

Independent Non-CEO Chair Centrality

28.5
13.0

0

0

0

Non-independent Non-CEO Chair Centrality

NINCC

15.5

31.8

0

0

0

Powerful CEO

PCEO

0.464

0.499

0

0

1

CEO Centrality

CEOC

77.3

19.2

65.3

82.3

93

Powerful independent Auditing Committee

PIBA

0.490

0.500

0

0

1

Powerful independent Compensation Committee

PIBC

0.520

0.500

0

1

1

Powerful independent Nominating Committee
Auditing Committee Members Centrality

PIBN

0.442

0.497

0

0

1

IDCA

80.7

16.3

73.3

85.0

92.8

Compensation Committee Members Centrality

IDCC

80.9

18.1

74.0

86.2

93.6

Nominating Committee Members Centrality

IDCN

70.7

32.0

64.0

83.8

92.8

Tobin's Q

Q

1.58

1.55

0.848

1.19

1.83

CEO Age

CEOA

55.7

7.33

51

56

60

Board Size

BSIZE

9.44

2.62

8

9

11

E-Index

ENDX

2.72

1.4

2

3

4

ASSETS

16.8

89.2

0.755

2.12

7.37

LEV

0.225

0.181

0.066

0.212

0.339

Profitability

PROFIT

0.126

0.101

0.07

0.121

0.176

Capital Expenditure

CAPEX

0.049

0.062

0.013

0.0324

0.0638

CF

0.0908

0.125

0.0407

0.0878

0.142

R&D

R&D

0.024

0.0444

0

0

0.0279

Advertising

ADV

0.0102

0.0245

0

0

0.00584

Earnings Manipulation

EM

0.00819

0.0870

-0.0228

0.0113

0.0464

Total Assets (in $bil.)
Leverage

Cash Flow

A2

