                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION OF HEALTH CARE MARKETS

                                             Martin Gaynor
                                               Kate Ho
                                             Robert Town

                                         Working Paper 19800
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19800


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2014




We are grateful to editor Janet Currie for support and encouragement and to her and four anonymous
referees for helpful comments that substantially improved the paper. All opinions expressed here and
any errors are the sole responsibility of the authors. No endorsement or approval by any other individuals
or institutions is implied or should be inferred. In particular, the views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Trade Commission, any individual
Commissioner, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19800.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Martin Gaynor, Kate Ho, and Robert Town. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Industrial Organization of Health Care Markets
Martin Gaynor, Kate Ho, and Robert Town
NBER Working Paper No. 19800
January 2014, Revised March 2014
JEL No. I11,L1,L10

                                            ABSTRACT

The US health care sector is large and growing – health care spending in 2011 amounted to $2.7 trillion
and 18% of GDP. Approximately half of health care output is allocated via markets. In this paper,
we analyze the industrial organization literature on health care markets focusing on the impact of
competitionon price, quality and treatment decisions for health care providers and health insurers.We
concludewith a discussion of research opportunities for industrial organization economists, including
opportunitiescreated by the US Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.


Martin Gaynor                                      Robert Town
Heinz College                                      Health Care Management Department
Carnegie Mellon University                         The Wharton School
4800 Forbes Avenue, Room 3008                      University of Pennsylvania
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890                          3641 Locust Walk
and NBER                                           Philadelphia, PA 19104
mgaynor@cmu.edu                                    and NBER
                                                   rtown@wharton.upenn.edu
Kate Ho
Columbia University
Department of Economics
1133 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kh2214@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

The US health care sector is large and growing – health care spending in 2011 amounted
to $2.7 trillion and 18% of GDP (Hartman et al., 2013).1 This makes the US health sector
the sixth largest ‘economy’ in the world, just slightly behind France and ahead of Brazil,
the UK, Italy and Russia.2 While total spending on health care is large, the industries that
constitute the major components of this sector: hospital services, physician services, and
health insurance, are each large in their own right. The hospital sector, at $850.6 billion,
represents 5.6% of US GDP, physician services constitute 3.6%, and health insurance is
1%.3 This makes the hospital and physician sectors some of the largest industries in the
US economy, larger than construction (3.6% of GDP), mining and oil and gas extraction
(1.95%), agriculture (1.37%), computer and electronic products (1.29%), broadcasting and
telecommunications (2.5%), automobile manufacturing (0.33%), or even breweries (0.11%).4
    Obviously any sector that constitutes nearly one-fifth of the US economy is large enough
to warrant extended and focused analysis. However, the significance of the health care sector
is not merely due to its size. The functioning of this sector has tremendous implications for
the well being of the population. A reduction in competitive vigor in health care markets
can result in substantially higher prices and higher medical expenditures. Further, even
though consumers are typically heavily insured, the higher expenses associated with higher
prices reduces consumer surplus. Employers pass through higher health care costs dollar
for dollar to workers, either by reducing wages or fringe benefits, or even dropping health
insurance coverage entirely (see, e.g., Gruber, 1994; Bhattacharya and Bundorf, 2005; Baicker
and Chandra, 2006; Emanuel and Fuchs, 2008).5 Perhaps more importantly, the competitive
environment affects the quality of care delivered by health care organizations which, in turn,
can have enormous impacts on the quality and length of life.
   This paper focuses on the functioning of health care markets for good reason – markets
play a large role in the delivery of health care in many countries, and in the financing of
care in the United States, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.6 Despite its clear importance,
the functioning of health care markets has received relatively little attention in health policy
   1
     We note that health care is also a very substantial part of the economies of all developed economies, not
just the United States.
   2
     In 2011, US GDP was $15 trillion, China $7.3, Japan $5.9, Germany $3.6, France $2.8, Brazil $2.5, UK
$2.4, Italy $2.4, and Russia $1.9. (Source: World Bank, http://databank.worldbank.org/data/views/
reports/tableview.aspx).
   3
     Health insurance is measured as the “net cost of health insurance,” the difference between premiums
collected and benefits paid in a calendar year (Hartman et al., 2013).
   4
     Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, http://www.bea.gov/industry/gdpbyind_data.htm.
   5
     Town et al. (2006) find that private insurance rolls declined by approximately 0.3 percentage points or
approximately 695,000 lives in 2003 due to the effects of hospital mergers, with the vast majority of those
who lost private insurance joining the ranks of the uninsured.
   6
     Approximately one-half of health care in the US is financed via private markets, about two-thirds in
Switzerland, and about 85% in the Netherlands (Source: OECD Health Data 2012, http://www.oecd.org/
health/health-systems/oecdhealthdata2012-frequentlyrequesteddata.htm.


                                                      1
spheres. In addition, markets have come to play an increasing role in the delivery of health
care in other countries. In 2006 the English NHS introduced reforms designed to increase
choice and competition for hospital care (Farrar et al., 2007). New NHS reforms have been
enacted recently which seek to extend the role of markets and competition further (see
http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/topics/nhs-reform). The Netherlands relies on private
markets for health insurance and has been gradually deregulating markets for health care
(Schäfer et al., 2010). Germany, Sweden, and Italy (Lombardy) all have some forms of
de-centralization designed to introduce markets and competition in health care (Dixon and
Poteliakhoff, 2012; Vrangbaek et al., 2012; Helderman et al., 2012). As a consequence, the
performance of markets can have large impacts on the overall performance of the health care
sectors in many countries.
    There has been growing interest among economists in recent years in the industrial or-
ganization of health care markets. This is due in part to the growing prominence of health
care markets in policy issues, the increasing availability of rich datasets on health care, ad-
vances in economics methodology, and institutional changes that have led to a greater role
and prominence for markets in health care. In the US the Patient Protection and Afford-
able Care Act passed in 2010 (ACA) has further increased the policy relevance of questions
concerning interactions between medical providers and insurers. The US reforms are built
on the existing structure of US health care markets, and attempt to leverage competition in
some areas (for example between insurers competing on Health Insurance Exchanges), while
encouraging certain kinds of consolidation in others. In addition they move towards substan-
tial changes in provider incentives, raising questions about the interaction between market
structure, incentives and outcomes in this market. There are key policy roles for competition
authorities, regulators, and policy designers in enabling and facilitating competition in health
care markets.
    The paper proceeds as follows. We begin in Section 2 by describing some key issues in the
industrial organization of health care as a way of structuring our discussion of the literature.
That section also mentions some interesting topics that, due to space constraints, we will
not discuss. In Section 3 we provide some informative descriptive statistics on provider
and insurer market structure. We then discuss quality determination in Section 4, price
and network determination in health care markets in Section 5, health insurance premium
setting in Section 6, and plan choice in Section 7. The economics of physician treatment
and referral decisions are presented in Section 8. In each of these sections we provide an
in-depth review of the existing literature. We note that, in each section, there are promising
areas for further research where there is currently little evidence, but where new data sources
and empirical methodologies are becoming available. We conclude with a discussion of these
research opportunities, focusing in particular on the US health reforms.


2   Key Issues in the Industrial Organization of Health Care

Recent research on health care markets has focused on the different ways in which inter-


                                               2
actions between firms affect variables that directly impact welfare. These variables include
provider quality, prices, treatment decisions, and insurer premiums. An additional factor is
the match between consumers and providers: are consumers who care about (or need) par-
ticular provider characteristics matched to providers with those characteristics? Inter-firm
interactions include horizontal competition (which may affect, for example, firms’ invest-
ments in their quality) and also vertical interactions that might determine the prices paid to
providers or the choice set of providers made available to particular consumers.
    We structure our discussion of this literature around a multi-stage model of the market.
In the first stage providers (hospitals and physicians) make investments that determine their
quality. In addition to being influenced by horizontal competition, these investments may be
affected by demand-side factors such as the amount of information on quality that is provided
to consumers and the amount of choice they are offered when they need medical care. In
the second stage, given their quality levels, providers negotiate with insurers to determine
insurers’ provider networks and the prices paid to providers. This complex interaction has
been analyzed in a growing number of papers; it has substantial implications for consumer
welfare and for costs. Third, insurers choose their premiums to maximize their objective
functions, taking into account their own characteristics and those of competing insurers. In
the fourth stage consumers observe each insurer’s provider network and other characteris-
tics, including premiums, and choose their insurers. Finally, when the enrollment process is
complete, some consumers get sick and utilize providers either from within their insurers’
networks or (incurring a larger out-of-pocket payment) from outside the network.
    Each stage of this model has an impact on the equilibrium outcome, and therefore on
welfare. Clearly every stage is related to the others: optimal choices in one stage are functions
of expectations regarding the rest. The stages are as follows.

  1. Quality determination in provider markets

  2. Price and network determination in provider markets

  3. Premium determination in insurance markets

  4. Consumer choice in insurance markets

  5. Incentives and provider referral decisions/consumer utilization.

   However, very few papers try to address more than one or two stages of the model, in
part because of modeling issues (model complexity and the difficulty of identifying a complete
model of all the stages), and in part due to lack of data required to estimate a complete model.
Most instead focus on one of the stages. In what follows we review the key papers on each
topic and present a framework for thinking about the individual topics and the model as a
whole.
    In this review we focus on market models of price and quality determination. There are,
of course, other important and interesting topics in the industrial organization of health care

                                               3
markets, notably the economics of asymmetric information in these markets, pharmaceuti-
cals, and medical devices. There have been a number of excellent reviews on asymmetric
information in health care (McGuire, 2000; Einav et al., 2010; Dranove, 2012; Breyer et al.,
2012; Einav and Finkelstein, 2010), and of the economics of pharmaceuticals (Scherer, 2000;
Berndt, 2002; Scott Morton and Kyle, 2012). Given space constraints, we focus on the indus-
trial organization of health care and health insurance markets. We explicitly focus on papers
that speak directly to one of the five stages of the framework listed above. This is both of
quantitative importance, given the size of this sector of the economy, and an area of rapidly
growing research. We comment on the potential for incorporating asymmetric information
into the IO modeling of health care in Section 9.


3       Provider and Insurer Market Structure

In most developed economies, hospital and physician services comprise a large and growing
component of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The share of total expenditures accounted
for by hospital and physician services and health insurance has grown substantially over the
last 30 years. In 1980, hospitals, physicians, and health insurance7 accounted for 3.6%, 1.7%,
and 0.34% of GDP, respectively (Martin et al., 2011). By 2011, these numbers were 5.5%,
3.5%, and 1%, respectively. The total size of the hospital, physician and insurance sectors
nearly doubled over this 29 year period, from 5.64% to 10%. The size of these industries
and their long run trends suggest that understanding their structure and performance is
not only important for the performance of the health care industry, it is also important for
understanding the economy as a whole.


3.1      Hospitals

While the hospital sector increased its importance in the economy, it simultaneously became
more concentrated. In particular, a large hospital merger wave swept through the country
during the 1990s, increasing the concentration of many hospital markets.8 It was during
this period that hospital systems, organizations comprised of multiple hospitals, became an
important feature in the health care landscape. This increase in concentration will likely
persist and affect market outcomes for the foreseeable future.9 Figure 1 displays the trends
in the hospital HHI, the number of within market hospital mergers and acquisitions, and the
    7
     Measured as the net cost of health insurance.
    8
     There have been over 1,000 mergers in the US hospital industry from 1994 to the present, with activity
picking up in recent years (162 in 2010 and 2011).
   9
     Because of their high entry and fixed cost structures, changes in market structure tend to persist over
decades. Chung et al. (2013) document that the impact of the Hill-Burton Act, which provided capital
subsidizes to not-for-profit and public hospitals from 1948-1971, persists to this day.




                                                     4
percentage of the population enrolled in an HMO from 1990-2006.10
    The message from Figure 1 is that U.S. hospital markets are highly concentrated and have
become even more concentrated over time. In 1987, the mean HHI was 2,340 and by 2006 the
HHI is was 3,161 – an increase of over 900 points.11 In 1992, the mean hospital concentration
levels (2,440) were (barely) below the recently updated Federal merger guidelines’ (Federal
Trade Commission and Department of Justice, 1992) cut-off point for classifying a market as
“Highly Concentrated” (HHI ≥ 2,500), but by 2006 the mean concentration level (3,261) rose
to well above this threshold. In 1990 approximately 65% of MSAs were classified as highly
concentrated. By 2006 more than 77% fell into that category. Perhaps just as tellingly, the
percentage of MSAs classified as unconcentrated (HHI < 1,800) fell from 23% in 1990 to 11%
in 2006.
    Town et al. (2006) note that mergers and acquisitions are the primary reason for the
increase in hospital concentration over this period. Figure 2 shows the distribution of con-
centration across MSAs in 1990 and 2006. Two features are apparent from the figure. First,
most MSAs are highly concentrated. Second, points above the 45◦ line are MSAs that experi-
enced an increase in concentration from 1990 to 2006. The figure illustrates clearly that there
has been a large increase in concentration in the vast majority of geographic areas in the US.
By 2006, most health insurers had to negotiate with hospital systems in highly concentrated
markets, which likely reduced their bargaining leverage.
   An obvious question is what initiated this wave of hospital consolidation. Fuchs (2007)
and others point to the rise of managed care as the principal factor driving this massive
consolidation. Anecdotal evidence and a cursory glance at Figure 1 is consistent with this
hypothesis. The idea is that the rise of HMOs introduced aggressive price negotiations
between hospitals and health plans, thereby giving hospitals a strong incentive to acquire
bargaining power through consolidation. However, the empirical evidence investigating this
causal link is mixed (e.g., Chernew, 1995; Dranove et al., 2002; Town et al., 2007b). Park and
Town (2014) argue that the expectations over the importance of HMOs drove this merger
wave. They find that HMO exit, a measure of the exuberance of expectations regarding the
demand for managed care in a location, is correlated with hospital consolidation.


3.2     Physicians

Physicians practice in a wide variety of organizational settings from single and paired inde-
pendent practices, to multi-physician, multi-specialty groups, to working as part of a large,
  10
     The HHI is the sum of squared market shares in the market. It is the most commonly used measure of
market structure. We present population weighted averages for Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) based
on admissions. We limit the sample of MSA to those with a population less than 3 million in 1990. We do
this because it is likely that in MSAs with more than 3 million, there are multiple hospital markets and the
HHI of that MSA is likely mismeasured.
  11
     It is interesting that over roughly the same period of time the nursing home industry did not see significant
increases in market concentration, even though it was also subject to a number of mergers and acquisitions.



                                                        5
integrated health system. The horizontal and vertical structures of these physician groups
can affect both the process of care and the bargaining leverage of these groups. The com-
plicated nature of these organizational structures makes measuring the market structure for
physician services particularly challenging. Nonetheless, cross-sectional data measuring the
basic types of organizations to which physicians belong has been available for some time.
Unfortunately, the representativeness and quality of these data varies. It is also unfortunate
that, until recently, there were not good measures of the concentration of physician markets.
Data collected by SK&A12 and by IMS Health13 have recently helped to fill this void. These
data represent a large improvement over the alternative, although they are not perfect, and
are sold by commercial entities and are thus rather expensive.
    Physicians, on average, practice in small groups. According to a recent American Med-
ical Association survey, 60% of physicians practice in groups with less than 5 physicians.14
The same survey also documents that approximately 6% of physicians are in large practices
(greater than 50 physicians).
   The market for physician services is generally unconcentrated, but there is meaningful
variation across geography. This is not surprising given the size distribution of physician
practices. Dunn and Shapiro (2012) use SK&A data to link physicians to their practice
groups. They find that during the 2005 to 2008 time frame the mean HHI is 1,200 (SD
= 1,100) and 1,000 (SD=1,100) for cardiologists and orthopedists, respectively.15 10% of
cardiology and orthopedic patients are treated in markets where the HHI is greater than
2,200. Entry into those specialties is more restricted than general practitioner physicians and
thus the market structure for general practitioners is presumably even less concentrated.
    Kleiner et al. (2012) construct measures of market share for a number of physician services
markets using Medicare data. They find that the median market share (across all markets)
for the two largest practices in a market is 33% for primary care, 49% for orthopedics, 57%
for radiology, 58% for cardiology, and 72% for oncology. The median HHI across all areas
is 761 for primary care, 1,751 for orthopedics, 2,190 for radiology, 2,370 for cardiology, and
3,606 for oncology. This shows a similar pattern to that found by Dunn and Shapiro (2012)
– markets for specialists are fairly to highly concentrated. Kleiner et al. (2012) find that
primary care physician services markets by contrast, are quite unconcentrated.
   While these measures are quite helpful, they don’t get at the complicated structure of
organizational and contractual relationships that are prevalent in physician services markets.
Understanding and measuring these structures is an important challenge for future research
on this market.
  12
     http://www.skainfo.com/database_finder.php?select=Physicians
  13
     http://www.imshealth.com/portal/site/imshealth
  14
     American Medical Association (2009)).
  15
     Dunn and Shapiro (2012) construct a “Fixed Travel Time HHI” which constructs the HHI accounting
for geographic differentiation of physicians.




                                                 6
3.3       Health Insurers

In general, health insurance markets in the US appear to be relatively concentrated and are
becoming more concentrated over time. Dafny et al. (2011), using data on the large employer
segment of the insurance market, show increasing concentration in health insurance markets.
Dafny et al. (2011) state that the mean HHI in their sample increased from 2,286 to 2,984
from 1998-2006, the median four firm concentration ratio increased from 79 to 90 percent,
and the mean number of carriers per market fell from 18.9 to 9.6. They show that 78 percent
of the markets they studied had increases in the HHI of 100 points or more from 2002 to
2006, and 53 percent experienced increases of 500 points or more. Dafny (2010) documents
an increase in the percentage of markets with fewer than 9 insurance carriers in the U.S. from
1998-2005, and a decrease in the percentage of markets with 9 or more carriers.
    A recent report by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (Government Account-
ability Office, 2009) compiled information on the market structure of the small group health
insurance market in the US. Those markets also appear to be fairly heavily concentrated,
and increasing in concentration. Schneider et al. (2008) utilize a unique source of survey
data collected by a commercial entity for California to construct HHIs for insurance plans
at the county level for 2001. They find an average insurance HHI for California counties
of 2,592. They report that 21 percent of counties have HHIs below 1,800,16 55 percent had
HHIs between 1,800 and 3,600 and 24 percent had HHIs above 3,600. The information from
these various data sources seem broadly consistent.
    The trend toward increasing concentration in health insurance markets is not limited to
the US. For example, health insurance markets in the Netherlands have also become more
concentrated. The mean HHI was not very high in 2005, with a mean HHI of 1,346, but
increased by nearly 800 points by 2010 to 2,011. The mean HHI in 2010 is slightly higher
than the HHI for an equally divided 5 firm market (2,000). While not trivial, this is below
the recently revised Horizontal Merger Guidelines cutoff for considering a market highly
concentrated (HHI=2,500). What is most notable is the large increase in concentration over
the period, which may be a cause for concern.


4        Quality Determination in Provider Markets

This section corresponds to the first stage in the modeling framework described above. We
lay out a framework for analyzing choices that determine quality by health care providers and
review key contributions to the literature. While in reality providers make investments and
other choices that determine quality indirectly, for simplicity of exposition we discuss quality
as if it is chosen directly by providers. We first treat the case of administered prices, then
discuss quality determination with market determined prices, since the theory and empirics
are different.
    16
    The old FTC/DOJ Horizontal Merger Guidelines cutoff for considering a market highly concentrated
(Federal Trade Commission and Department of Justice, 1992).


                                                 7
4.1    Administered Prices

In many situations, prices are set administratively (usually by regulators), rather than being
market determined. This is true of entire health systems (e.g., the British National Health
Service), or sectors of health systems (e.g., the Medicare program in the U.S.). In this
situation, when competition among firms occurs it will be via non-price means, which we call
quality.17
    A standard result in models with administered prices is that non-price (quality) competi-
tion gets tougher in the number of firms so long as the regulated price is set above marginal
cost. Firms facing tougher competition will increase their quality in order to attract (and re-
tain) consumers. This result is essentially the same as in models of industries with regulated
prices (e.g. airlines, trucking) from a number of years ago (e.g. Douglas and Miller, 1974;
Schmalensee, 1977; Vander Weide and Zalkind, 1981).
   While this model is not truly specific to health care, adapting it to some institutional
specifics of the health care industry produces essentially the same results (Allen and Gertler,
1991; Pope, 1989; Gaynor, 2006; Gravelle et al., 2012). Allowing firms to have non-profit
objectives or to have some patients who do not exercise choice (e.g., emergency cases) does
not alter the results (under appropriate conditions – see Gaynor and Town, 2012).
    As is well known, the increased quality due to tougher competition can benefit consumers,
but in general is not necessarily welfare increasing. In particular, with entry costs, if firms
neglect business stealing effects there can be excessive entry. In equilibrium firms capture
less demand than they had anticipated, due to business stealing, so the benefits of entry from
increased quality are more than offset by the entry costs of the additional firms.
     In the case of health care, however, it is likely that quality will be excessive only if it has
little effect on health.18 Quality that substantially improves a patient’s chance of survival
will be very valuable, and such benefits are likely to outweigh costs. We can do a simple back
of the envelope calculation to illustrate this. For example, the typical estimate of the value
of one additional year of life (a “life-year”) is $100,000. If an increase in quality leads to one
additional life-year for every sick person and there are 1,000 sick people in the market, then
costs would have to increase by more $100 million for the increase in quality to be inefficient.
    In any case, the positive predictions of this model are clear. One may write down a
firm’s equilibrium quality function as the (implicit) solution to firms’ first-order conditions.19
Suppose firms maximize profits (this assumption can be relaxed to accomodate non-profit
maximizing preferences with no qualitative difference in the results). Let the profits of
hospital j be as follows.
  17
     Here we mean vertical differentiation.
  18
     Of course it’s possible that with asymmetric information poorly informed patients may choose either
supra or sub-optimal quality or similarly, that physician agents will not choose optimally for their patients.
The substantial variation in treatment of observationally equivalent patients suggests the presence of such a
phenomenon (Chandra and Skinner, 2012).
  19
     See Gaynor and Town (2012) for the full derivation.


                                                      8
                                        πj = p · qj − c(qj , zj ) − F,                                      (1)

where p is the regulated price, qj is hospital j’s demand, c() is the variable cost function, zj
is j’s quality, and F are fixed costs.
   Assume that the demand that any firm j faces is separable in its market share, sj , and
the level of market demand, D. Firm j thus faces a demand of:

                                       qj = sj (zj , z−j )D(p, zj , z−j )                                   (2)

where sj is firm j’s market share and z−j is a vector of all other firms’ qualities.20 Assume
that j’s market share is increasing in its own quality, decreasing in the number of firms, and
that the responsiveness of market share to own quality is also increasing in the number of
firms.
       The equilibrium quality function that emerges is as follows.

                                           zje = z(p, cq , cz , sj , D)                                     (3)


where zje is firm j’s equilibrium quality, p is the regulated price, cq and cz denote the marginal
costs of quantity and quality respectively, sj is firm j’s market share, and D is market demand.
The firm’s level of quality depends on the level of the regulated price, the marginal cost of
quantity, the marginal cost of quality, the level of demand, market share, and (implicitly)
the quality elasticities of market share and market demand. Quality is increasing in price,
the elasticity of demand with respect to quality, and the firm’s total demand. Quality is
decreasing in the marginal costs of quantity or quality.
    This has implications for econometric specifications for empirical analysis. The equation
to be estimated is (3). However, measures of marginal cost, market share, and demand are
likely to be endogenous in an econometric equation. One would employ exogenous deter-
minants of these factors, such as cost shifters (W ), demand shifters (XD ), and the number
of firms (N ). A reduced form econometric specification would thus look something like the
following,

                                          zje = Z(p, W, XD , N, ε)                                          (4)


where ε is a random error term. Note that this looks a lot like a Structure-Conduct-
Performance (SCP) model (described below in Section 4.3), with quality replacing price
  20
     Note that for consumers insulated from the cost of consumption, as in health care, the price they face
will be less than the price received by the firm. We ignore this in order to keep this sketch of a model simple.
It would not affect the conclusions in any event.


                                                        9
as the dependent variable.


4.2    Market Determined Prices

We now turn to examining quality determination in an environment where prices are market
determined. In general there are no determinate results in economic theory for the impact of
competition on quality in models where firms choose both price and quality – the outcome
depends on various factors including the relative elasticities of demand with respect to quality
and price for different consumers and the nature of competition between firms (see Gaynor,
2006; Gaynor and Vogt, 2000). However, some simple insights can be obtained from an
amended version of the Dorfman-Steiner condition (Dorfman and Steiner, 1954). Dorfman
and Steiner’s model is nominally about choice of price and advertising, but can also be
interpreted as about price and quality (although in a somewhat restrictive way).21 The
Dorfman-Steiner condition is

                                                    p εz
                                               z=    ·                                                 (5)
                                                    d εp

where z is quality, p is price, d is the marginal cost of quality, and εz and εp are the elasticities
of demand with respect to quality and price, respectively. This says that quality will increase
if the quality elasticity of demand increases or the price elasticity of demand declines, and
vice versa. Quality will also increase if price increases relative to the marginal cost of quality,
and fall if the opposite happens.
    While there are no determinate conclusions from this framework, it does offer some useful
guidance for thinking about issues of competition in health care markets. Suppose that the
price elasticity of demand facing health care firms increases, for example, due to the entry
of alternative providers, or consumers facing greater cost sharing. This will lead to a fall in
prices.22 Note that if there is no sufficiently countervailing increase in the quality elasticity,
then quality will also fall. If the quality elasticity of demand increases (for example, due to
an emphasis on medical errors or quality improvement), then quality will increase. If the
price elasticity remains unchanged this will lead to a price increase (since the increase in
quality leads to an increased marginal cost of quantity), but price cost margins will remain
unchanged. This framework will prove helpful in making sense of some results from the
empirical literature.
  21
     Dorfman and Steiner model a monopolist’s behavior. We can consider this an approximation to the
behavior of an oligopolistic or monopolistically competitive firm if we think of the demand function as a
reduced form demand, e.g., an oligopolist’s residual demand curve (see, e.g., Dranove and Satterthwaite,
2000).
  22
     The advent of managed care in the 1990s is commonly thought to have increased the price elasticity
of demand facing health care firms (hospitals in particular). This should have led to decreased prices, and
indeed seems to have done so. See Dranove and Satterthwaite (2000) and Gaynor and Vogt (2000) for reviews
of the evidence.


                                                    10
    While the papers that limit their attention to quality competition are potentially im-
portant, including quality investment choices in the full model of competition also implies
that the models of bargaining over hospital prices described in Section 5.2 should ideally
be expanded to allow for hospital choice of quality (see Gaynor and Town, 2012, for a full
exposition). One could do this by expanding the model to let hospitals choose their qualities
in a first stage, then the price bargaining game in Section 5.2 ensues, treating qualities as
fixed. The other stages in the model, patient choice of health plan and patient choice of
hospital, etc., then ensue.
    Few if any empirical papers have so far attempted to estimate the full multi-stage model.
While it is complex, and simplifying assumptions would be needed for tractability, in our view
this is an important next step in analyzing this industry. We return to this issue below. We
note here that the effect of competition on quality and on price is indeterminate in general,
which is no surprise given the general results in the literature. However, if we assume that
patient choice is not responsive to price (which can be reasonable for hospital care where
consumers are largely insulated from prices by the presence of health insurance) then we
can derive the result that greater competition will lead hospitals to optimally increase their
quality.
    In equilibrium greater competition leading to increased quality can have varying effects
on prices. Since there is a positive marginal cost of quality, higher quality will lead to higher
prices. However, there can be (increased) price dispersion in the new equilibrium. Suppose
that hospitals have different costs of producing quality. In this situation, some hospitals
will choose higher quality than others and their relative values to an insurer’s network will
change. This will lead to some hospitals (those with lower marginal costs of quality) having
more bargaining power with insurers and commanding higher prices. Hospitals with higher
marginal costs of quality will have lower relative quality and therefore will have less bargaining
power and lower relative prices. On the other hand, if all hospitals have identical marginal
costs of quality, all hospitals will increase quality by the same amount, and so do not change
their relative attractiveness to insurers. In that case, hospitals’ bargaining positions have not
changed, so in equilibrium there is no effect on the distribution of prices.


4.3     Econometric Studies of Hospital Competition and Quality

There is a rapidly growing empirical literature on competition and quality in health care.
At present the evidence from this literature is entirely on hospital markets. In what follows
we provide a brief overview of this literature. We first review the results from econometric
studies of markets with administered prices, and then market determined prices.
    The studies reviewed here employ a variety of econometric approaches. The modal ap-
proach is a “Structure-Conduct-Performance” (SCP) specification. These econometric mod-
els are derived from a conceptual model that hypothesizes a causal link from market structure
to firm conduct and then to industry performance.23 Most SCP models applied to health
 23
      See Schmalensee (1989); Carlton and Perloff (2005).

                                                     11
care focus on the link between market structure and firm conduct, and omit industry perfor-
mance. The typical conduct measure in the general industrial organization literature is price
or price-cost margin. The typical measure of market structure is the Herfindahl-Hirschmann
Index (HHI). The equation usually estimated has roughly the following appearance,

                             p = β0 + β1 q + β2 XD + β3 W + β4 HHI + ε                                    (6)


where p is price, q is quantity, XD represents demand shifters and W captures cost shifters.
The SCP studies of quality employ a measure of quality as the dependent variable in this
equation, rather than price (and omit quantity). Equation (3) above is very similar to this
specification, although the econometric specifications in the literature are mostly ad hoc.
    The SCP approach has a number of well recognized problems when price is the dependent
variable (see Bresnahan, 1989; Schmalensee, 1989, on these issues). These problems also apply
when quality is the dependent variable, and there are some additional issues. First, the use
of the HHI in a pricing equation can be explicitly derived only from a homogeneous goods
Cournot model of conduct.24 Obviously an SCP regression with quality as the dependent
variable does not derive from this framework. In the case of administered prices, theory does
point to an econometric model with a measure of market structure on the right hand side
(see equation (3) or (4)). Even in this case, or even if one thinks of a quality SCP regression
as deriving from a broad conceptual framework as opposed to a specific theoretical model, a
number of issues remain. The HHI (or any market structure measure) is likely endogenous.
Unmeasured variation in demand and cost factors affect both quality and market structure.
For example, a firm with low costs is likely to both have a high market share (leading to
a high HHI) and choose high quality. Alternatively, if high fixed cost investments improve
quality, then hospitals in high density markets will have higher quality simply because they
spread these costs over more patients.
    An additional specification issue arises in regard to SCP studies of markets with admin-
istered prices. When price is regulated, price (or the price cost margin) should appear as
an exogenous determinant of the supply of quality (again, see equation (4)). In addition, it
is possible that the regulated price may be correlated both with quality and concentration.
For example, firms in unconcentrated markets may produce higher quality due to tougher
competition. They may also have higher costs due to producing higher quality, and therefore
receive higher regulated prices.25 Therefore, omitting price may lead one to overestimate
the effect of concentration on quality. However, to the extent that regulatory authorities try
(and succeed) to set prices to compensate firms for their costs, the regulated price may be
correlated with the error term in an SCP regression.
  24
     In that case, the coefficient on the HHI in an SCP regression captures the elasticity of demand, not firm
conduct (which is already assumed to be Cournot).
  25
     The administered pricing schemes for hospitals in both the US Medicare program and the English NHS
make adjustments for geographic differences in hospital costs.



                                                     12
    While the majority of the studies we review here employ an SCP framework, some employ
different approaches. Some studies evaluate the impact of mergers, some evaluate the impact
of regulatory changes (e.g, price deregulation). In addition, there are a small number of
studies that take a structural approach: there are some that estimate demand, and some
that examine the determinants/impacts of the number of firms. Each of these approaches
have their advantages and disadvantages. We discuss these in the context of evaluating the
various studies.


4.3.1    Studies with Administered Prices

There are a number of studies of the impact of competition on hospital quality under an
administered price regime. These derive from the U.S. Medicare program and from the
English NHS, which made a transition to administered prices in a reform in 2006. The
amount a Medicare beneficiary pays is the same, regardless of where she obtains care. As a
consequence, price is not a strategic variable for hospitals serving Medicare patients. Patients
in the NHS pay nothing, so price plays no strategic role in that system either.
    Kessler and McClellan (2000) is one of the first studies attempting to make inferences
about a causal effect of competition on quality for hospitals. This is a study of the impact of
hospital market concentration on (risk-adjusted one year) mortality from acute myocardial
infarction (AMI, i.e., a heart attack) for Medicare patients. Expenditures on these patients
are also studied. The study included data on all non-rural Medicare beneficiaries with AMI
during selected years from 1985 to 1994. Kessler and McClellan use the SCP framework
discussed above, with some modifications. They instrument for the HHI with hospital market
shares predicted from a model of patient choice of hospital, where patient choice is largely
determined by distance from the hospital.26 They also employ zip code fixed effects. As
a consequence, the effects of hospital market concentration are identified by changes in the
predicted HHI.
   The results from this study are striking. Kessler and McClellan find that risk-adjusted
one year mortality for Medicare AMI patients is significantly higher in more concentrated
markets. In particular, patients in the most concentrated markets had mortality probabilities
1.46 percentage points higher than those in the least concentrated markets (this constitutes
a 4.4 percent difference) as of 1991. This is an extremely large difference – it amounts to
over 2,000 fewer (statistical) deaths in the least concentrated vs. the most concentrated
markets. There are significant impacts of concentration on expenditures as well. Prior to
1991, expenditures were higher in less concentrated markets, while the reverse is true as of
1991. Since both mortality and expenditures are lower in less concentrated markets, they
conclude that competition improves welfare.
  26
    This is one of multiple papers in the literature that essentially uses distance to hospital as an instrument,
requiring the assumption that distance (or equivalently consumer choice of home location) is exogenous. We
note the caveat that distance to hospital may be correlated with unmeasured patient characteristics, which
would generate some bias in the estimates.



                                                       13
    While it is clear that concentration affects hospital quality, the mechanism by which
this works is not. It seems unlikely that hospitals strategically choose lower quality in the
form of an increased probability of death when they face weaker competition. What may
be happening is that hospitals in more concentrated markets exert lower effort than other
hospitals. Heart attack patients are very sick and vulnerable, and even relatively small
changes in how well their care is managed can have large impacts on their probability of
survival, so lower effort in the hospital may have the unintended consequence of higher
mortality.
    Another question with regard to this application is whether hospitals compete for heart
attack patients. Tay (2003) states that one-half of heart attack patients arrive at the hospital
via ambulance. Since these patients don’t have the ability to choose between hospitals,
it’s hard to see how hospitals can compete for these patients. However, hospitals in more
competitive environments are pressured to be better in order to compete for patients who
exercise choice (non-emergency cases). Being better requires investments in organization and
management processes that carry with them substantial fixed costs. As a consequence quality
improvements are organization wide as opposed to disease specific. These improvements
manifest themselves in a very sensitive area – heart attack patient mortality.
    Two recent studies (Cooper et al., 2010; Gaynor et al., 2013) examine the impact of com-
petition on hospital quality using a reform in the English National Health Service (NHS). The
NHS introduced a reform in 2006 intended to promote competition among hospitals. Prices
were administratively determined based on patient diagnoses, via a method very similar to
that employed by the U.S. Medicare system. Patient choice of hospital was introduced, and
hospitals had strong incentives for financial performance. As a consequence, hospitals were
to compete solely on non-price dimensions. These studies combine SCP with the “natural ex-
periment” econometric policy evaluation approach, implemented via difference-in-difference
estimation. The differences are before and after the reform and across more and less concen-
trated markets. Although they differ in the precise methods employed, both Cooper et al.
(2010) and Gaynor et al. (2013) find that, following the reform, risk-adjusted mortality from
AMI fell more at hospitals in less concentrated markets than at hospitals in more concentrated
markets.
    Gaynor et al. (2013) also look at mortality from all causes and mortality from all causes
excluding AMI, and find the same qualitative results as for AMI, although the estimated
effects are smaller in magnitude. They also examine measures of utilization and expenditure,
and find that length of stay rose in less concentrated markets relative to more concentrated
markets after the reform, but there were no impacts on expenditures. Quantitatively, Gaynor
et al. (2013) find that the reform reduced heart attack mortality by 0.2 percent.27 Since the
reform saved lives without increasing costs, they conclude it was welfare improving.
  27
    Both the Cooper et al. (2010) and Gaynor et al. (2013) estimates of the impact of competition post-
reform are quantitatively similar. Cooper et al. (2010) calculate that a one standard deviation increase of
their measure of competition would lead to a reduction in the heart attack mortality rate of 0.3 percent per
year. Gaynor et al. (2013)’s estimates imply that a one standard deviation decrease in concentration reduces
heart attack mortality by 0.33 percent per year.


                                                    14
   Some insight into the mechanisms underlying the relationship between market structure
and quality is provided by Propper et al. (2010). Propper et al. use data for the English
NHS and employ a measure of management quality developed by Bloom and Van Reenen
(2007) to examine the impact of market structure on management quality and, ultimately, on
hospital quality (AMI mortality, emergency surgery mortality, and other measures). The find
that having more close by competitors has a strong and significant impact on management
quality and hence on clinical quality of care. Their estimates imply that adding a rival
hospital close by increases the measure of management quality by one-third of a standard
deviation and thereby reduces heart attack mortality by 10.7 percent. While these results
are for the English NHS under specific circumstances, they may provide some insight into
these mechanisms more generally.
    Gaynor et al. (2011) estimate a structural model of demand for heart bypass surgery
(CABG) in England to evaluate the effect of the NHS reform studied by Cooper et al. (2010)
and Gaynor et al. (2013). In particular, one part of the reform required referring physicians
to give patients five choices of hospitals (previously they’d been required to give none).
Gaynor et al. (2011) use individual data on patient treatment to estimate a multinomial
logit model of demand faced by individual hospitals for CABG surgery. Overall they find
that the introduction of choice led to increased responsiveness of demand to hospital quality
– the demand elasticity with respect to a hospital’s (risk-adjusted) mortality rate is greater
after the reform than before. They also find considerable individual heterogeneity in patient
responsiveness. More seriously ill patients (as measured by a higher co-morbidity count) are
more sensitive to the hospital mortality rate than the average patient. With the introduction
of the reform their preference for quality, relative to the average patient, increases even more.
Gaynor et al. (2011) also find some suggestive evidence of a supply response – hospitals which
had greater increases in their quality (mortality rate) elasticities due to the reform had larger
declines in their mortality rates, implying intensified competition due to the reform.


4.3.2    Studies with Market Determined Prices

We now turn to econometric studies of competition and quality where prices are determined
in the market.28 Here we focus on the studies with the most credible identification strategy
in which market structure is changed by either mergers or deregulation of price or entry.
The results from settings with market determined prices are decidedly more mixed than the
literature that focuses on quality in administered price settings. Also, credible identification
of the impact of competition on quality is more challenging. Nevertheless, the evidence
indicates that increases in competition improve hospital quality.
   There have been a number of recent studies of competition and quality in hospital markets.
These all cover time periods from the 1990s or later, when it is generally agreed that price
competition had emerged in hospital markets. We first discuss SCP studies, then cover
  28
    We omit older studies of the “Medical Arms Race.” For a review that includes these studies see Gaynor
(2006).


                                                   15
merger studies, then finally move to studies of deregulation.
    Propper et al. (2004) use an SCP approach to examine the effect of the effect of hospital
competition in the United Kingdom following reforms to the National Health Service in the
1990s (prior to, and different from, the 2006 reform discussed previously). These reforms
encouraged payer-driven price competition among hospitals. NHS hospitals competed for
contracts from local health authorities (Primary Care Trusts, PCTs) on the basis of price
and waiting time (not quality of care). Propper et al. examine the impact of a measure of
market structure (roughly, the number of competitors) on mortality over the period 1995-1998
and find that mortality increased with the number of competitors. If the effect of this reform
was to create competition mainly (or solely) over price, then it may have led to an increased
price elasticity. Using the Dorfman-Steiner condition, equation (5), as a guide, we see that
without a countervailing increase in the quality elasticity, quality will decline. Whether this
is the mechanism driving the result in this paper can not be determined, although it provides
direction for future research.
   Ho and Hamilton (2000) and Capps (2005) are two papers that examine the impact of
hospital mergers on quality of care. Ho and Hamilton (2000) study 130 hospital mergers of
various types over the period 1992 to 1995. The quality measures they employ are inpatient
mortality, readmission rates, and the early discharge of newborns. They employ hospital
specific fixed effects to control for time invariant hospital characteristics that may be related
to merger. Capps (2005) uses a set of quality indicators developed by the US Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality29 to examine the effect of hospital mergers on quality. He
compares merging to non-merging hospitals in New York state during 1995-2000. There are
25 merging hospitals, and 246 total. Neither study finds much in the way of significant
impacts of hospital mergers on the quality of care.
    Romano and Balan (2011) study the impact on quality of care of a consummated merger
between two hospitals in the Chicago suburbs (Evanston Northwestern Hospital and Highland
Park Hospital). This merger was the subject of an antitrust suit by the Federal Trade
Commission, and the authors provided evidence on the case. The authors use a difference-
in-differences methodology and compare the changes in quality measures at the two merged
hospitals before and after the merger to the changes at control hospitals over the same time
period. They find no significant impact of the merger on many quality measures, but there is
a significant negative impact on some and a few with positive impacts. They conclude that
overall there is no reason to infer that the merger had salutary effects on quality.
    Three papers use changes in regulation as a way to learn about the effect of hospital
competition on quality. Volpp et al. (2003) study the effect of the deregulation of hospital
prices in New Jersey to try and learn about the impact of the introduction of price competition
on hospital quality. In 1992 New Jersey deregulated hospital prices. The neighboring state
of New York had no change in its hospital regulatory regime. Volpp et al. use data on AMI
hospital admissions in New Jersey and New York from 1990 to 1996 to learn about the effect
of the deregulation. They use a difference-in-difference approach – contrasting the pre and
 29
      http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/

                                               16
post regulatory repeal changes in risk-adjusted inpatient AMI mortality in New Jersey with
those in New York. They find that mortality in New Jersey increased after price deregulation
relative to New York. The prediction from equation (5) is that quality will fall when the price
elasticity of demand increases. The biggest impact of the price deregulation in New Jersey
very well may have been to increase the price elasticity of demand, and decrease price.30
Deregulation seems unlikely to have affected the quality elasticity.
    A paper by Propper et al. (2003) employs a similar approach to Volpp et al. In this
paper Propper et al. (2003) examine the impacts of competitive reforms in the NHS on
mortality for AMI patients. Propper et al. (2003) use a different strategy in this paper than
in Propper et al. (2004). Here they use the change in regulation in the U.K. over the period
1991-1999, combined with geographic variation in the number of competitors.31 As described
above, price competition was introduced in 1991 and actively promoted up until 1995. It
was downplayed after 1995 and actively discouraged from 1997 onwards. The impact of
competition is identified by differences between hospitals facing competitors and those who
are not between the time periods when competition was encouraged versus when it was
discouraged.
    Propper et al. (2003), utilizing reforms in the English NHS, find that competition reduces
quality. They find that differences in mortality for hospitals in areas with competitors versus
those with no competitors were higher during the period when competition was promoted
(1991-1995), than during the period when competition was discouraged (1996-1998). The
estimated cumulative effect of competition over the entire period is to raise mortality rates
by roughly the same amount as the cumulative effect of the secular downward trend in heart
attack mortality (presumably due to technological change). This is a large impact. As with
Volpp et al. (2003), these results can be interpreted as consistent with economic theory,
although that is not directly testable within the framework employed in the paper.
    Cutler et al. (2010) is a study that utilizes information on entry (in the CABG market)
to make inferences about the impacts of competition. Cutler et al. use the repeal of entry re-
stricting regulation (hospital certificate of need regulation, CON) in Pennsylvania to examine
the effect of entry of hospitals into the CABG surgery market. They hypothesize that overall
production is capacity constrained – cardiac surgeons are a scarce input and their supply
can’t be altered easily. As a consequence, hospital entry won’t lead to increased quantities
of CABG surgery, but may lead to improved quality, in particular, they hypothesize that
it will increase the market shares of high quality surgeons. This hypothesis is confirmed in
the empirical analysis. They find that in markets where entrants have 11-20 percent market
shares of CABG surgeries, high quality surgeons’ market shares increased 2.1 percentage
points more than for standard quality surgeons. Overall, they conclude that entry led to
increased quality, but that there was no net effect of entry on social welfare. Their estimates
of the gains from reduced mortality due to entry are approximately offset by the estimated
fixed costs of entry.
 30
      Unfortunately Volpp et al. do not have any evidence on the effect of deregulation on prices.
 31
      Only variation in the number of competitors is used in Propper et al. (2004).


                                                      17
    The empirical literature on competition and quality in health care markets is for the most
part fairly recent, and has grown very rapidly. This first generation of studies has provided
a valuable base of knowledge for further research. As yet there has been relatively little
structural work in this area, and that has been confined to estimating demand. An obvious
next step is specifying and estimating complete equilibrium models of quality determination
in the market, ideally also including the price-setting stage of the full model. The challenge
for researchers will be specifying models that are true to the important institutional facts
while being tractable enough for estimation. In addition, the measures of quality have for the
most part been confined to patient mortality. While that is undoubtedly significant, it will be
important to employ other measures in order to obtain a more complete picture of the impacts
of competition on health care quality. Although still in their infancy, as electronic medical
records develop and become available for research, more nuanced and complete measures of
quality will be possible.32


5        Provider Price Negotiations and Network Formation

The second stage in the model from Section 2, following quality choice, is price determina-
tion. In this section we outline a framework for analyzing competitive interactions between
providers and payers around provider prices and payer networks in a bilateral bargaining
framework. We follow the previous literature by taking hospital quality as given; however,
as noted above, an important next step is to incorporate endogenous quality choice into the
model. The bargaining framework we discuss was developed to analyze hospital competition
but with some adjustments could be applied to other settings in which insurers construct
networks of providers, pharmacies or drugs in formularies to serve their enrollees.
    There are at least four key distinguishing features of hospital markets that play an im-
portant role in affecting negotiations between hospitals and insurers. First, since privately
insured patients primarily access hospital care through their health insurance, the set of avail-
able hospitals will depend on the health plan’s provider network structure. Health insurers
often contract with a subset of hospitals in a given location. The effective hospital choice set
for a patient when they need to be treated will therefore depend upon their health insurance
plan (Ho, 2006). Second, patients do not pay directly for the vast majority of their inpatient
care. Most of the cost of an inpatient episode is covered under the patient’s insurance and
hence any price differential between hospitals is only fractionally paid for by the patient.33
More recently, insurers have begun establishing tiered networks in which patients pay differ-
ent out-of-pocket expenditures depending on which cost tier the hospital is placed. Third, the
health insurance choice of the patient is generally made prior to the need for inpatient treat-
    32
     Electronic medical records contain information on patient biometrics (e.g., weight, height, blood pres-
sure), test results, etc. that are not contained in the data now commonly used by researchers: health insurance
claims data or hospital discharge databases.
  33
     Some physician contracts with insurers put the patient’s physician at risk for the cost of hospital care,
inducing a more significant price sensitivity (Ho and Pakes, 2013).



                                                      18
ment. In this sense, hospitals are an option demand market (see Dranove and Satterthwaite,
2000; Capps et al., 2003). Fourth, hospitals negotiate with private insurers over inclusion
in their provider network and the reimbursement rates from treating the insurer’s enrollees.
These negotiations also determine how hospital utilization will be monitored and controlled
as well as details of the billing arrangements and may include discussion over which cost tier
the hospital will occupy.
    Health insurers, in turn, compete with each other based on premiums (which are a function
of the prices they pay hospitals) if the plan is underwriting risk, or the administrative fees
if the employer is bearing the risk.34 Importantly, insurers also compete on the breadth
and quality of their provider networks. Employers, through whom most private insurance
is acquired, have preferences over hospitals which are an aggregation of their employees’
preferences, and select the set of health plans they offer to their workers based on expected
costs, benefit structure and provider networks.35
    A model of insurer-provider price negotiations would ideally also include endogenous
network formation. However, because of the complexity of this problem, recent papers fully
model only one of these phenomena. We discuss the research on network formation in the
following section. We then follow with price negotiation models in Section 5.2.


5.1     Insurer-Provider Network Formation

A small number of papers have focused on understanding the formation of insurers’ hospital
networks. Ho (2006) uses hand-collected data on the networks of over 500 plans in 43 US
markets to understand the welfare effects of restricted hospital choice. In her data 17% of
potential plan-hospital pairs do not have contracts. The proportion varies substantially across
markets. She estimates a model of consumer demand for hospitals and uses it to construct a
measure of each consumer’s expected utility from the hospital network offered by each plan
in her data.36 She then uses this expected utility from the network as an input into a discrete
choice model of consumer demand for insurers. Ho’s estimates indicate that consumers place
a significant weight on the attractiveness of the hospital network when choosing their plans.
Under the assumption of fixed prices, she predicts that a change from the observed networks
to a world where every plan included every hospital in its network would lead to a median
equivalent variation of $15.70 per privately insured consumer per year, or a total gain of
$1.04 billion for the 43 markets in her data. She notes that these numbers are small relative
to the premium increases that could result from a move away from the ability of MCOs to
use the threat of restricted networks as a bargaining device.
  34
     60% of workers with employer sponsored health insurance are covered in partially or completely self-
funded plans (Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust, 2012).
  35
     Most large employers are self-insured and thus changes in negotiated prices between providers and health
plans are directly passed on to the employer.
  36
     This is similar to the willingness-to-pay variable developed in Capps et al. (2003) which we discuss in
detail below.



                                                     19
    Ho (2009) builds on her previous work and uses it to model the network formation game.
The key insight she develops is that given consumer preferences over MCO characteristics
(including the structure of the hospital network), and the realized hospital network, one
can estimate the parameters of the hospital profit function. She uses the estimates from Ho
(2006) to construct consumer valuations for any hospital network that could be offered by any
plan in the large metropolitan areas under analysis. With these measures in hand, together
with her insurer demand estimates, she then turns to the network formation game. Her
model abstracts away from details of the bargaining game: all hospitals make simultaneous
take-it-or-leave-it offers to all plans in the market. Then all plans simultaneously respond.
MCOs select the hospital network that maximizes expected profits relative to all possible
counterfactual networks. These profits are the revenues the MCO earns, given its hospital
network (and a simple premium-setting model), less the payments made to the hospitals in
its network.
    This simple model suggests the use of an inequality method of moments estimator de-
veloped by Ho and co-authors (Pakes et al., 2006) to estimate the determinants of hospital
profits. While the underlying econometric theory is non-trivial, the basic idea behind the
estimator is straightforward. Given a set of instruments which help address measurement
error, the estimator finds the set of parameters that result in the observed hospital network of
each insurer producing a higher expected profit than any alternative network, conditional on
other insurers’ expected choices.37 Expected insurer profits under both observed and counter-
factual sets of networks can be constructed from Ho’s model as a function of data, estimated
demand model parameters and hospital profits. This approach enables Ho to estimate the
hospital profit function (although not the full bargaining model) despite the fact that her
data do not include information on hospital prices. Instead of positing a structural expression
for hospital profits, Ho specifies a reduced form hospital profit function where profits are a
function of the number of expected admissions, market and hospital characteristics.
   Ho finds that hospitals in systems take a larger fraction of the surplus and also penalize
plans that do not contract with all members. Hospitals that are attractive to patients also
capture high markups, and hospitals with higher costs per patient receive lower markups
than other providers. One limitation of Ho’s work is that - because it embeds a reduced
form hospital profit function - it is not directly applicable to analyzing the impact of hospital
mergers or other changes in market structure.
    Pakes (2010) furthers the ideas of Ho (2009) and Pakes et al. (2006) by examining the
MCO/hospital network formation decision allowing for richer error structures. The idea
behind the estimation is the same as in Ho (2009) but he allows for the existence of transfers
between hospitals and insurers that are observed by the firms but not by the econometrician.
The estimation and simulation results reveal interesting patterns. In the simulations he
computes the full information Nash equilibrium for the game in which hospitals make take-
it-or-leave-it offers to insurers and insurers decide whether to accept or reject the offers. The
equilibrium margins for hospitals are decreasing in excess capacity and costs relative to the
 37
      The parameters are set-identified.


                                               20
other hospitals in the market. The hospital’s margins are increasing in the insurer’s margins.


5.2    A Model of Hospital Insurer Price Negotiation

A number of authors have taken the literature on hospital-insurer price negotiations fur-
ther than Ho (2009). These papers use data on actual hospital prices (not just the realized
hospital networks) to estimate models that put more structure on the bargaining game.
The result is a fully-specified bargaining model that can be used to conduct policy-relevant
counterfactual exercises. These are particularly important because the impact of changes in
market structure, such as hospital mergers, in the bargaining framework can differ substan-
tially from standard oligopoly models. This is relevant in general to sectors of the economy
where prices are determined via negotiation (e.g., cable television, industrial equipment and
supplies, much of wholesale purchasing), not just health care. However, in order to focus
on the bargaining game, these papers simplify other elements of the model: in particular
they usually condition on the network of the insurer, and do not allow consumers to switch
insurers in response to a network change. These simplifications have some implications that
we return to below.
    To illustrate this, we outline below the recent model of Gowrisankaran et al. (2013) (GNT,
hereafter) of hospital-insurer bargaining.38 This is representative of this approach. We focus
on GNT’s ‘MCO Agency’ (Managed Care Organization) model as it captures many of the
salient features of hospital-insurer negotiation and its structural parameters can be estimated
in a straightforward way.39 The GNT model builds on a longstanding literature on hospital
competition by Gal-Or (1997), Town and Vistnes (2001), Capps et al. (2003), Gaynor and
Vogt (2003), Ho (2009), Haas-Wilson and Garmon (2011), and Lewis and Pflum (2011). The
structure of this model is also similar to the bargaining models of Crawford and Yurukoglu
(2010) and Grennan (2010), who study cable television distribution and the negotiations
between hospital and medical device suppliers over the price of stents, respectively.
    GNT model the bargaining process as a simple two-stage game. They make the assump-
tion noted above: that employer/MCO (“managed care organization”) contracts are taken
as given.40 That is, enrollees do not actively select health insurance plans and health plans
do not compete downstream with one another. This allows the model to focus on the poten-
tially imperfect contracting of hospital and MCOs. In the first stage, hospital systems and
MCOs negotiate the terms of hospitals’ inclusion in MCOs’ networks. In the second stage,
each patient receives a health status draw. Some draws do not require inpatient hospital
care, while others do. If a patient needs to receive inpatient hospital care, she must pay a
  38
     This section draws heavily from Gowrisankaran et al. (2013) exposition.
  39
     GNT also estimate/calibrate another model of MCO/hospital negotiations in which MCO first determine
networks and negotiate prices and then compete against one another à la Bertrand. The results from that
model broadly align with their MCO Agency model.
  40
     We use the term MCO, but this generally denotes any insurer that uses provider networks and negotiates
prices with providers. This includes virtually all private health insurers in the US.



                                                    21
exogenously determined coinsurance proportion of the negotiated price for each in-network
hospital, with the MCO covering the difference. Coinsurance rates may vary across patients
and diseases. The patient selects a hospital in the MCO’s network – or an outside alternative
– to maximize her utility.
    Starting with the second stage of their model, there is a set of hospitals j = 1, . . . , J, and
a set of managed care companies m = 1, . . . , M . Each enrollee has health insurance issued
by a particular MCO. Let i = 1, . . . Im denote the enrollees of MCO m. Each MCO m has a
subset of the hospitals in its network; denote this subset Nm . For each m and each j ∈ Nm ,
there is a base price pmj , which was negotiated in the first stage. Let p~m denote the vector
of all negotiated base prices for an MCO.
    At the start of the second stage, each patient receives a draw on her health status which
determines if she has one of a number of health conditions that require inpatient care. Let
fmid denote the probability that patient i at MCO m has illness d = 0, 1, ...D, where d = 0
implies no illness. Let wd be weights denoting the relative intensity of resource use for illness
d, with w0 = 0. For tractability GNT assume that the price paid for treatment is wd pmj ,
the base price multiplied by the disease weight. Therefore, there is only one price to be
negotiated, the base price, which can be viewed as a price per unit of wd . This is essentially
how most hospitals are reimbursed by Medicare, and many MCOs incorporate this payment
structure into their hospital contracts.
   Each patient’s contract with her MCO specifies a coinsurance rate for each condition,
which we denote cmid . The coinsurance rate specifies the fraction of the billed price wd pmj
that the patient must pay out of pocket. For each realized illness, d = 1, . . . , D, the patient
seeks hospital care at the hospital which gives her the highest utility, including an outside
option. The utility that patient i enrolled in health plan m receives from care at hospital
j ∈ Nm is given by
                            umijd = βxmijd − αcmid wd pmj + emij .                            (7)
In equation (7), xmijd is a vector of hospital and patient characteristics which may include
travel time, hospital indicators, and interactions between hospital and patient characteris-
tics (such as age, sex, hospital ownership type, hospital teaching status, etc.), and β is the
associated coefficient vector. The out-of-pocket expense to the patient is cmid wd pmj . The
parameter α denotes the price sensitivity. The outside choice, denoted as choice 0, is treat-
ment at a hospital located outside the market. Finally, emij is an i.i.d. error term that is
distributed Type I Extreme Value.
    Consumers’ expected utilities will play an important role in the bargaining game. Let
δmijd = βxmijd − αcmid wd pmj , j ∈ {0, Nm }. Given the assumption on the distribution of error
terms, the choice probability for patient i with disease d as a function of prices and network
structure is:
                                                    exp(δmijd )
                            smijd (Nm , p~m ) = P                    .                      (8)
                                                  k∈0,Nm exp(δmikd )

The ex-ante consumer surplus, or dollar value of expected utility, as a function of prices and


                                                22
the network of hospitals in the plan, is given by:

                                                I     D
                                                                                           !
                                            m X
                                         1X                              X
                        Wm (Nm , p~m ) =           fmid ln                       exp(δmijd ) .            (9)
                                         α i=1 d=1                      j∈0,Nm

Capps et al. (2003) refer to Wm (Nm , p~m ) − Wm (Nm \ Js , p~m ), as the “willingness-to-pay”
(WTP) as it represents the utility gain to the enrollees of MCO m from the system s.41
    Another important quantity for the equilibrium is the intensity-weighted expected number
of plan m patients who are admitted to hospital j ∈ Nm , given by
                                                    Im X
                                                    X  D
                              qmj (Nm , p~m ) =               fmid wd smijd (Nm , p~m ).                 (10)
                                                    i=1 d=1

Since prices are per unit of wd , the intensity-weighted expected number of patients times
price will give the expected revenue to the hospital from MCO m.
    There are M ×S potential contracts between hospitals and MCOs, each specifying the ne-
gotiated base prices for one MCO/hospital system pair. The bargaining outcome determines
a separate base price for each hospital in the system; the actual price paid to a hospital for
treatment of a patient with disease d will be its base price multiplied by the disease weight wd .
MCOs and hospitals have complete information about MCO enrollee and hospital attributes,
including xmijd and hospital costs.
   GNT assume that prices for each contract solve the Nash bargaining solution for that
contract conditional on all other prices (Horn and Wolinsky, 1988; Collard-Wexler et al.,
2013). The Nash bargaining solution is the price vector that maximizes the exponentiated
product of the values to both parties from agreement (as a function of that price) relative to
the values without agreement.
   Define the ex-ante expected cost to the MCO of a given hospital network and vector of
negotiated prices to be T Cm (Nm , p~m ),

                                      X  D
                                      Im X                      X
                 T Cm (Nm , p~m ) =             (1 − cmid )             pmj fmid wd smijd (Nm , p~m ).   (11)
                                      i=1 d=1                  j∈0,Nm


Then, define the value for the MCO and the employer it represents to be:

                            Vm (Nm , p~m ) = τ Wm (Nm , p~m ) − T Cm (Nm , p~m ),                        (12)

where τ is the relative weight on employee welfare. If employer/employee/MCO incentives
were perfectly aligned then τ = 1. Assume that Nm , m = 1, . . . , M , are the equilibrium
sets of network hospitals. For any system s for which Js ⊆ Nm , the net value that MCO m
 41
      Nm \ Js represents insurer m’s network without the hospitals in system s (\Js ).



                                                          23
receives from including system s in its network is Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m ).
    Hospital systems can be either for-profit or not-for-profit (NFP). Assume that NFP sys-
tems maximize a some linear combination of profits and the weighted quantity of patients
served (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2006). Let mcmj denote the “perceived” marginal cost of
hospital j for treating a patient from MCO m with disease weight wd = 1. The costs of treat-
ing an illness with weight wd is wd mcmj . This model of perceived marginal costs implicitly
allows for different NFP objective functions: an NFP system which cares about the weighted
quantity of patients it serves will equivalently have a ‘perceived’ marginal cost equal to its
true marginal cost of production net of this utility amount (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2006;
Gaynor and Vogt, 2003).
   GNT specify that a hospital’s marginal cost, which is MCO specific, is:

                                          mcmj = γvmj + εmj ,                                                  (13)
where mcmj is the marginal cost for an illness with disease weight wd = 1, vmj are a set of
cost shifters (e.g., hospital, year, and MCO fixed effects), γ are parameters to estimate, and
ε is the component of cost that is not observable to the econometrician. The returns that
hospital system s expects to earn from a given set of managed care contracts are then:
                                                 X X
             πs (Ms , {p~m }m∈Ms , {Nm }m∈Ms ) =         qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj − mcmj ]     (14)
                                                     m∈Ms j∈Js


where Ms is the set of MCOs that include system s in their network.P From (14), the net
value that system s receives from including MCO m in its network is j∈Js qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj −
mcmj ].
    Having specified the objective functions, the Nash bargaining problem for MCO m and
system s, denoted N B m,s (pmj j∈Js |pm,
                                      ~ s ), can be specified and is the exponentiated product
of the net values from agreement:
                               X                                    bs(m)
  N B m,s (pmj j∈Js |pm,
                      ~ s) =          qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj − mcmj ]
                               j∈Js
                                                                                                   bm(s)
                                                             Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m )            , (15)

where bs(m) is the bargaining weight of system s when facing MCO m, bm(s) is the bargaining
weight of MCO m when facing system s, and pm,    ~ s is the vector of prices for MCO m and
hospitals in systems other than s. GNT impose the standard normalization, bs(m) +bm(s) = 1.
     The Nash bargaining solution is the vector of prices pmj j∈Js that maximizes (15). Let
p~∗m denote the Horn and Wolinsky (1988) price vector for MCO m. It must satisfy the Nash
bargain for each contract, conditioning on the outcomes for each other contract. Thus, p~∗m




                                                    24
will satisfy:
                                                         ~ j |p∗m,
                             p∗mj = max N B m,s (pmj , p∗m,     ~ s ),                      (16)
                                     pmj

where p∗~m,j is the equilibrium price vector for other hospitals in the same system as j.
    Solving the model by setting the FOCs ∂ log N B m,s /∂pmj = 0 yields the following pricing
relationship:
                                        ~ − (Ω + Λ)−1 ~q,
                                   p~ = mc                                                (17)


where p~, mc
          ~ and ~q denote the price, marginal cost and adjusted quantity vectors respectively
for hospital system s and MCO m. Ω and Λ are both #(Js ) × #(Js ) size matrices, with
                                        b
elements Ω(j, k) = ∂q  mk
                     ∂pmj
                          and Λ(j, k) = bm(s)  A
                                          s(m) B
                                                               ∂Vm
                                                 qmk where A = ∂p mj
                                                                     and B = Vm (Nm , p~m ) −
Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m ).
    Equation (17), which characterizes the equilibrium prices, would have a form identical
to standard pricing games were it not for the inclusion of Λ. The case where Λ = 0, and
hence there is differentiated products Bertrand pricing with individual prices for each MCO,
is where hospitals have all the bargaining weight, bm(s) = 0, ∀s.
   Importantly, (17) shows that, as with Bertrand competition models, GNT can back out
implied marginal costs for the bargaining model as a linear function of prices, quantities and
derivatives, given MCO and patient incentives.


5.2.1    Implications of the GNT model

In general, the comparative statics of the GNT model are complicated and depend on many
factors including, for example, the coinsurance rates and the degree of asymmetry between
hospitals. This subsection provides theoretical intuition for some of the forces at work. First,
the use of coinsurance rates has potentially important implications. As long as coinsurance
rates are strictly between zero and one, prices affect patient choice and MCOs use this fact to
steer patients towards cheaper hospitals. This will influence equilibrium pricing: for example
the MCO may be willing to have a higher relative price for the high-cost hospital because
this will steer patients to the low-cost hospital.
    The model also has direct implications for the impact of bargaining on prices. Note from
equation (17) that price-cost margins from the model have an identical formula to those
that would arise if hospitals set prices to patients, and patients chose hospitals using the
choice model, but with Ω + Λ replacing Ω. Since Ω is the matrix of actual price sensitivi-
ties, GNT define the effective price sensitivity to be Ω + Λ. GNT show that for the special
case of a single-hospital system, this effect of bargaining on price sensitivity leads to lower
prices relative to differentiated products Bertrand competition with a given coinsurance rate.
With asymmetric hospitals and multi-hospital systems, the incentives are more complicated.
There may be cases where MCO bargaining may not uniformly lower prices, notably if cost
differences across hospitals are large and hence it is important to steer patients to low-cost

                                                25
hospitals. However, generally MCO bargaining lowers prices relative to differentiated prod-
ucts Bertrand competition. This implies there is a beneficial effect of selective contracting.
Insurers that have the threat of excluding a hospital from their networks have the ability to
bargain and reduce prices for consumers. A number of states have passed laws that require
insurers to contract with all interested providers (“Any Willing Provider” laws).42 Laws such
as these reduce insurers’ bargaining power, allowing providers to raise prices.43
    Consider now the impact of mergers on prices. Similarly to Bertrand competition, negoti-
ated prices also result in upward pricing pressure from mergers. For example, as two separate
hospitals merge, by raising the price of one of the hospitals some consumers are diverted to
the other hospital. Pre-merger these were considered lost profits, post-merger these are cap-
tured. This creates an incentive to raise prices relative to the pre-merger prices. However,
the impact of a merger in a bargaining model will be different than under Bertrand competi-
tion. To see this, note that with Bertrand competition, a merger only changes the cross-price
effects. With bargaining, the effective own-price elasticity can also change. However, the
cross-price terms change differently, and potentially less, than with Bertrand competition.
Since these effects can be of opposite sign, the net effect of the merger relative to the Bertrand
prediction is ambiguous.
    It is worth noting that GNT’s simplifying assumption that insurers do not compete for
enrollees is needed to generate their simple characterization of the bargaining outcome. If
enrollees could switch insurers in response to a network change, the Nash bargaining problem
in equation (15) would contain an additional term representing the system’s outside option
or threat point: its incremental profits from other insurers when it was removed from MCO
m which came from enrollees switching plans to access it. This increase in hospital threat
points would have implications for both prices and the price effects of hospital mergers. Ho
and Lee (2013) develop a method that allows them to investigate these issues empirically;
their results are discussed below.


5.3     Empirical Evidence on the Impact of Hospital Competition on Prices

5.3.1    Reduced Form Estimates

Most of the analysis of the impact of hospital competition has relied on reduced form specifica-
tions following the SCP paradigm in the Industrial Organization literature. In this approach,
researchers construct measures of market concentration, usually some form of the Herfindahl-
  42
      Interestingly, recent legislation has been introduced in Pennsylvania that would require integrated
providers to contract with any willing insurer. The intent of these ”Any Willing Insurer” (AWI) laws appears
to be to reduce the possibility of foreclosure. To the best of our knowledge no state has enacted an AWI law.
   43
      See Vita (2001), Durrance (2009), and Klick and Wright (2013), who provide evidence showing that any
willing provider laws lead to increased per capita health and pharmaceutical spending. Pinkovskiy (2013)
finds that state regulation of managed care generally, including any willing provider laws, increased health
care spending’s share of US GDP by nearly 2 percentage points, and accounts for much of the growth in
health care spending over the period 1995-2005.


                                                     26
Hirschmann Index (HHI), and regress it on the variable of interest (e.g. prices) controlling
for observable confounding variables (see equation (6)). Reduced form approaches allow re-
searchers to be somewhat agnostic about the underlying theoretical model and thereby let
the data speak directly to the relationships between the variables of interest.44 While the
broader industrial organization literature has largely moved away from employing reduced
form approaches, it nevertheless remains a popular research approach in the health economics
and health services research literatures.
    Accurately measuring prices is the principal challenge in estimating models of hospital
price competition. MCO - hospital contracts are complicated and have different prices and
different payment structures for different services. Three types of contracts are prevalent:
DRG-based, per-diem, and percent of charges. Hospital contracts often contain combinations
of these three types of contracts. For example, a hospital/insurer contract might have a DRG
structure for general medical/surgical services and ‘carve-out’ obstetrics using a per-diem
formulation. These contracts give hospitals different incentives for resource use. Anecdotally,
bargaining leverage appears to play a significant role in the determination of the contract
form, with hospitals preferring contracts with lower powered incentives and insurers preferring
higher powered contracts.
    There is little work that considers the role of competition in determining insurer-hospital
contract structure.45 In their analysis of insurer contracts for transplant services, Bajari et al.
(2010) find that the majority of hospital contracts rely on a non-linear, percent of charges
structure. Because of the complexity of insurer-hospital contracts, in most circumstances,
actual administrative claims data used to adjudicate payments between hospitals and insurers
will provide the best measure of price. Constructing price using administrative claims requires
adjusting for differential severity and types of services. Until very recently, administrative
claims data from payers and hospitals were not widely available.46 Without the ability to
access transaction level data, researchers resorted to constructing prices using state mandated
hospital financial reports. This meant constructing price measures applying average hospital
wide discounts to insurers to charges (list prices) (see, e.g., Gaynor and Vogt, 2003).
   However, there are some exceptions. Capps and Dranove (2004), Tenn (2011), Haas-
Wilson and Garmon (2011), Thompson (2011), Ginsburg (2010), and Gowrisankaran et al.
  44
     See Gaynor and Vogt (2000) and Dranove and Satterthwaite (2000) for summaries of early portions of
this literature.
  45
     Town et al. (2011) examines the degree of physician risk-bearing in their contracts with health insurers.
They find that physicians facing less competition are more likely to have fee-for-service contracts.
  46
     Very recently some health insurance claims databases have become available which contain actual prices
paid to hospitals. The Health Care Cost Institute http://www.healthcostinstitute.org has the universe
of claims from 4 large private insurers with complete data on transaction prices, FAIR Health http://www.
fairhealth.org maintains a database of health insurance claims for which a portion has information on
transaction prices, and Truven Health Analytics http://www.truvenhealth.com maintains the MarketScan
database of health insurance claims from a group of large employers, with complete data on transaction
prices.




                                                     27
(2013) all use insurer claims data to construct risk-adjusted prices.47 More recently, several
states have initiated programs to post measures of hospital prices on the web. For example,
Massachusetts issues detailed reports on provider prices broken down by insurer and type of
product (e.g., http://www.mass.gov/ago/docs/healthcare/2011-hcctd-full.pdf.)
    Recently, Gaynor and Town (2012) surveyed the hospital price concentration literature
published between 2000 to 2011. Of the eight papers included in their literature review,
all but one of the papers found a positive relationship between hospital concentration and
price. This relationship is a function of the structure of the health plan market. During the
rise of MCOs in the 1990s this relationship strengthened, and the growth in the correlation
appears to wane during the managed care backlash of the early 2000s. The correlation is
stronger in markets with high MCO penetration or in areas with a large number of managed
care organizations. The relationship between price and measures of market structure also
holds in other countries. Halbersma et al. (2010) find hospital prices are positively correlated
with hospital concentration and negatively correlated with insurer concentration after the
introduction of market-based health care reforms in the Netherlands in 2004.48


5.3.2      Estimates of the Impact of Consummated Hospital Mergers on Price

The second popular approach to the analysis of the impact of hospital mergers is to study the
impact of consummated mergers. The appeal of studying consummated mergers is obvious.
The variation in market structure is driven by the phenomena of primary policy interest.
Understanding the outcomes of past hospital mergers speaks directly to the role of competi-
tion and the impact of consolidation on hospital prices. The predominant empirical strategy
is difference-in-difference estimation, where the merging hospitals (or sometimes their close
rivals) are the treatment group and researchers locate other hospitals to use as controls.
    Despite its clear appeal, there are non-trivial impediments to implementing merger case
study approach. Principal among these challenges is defining a sensible set of control group
hospitals. Hospital inflation has been significant and persistent – the producer price index for
hospitals increased on average 3.8% per year over the last decade. Thus, simply examining
pre/post hospital prices may lead to misleading inferences regarding the underlying change
in the competitive environment induced by the merger. In addition, a merger may change
the quality or the set of services provided by the merging hospitals, which may also affect
inference. The set of control hospitals should have cost and demand shocks that mimic what
would have happened to the merging hospitals under the counterfactual that the merger did
not take place.
       In their study of the impact of the Evanston Northwestern Healthcare and Highland Park
  47
      The Federal Trade Commission, following a string of unsuccessful attempts to block hospital mergers in
the 1990s, undertook a large retrospective effort to study the impact of consolidation in the hospital industry
on prices. Tenn (2011), Haas-Wilson and Garmon (2011), and Thompson (2011) are papers that resulted
from that effort.
   48
      Moriya et al. (2010); Melnick et al. (2011) also find the same patterns for US markets.


                                                      28
Hospital merger and the St. Therese Medical Center and Victory Memorial Hospital, Haas-
Wilson and Garmon (2011) used the non-federal general acute-care hospitals in the Chicago
Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area that were not involved in mergers over the relevant
time period. Hospital mergers will almost surely affect the price of close rivals. A hospital
merger that leads to increased bargaining power will also spillover and increase the prices of
competing hospitals that are not party to the merger. Using a set of control group hospitals
that are geographically proximate to the merging hospital will control for local demand and
cost shocks, but risks inducing a downward bias in the estimated impact due to the spillover
effect. Using hospitals that are not proximate as a control group reduces the bias from
spillovers, but increases the likelihood that demand and costs shocks will not be adequately
controlled.
    Gaynor and Town (2012) provide a detailed review of the hospital merger literature.
Of the nine studies they identified, all but one find that prices increased (or increased faster
relative to trend) for hospitals that consolidated relative to the control group hospitals.49 The
estimated increase in price is often quite large. For example, Tenn (2011) finds that the prices
at Sutter hospital increased between 28 and 44% after its merger with Alta-Bates hospital,
relative to the control group.50 The finding that horizontal hospital mergers in concentrated
markets leads to price increases implies that if there are merger specific efficiencies, they are
not large enough to overcome the impact of the increase in market power.
    The pattern that mergers between competing hospitals in concentrated markets often
leads to significant price increases also holds in international settings. While most non-US
OECD countries rely on administered prices, the health reforms implemented in 2004 in
the Netherlands allow insurers and hospitals to negotiate over prices. Two hospital mergers
between competing hospitals were consummated just prior to the reforms. Kemp and Sev-
erijnen (2010) estimate the impacts of the mergers on the price of hip surgery and find that
the hospitals involved in the most controversial merger experienced a significant increase in
price relative to the control hospitals.
    The concern regarding the use of a difference-in-difference approach to identify merger
effects is that the merger is in fact endogenous. Unobservables (to the econometrician) that
affect the returns to merger and the prices that would have occurred absent the merger
may be present and bias the estimated coefficients. For example, a hospital facing declining
demand might be more likely to merge.51 The estimating merger effect in this example
would be biased towards zero. Dafny (2009) addresses the endogeneity issue by constructing
  49
     The one study that did not find a price increase at merging hospitals, Spang et al. (2001), is the oldest
paper in the review and uses relatively poor measures of price and costs and the study design is not well
suited to identify hospital merger effects.
  50
     Since the price increase at Alta-Bates was comparable to the control group, this suggests that the hospital
system used their bargaining leverage after the merger only for higher rates at Sutter hospital.
  51
     The are other possible sources of bias. For example, a hospital that is a poor negotiator with MCOs
may be more likely to be acquired or the hospital may change its post-merger characteristics (e.g. quality)
which may affect is post-merger price. See Gowrisankaran (2011) and Leonard and Olley (2011) regarding
the potential biases of difference-in-difference estimates of merger price effects.


                                                      29
an indicator of whether hospitals are co-located (located within .3 miles of one another) as an
instrument in an instrumental variable approach. The logic is that if distance is predictive of
mergers (which it should be as the gains from merger are a function of the distance between
hospitals), but is uncorrelated with these unobservables that determine the post-merger price
effects, then it should correct for the selection into merger.52 She then examines the impact
of a hospital’s rivals merging on that hospital’s price using this IV strategy and finds that
OLS analyses lead to lower estimated merger effects relative to IV, consistent with the idea
that hospitals select into merger.
    Finally, while the literature clearly shows that mergers between rivals in concentrated
settings is likely to increase prices for insurers, it is unclear how those increased prices affect
consumers. Town et al. (2006) examine how changes in hospital market structure affect
rates of uninsurance. If increases in hospital prices are not passed on to consumers, then
there should be little association between hospital mergers and insurance take-up. They
find that, in fact, hospital mergers lead to declines in the rates of insurance and the more
competitive the insurance market (measured by the number of HMOs), the larger the impact
of hospital mergers. There is little work on the equity and access consequences of provider
consolidation. Town et al. (2007a) find that the declines in health insurance take-up caused
by hospital consolidation were most pronounced for low-income and minority populations.
Simpson (2003) finds that despite a large increase in prices, post-merger patients did not
switch to alternative hospitals.
    In sum, the message from this literature is clear. Consistent with the GNT model outlined
above, mergers between rival hospitals are likely to raise the price of inpatient care and these
effects are larger in concentrated markets. The estimated magnitudes are heterogeneous and
differ across market settings, hospitals and insurers.


5.3.3    Results from Structural Approaches

There are two strands of this literature which we term structural and semi-structural. Semi-
structural estimation approaches have a foundation in economic theory and rely on a specific
economic model to guide the construction of variables (e.g. WTP) and guide hypotheses to
be tested. However, these approaches are not purely structural in that some or all of the
estimated parameters do not map into model primitives.
    Town and Vistnes (2001) and Capps et al. (2003) take semi-structural approaches to
estimating the relationship between bargaining leverage and price. In both of these papers, a
measure of the health plan enrollees’ willingness-to-pay (WTP) for a hospital is constructed
and regressed upon hospital profits. In the notation of the model presented above, WTP is
  52
     As noted by a referee, while the instrument is clever, there is some reason to be concerned about its
validity. The instrument needs to be correlated with the likelihood of merger, but uncorrelated with un-
observables that drive post-merger change in price. The latter condition may be difficult to satisfy in this
setting.




                                                    30
given by: W T PJs = Wm (Nm , p~m ) − Wm (Nm \ Js p~m ).53
    While these empirical implementations are not fully structural, the approach does map
into a specific version of the GNT model. In the GNT model if the copayment rate is zero and
the bargaining weights are equal between the MCO and the hospital then price is determined
by:

                   X                           bs(m)
                         qmk [pmk − mcmk ] =         [Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m )] .   (18)
                  k∈Js
                                               bm(s)


While in the CDS framework, profits are given by:

                  X                            bs(m)
                        qmk [pmk − mcmk ] =          [Wm (Nm , p~m ) − Wm (Nm \ Js , p~m )] ,   (19)
                 k∈Js
                                               bm(s)


    The Capps et al. (2003) formula is equivalent to (18) if hospitals obtained a lump-sum
payment for treating patients, with the MCO then paying all the marginal costs of their
treatment. In practice, WTP measures are regressed on profits or price (in which case WTP
is normalized by qmk ) and marginal cost controls are added to the regression. The parameter
on WTP captures the relative bargaining weights.
   CDS estimate the relationship between WTP and hospital profits based on a specification
analogous to (19). Using data from San Diego, CA, they calculate WTP as described above
and regress it against hospital profits. WTP and hospital profits are highly correlated. A
one unit increase in WTP increases hospital profits by $2,233. Lewis and Pflum (2011)
build upon the CDS framework. They estimate a hospital cost function and specify a simple
bargaining model and find that WTP is correlated with market power. They also find that
systems operating in multiple markets have higher bargaining power, indicating that focusing
only on local markets in evaluating the potential effect of a merger may be insufficient. A
hospital’s physician arrangements and other characteristics can also have a significant effect
on its bargaining power.
    Town and Vistnes (2001) acquired data on negotiated price between two MCOs and
hospitals in Southern California to estimate the relationship between WTP and price. They
find that hospitals with higher bargaining power (as measured by these two counterfactuals)
negotiate higher prices. They also run merger counterfactuals, and their results indicate that
mergers between neighboring hospitals can lead to significant increases in hospital prices,
even in an urban environment with many other competing hospitals.
   Gowrisankaran et al. (2013) estimate the parameters of the model outlined in Section 5.2
using data from Northern Virginia. The center their analysis on a proposed merger between
the large 1,800-bed Inova hospital system and Prince William Hospital, a 170-bed facility in
 53
      CDS are the first to use the WTP terminology in this context.


                                                      31
Manassas, VA. In their structural work, Gowrisankaran et al. estimate the marginal cost and
bargaining parameters using (17) in a generalized method of moments procedure to recover
bargaining and cost parameters. Their model allows for the possibility that patients may
face nontrivial out-of-pocket cost differentials between hospitals which affects hospital choice
and in turn affects equilibrium prices.
    GNT find that patients pay an average of 2-3% of the hospital bill out of their own pocket.
The own-price elasticity for systems is relatively low, ranging from 0.07 to 0.15. Without any
health insurance, own-price elasticities would range from 3.13 to 6.57. Mean estimated Lerner
indices, based on the bargaining model, range from 0.21 to 0.68 across hospital systems. From
the inverse elasticity rule, these Lerner indices are equivalent to those implied by Bertrand
pricing with own-price elasticities of 4.84 and 1.48, respectively. This implies that bargaining
incentives make MCOs act more elastically than individual patients, but less elastically than
patients without insurance.
    With the structural parameters in hand, GNT then use the FOC from the bargaining
problem to examine the equilibrium implications of several different counterfactuals. They
find that Inova’s acquisition of Prince William Hospital would lead to a significant price
increase – the equivalent of a 30% price increase at Prince William Hospital. They also
examine the role of coinsurance rates in affecting the bargaining equilibrium. They find that
10-fold increase in the coinsurance rate leads to a 16% decrease in the equilibrium hospital
prices.
    Gaynor and Vogt (2003) take a different approach to structurally estimating the impact of
hospital mergers. They adapt the structural models of Berry et al. (1995), who developed an
estimation framework for differentiated products consumer goods, to the hospital industry.
Their approach can be mapped into the GNT model by assuming the coinsurance rate, α
equals 1, and the MCO’s bargaining weight is zero.54 Gaynor and Vogt use data from hospital
discharge and financial data from California. They estimate the average elasticity of demand
faced by a hospital to be -4.85, and find that hospitals are highly spatially differentiated –
cross-price elasticities fall sharply with the distance between two hospitals. They then go on
to simulate the impact of a hospital merger in San Luis Obispo, California, and predict that
hospital prices would increase by up to 53%, with no significant difference in merger effects
if the merging hospitals are NFP or FP.
   Ho and Lee (2013) work with a bargaining model similar to GNT but allow for health
insurer competition; that is they allow enrollees to switch plans in response to a network
change. They note that insurer competition may have at least two offsetting effects on
hospital prices. First it may lead to lower premiums, placing downward pressure on prices
because there is less surplus to be divided between insurers and providers. There is also a
bargaining effect: by increasing consumers’ ability to switch insurers in response to a network
change, insurer competition may allow hospitals to “play” insurers off one another, giving
them leverage to negotiate higher rates.
  54
    Gaynor and Vogt (2003) prove the conditions under which insurers choosing hospitals (and consumers
choosing insurers) is equivalent to consumers choosing hospitals directly.


                                                 32
    The authors derive an equation for price under the assumption of a zero coinsurance rate
and that premiums do not respond to a small change in hospital prices (although they may
respond to a hospital being dropped from a network). They work with transaction price data
for a large group of patients in California. Similar to GNT, price is expressed as a function
of how (i) an insurer’s premiums, demand, and payments to other hospitals, and (ii) hospital
costs and reimbursements from other insurers, change when a hospital is dropped from an
insurer’s network. They estimate a model of consumer demand for hospitals and use it to
predict as many terms in the price equation as possible. They then use other variables to
proxy for the terms that are not directly measurable with their data. A consumer WTP
measure proxies for hospital attractiveness to patients (an input into insurer premium and
demand changes). The impact of insurer competition is identified using a measure of the
presence of Kaiser Permanente, a large vertically integrated health insurer, in the hospital’s
market. Specifically the authors use the share of each hospital’s patients who live within 3
miles of a Kaiser Permanente hospital. Their intuition is that, if a hospital’s patients live
close to a Kaiser hospital, this should increase the attractiveness of Kaiser health insurance
to those patients and reduce the threat points of other insurers in price negotiations with the
hospital. They choose Kaiser Permanente for this analysis because, as a vertically integrated
insurer which owns a network of providers and rarely refers patients outside its network,
it affects the bargaining process between a non-Kaiser hospital and another insurer only
through competition for enrollees at the insurer level. A different insurance carrier, which
competed with the other insurer and also sent patients to the hospital, would impact the
hospital-insurer bargaining process through multiple routes.
    The authors allow for heterogeneous effects of insurer competition on prices across hospi-
tals. They find that the impact is negative for most hospitals, but that attractive hospitals
can benefit from insurer competition. For the top decile of hospitals by WTP, increasing
the proportion of patients with local access to a Kaiser hospital by just 10% increases the
negotiated price per admission by approximately 2% of the average price in their data. The
implication is that more insurance market competition leads to higher hospital prices for
attractive hospitals. However, since the estimation framework cannot be extended to predict
impacts on insurance premiums the welfare effects are unclear.55
    The structural analysis of buyer-seller networks is a young and quickly evolving literature.
While this literature is relatively new, the underlying policy implications of these papers is
similar to the other strands of the literature. Hospitals (particularly those in systems) can
acquire and exercise market power. The availability of high quality data sets combined with
recent theoretic and econometric advances point to this line of work leading to important
findings in the near future.
  55
    A number of reduced form papers find that hospital prices are lower where insurance markets are more
concentrated (Halbersma et al., 2010; Moriya et al., 2010; Melnick et al., 2011). Separately, Dafny et al.
(2011) find insurance premiums grow faster in more concentrated insurance markets, and Trish and Herring
(2012) find insurance premiums are higher where insurance markets are more concentrated.




                                                   33
5.3.4     Not-for-Profit Firm Behavior

The hospital sector is characterized by the fact that there is a mixture of firms with different
ownership types. Not-for-profits are the most common, but there are substantial numbers
of for-profit hospitals and public hospitals. Interesting questions arise in this context about
differences in behavior between for-profit and not-for-profit firms (and publics), and the im-
pact of the mixture of different types of firms in a market on firm conduct.56 The role of
not-for-profit hospitals in merger analysis was pushed to the fore with the decision in Butter-
worth/Blodgett hospital merger in which the court ruled that a merger between competing
not-for-profits was not anticompetitive because the merged hospitals were unlikely to exercise
their newly acquired market power.57 The court heavily relied on the work of Lynk (1995)
who argued that not-for-profit hospitals do not leverage their market power to increase prices.
His findings were later overturned by Dranove and Ludwick (1999).
    Several studies discussed above (e.g., Capps et al., 2003; Gaynor and Vogt, 2003) examine
the issue of not-for-profit/for-profit differences in competitive conduct. There is little support
for the notion that not-for-profit hospitals price differently than their for-profit counterparts.
A recent study by Capps et al. (2010) examines whether not-for-profit hospitals are more
likely than for-profit hospitals to offer more charity care or unprofitable services in response
to an increase in market power. The implication is, that if there were such a difference, not-
for-profits would be spending their profits from market power on socially beneficial activities.
Capps et al. examine 7 years of data on California hospitals and find no evidence of any such
differences – not-for-profits do not engage in any more socially beneficial activities than do
for-profits when they possess market power.
    More evidence for the lack of a difference between not-for-profits and for-profit hospitals
is found in Duggan (2000). He uses an increase in government reimbursements for treating
indigent patients to test for differences in behavior between for-profit, not-for-profit, and
public hospitals. He finds that both for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals responded strongly
to the financial incentives in the policy. Both types of private hospitals treated the most
profitable indigent patients and avoided unprofitable ones. Public hospitals’ behavior did
not change. In addition, both for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals used the revenues from
the indigent care program to increase financial assets, as opposed to improve medical care
for the poor. Duggan (2002) finds that not-for-profit hospitals located in areas with many
for-profit hospitals were substantially more responsive to the changed financial incentives
than not-for-profit hospitals located in areas with few for-profits.
  56
     A classic review of the difference between not-for-profits and for-profit organizations can by found in
Sloan (2000).
  57
     In the matter of Butterworth Health Corporation and Blodgett Memorial Medical Center, (Docket No.
9283)




                                                    34
6    Insurer Premium-Setting

The next stage in the model outlined in Section 2 concerns premium-setting by insurers.
Less work has been done in this area than on hospitals. The US health insurance market
is complex, with employers providing the majority of private coverage to their employees as
a pre-tax fringe benefit. Each employer offers only a subset of the plans available in the
market to its employees. Insurers therefore compete on two levels: first to be included in
the menu of plans offered by employers, and then to attract employees away from the other
offered plans. Employers may be self-insured, contracting with insurers only to administer
their plans (including assembling the provider network and negotiating provider prices),
they may purchase actual insurance, or they may offer a combination of self-insured and
fully-insured plans. Some employers bargain directly with insurers over premiums and other
coverage details; others hire benefits consulting firms to do this work for them. Given the
complexities of this market, detailed datasets are needed to analyze it fully. Such data are
not at present publicly available. Just a few authors have been able to access enough data to
study the impacts of competition on insurer premiums and other characteristics or to model
other aspects of this market.
    Dafny (2010) is one of the first of a new set of studies on insurance market competition.
Dafny uses data from a benefits consulting firm on the plans purchased and premiums paid
by a large number (776) of large employers over the period 1998-2005. While these data are
not necessarily complete by market or nationally representative, they do represent the most
complete and extensive data set with prices and quantities for the insurance market. Dafny’s
empirical approach is motivated by a model of the premium negotiations between insurers
and employers. She examines the effect of shocks to employer profitability on changes in
the insurance premiums they pay. The idea is that if insurers possess no market power then
the premiums they charge will not vary with employer profitability. Only if insurers have
market power will they be able to price discriminate based on employer profitability. Dafny
finds strong evidence that premiums increase with the buyer’s profitability. She also finds
that this effect decreases in magnitude with the number of insurers in the market, consistent
with insurer market power falling with the number of firms. This provides the first piece of
compelling evidence on competition in insurer markets - although of course it is possible that
other factors could be driving the results. Dafny considers the alternative hypothesis that
employers who experience positive profit shocks may share some of the rents with employees
through increased coverage, leading to increased medical expenses and thereby increasing
premiums without affecting insurer markups. The fact that the effect is larger in markets
with fewer insurers suggests this is not the primary mechanism. Dafny also includes a control
for plan generosity which does not alter the results.
    Dafny et al. (2011) use the same dataset as Dafny (2010) but examine how the growth
rate of an employer’s health insurance premiums is affected by health insurance market
concentration (HHI). They address the potential endogeneity of the HHI measure by instru-
menting for observed HHI with changes in local market concentration due to a large merger
in 1999 between two national health insurers: Aetna and Prudential Healthcare. Using this

                                             35
instrumental variables approach, they find a significant impact of the predicted change in
HHI due to the merger on the change in premiums. The cumulative effect of insurer market
consolidation on premiums is approximately 7 percent. They also find evidence that the
merger reduced physician earnings growth on average by 3 percent, while nurses’ earnings
rose slightly (by six-tenths of 1 percent). This is consistent with plan concentration leading
to downard pressure on physician earnings and to substitution of nurses for physicians.
    Dranove et al. (2003a) also find evidence that more insurers in a market are associated
with lower prices. They use a modification to the methodology of Bresnahan and Reiss (1990)
that was devised by Mazzeo (2002). The idea is to use a cross-section of data on the numbers
of insurance firms operating in different sizes and types of markets to identify threshold ratios
(the ratio of the population necessary to support n + 1 firms to the population needed to
support n firms for different values of n), and to use these ratios to infer changes in firm profit
margins as new insurers enter the market. The original methodology makes the assumption
that firms are homogeneous, but Mazzeo (2002) adapts it to allow for heterogeneity across
firms. Dranove et al. analyze data from 1997 and distinguish between HMOs that are national
and those that are not; they hypothesize that local HMOs may not compete strongly with
national HMOs because national employers may strongly prefer to buy from national HMOs
and local employers from local HMOs. They allow for the possibility of any combination of
any number of firms (up to five of each type). The parameter estimates indicate that the
profits of local HMOs are virtually unaffected by the number of national HMOs and vice
versa. However the presence of a second same-type HMO reduces profits by approximately
one-half, while the effects of subsequent same-type firms on profits are negative but declining
in magnitude. These results indicate that there is fairly substantial competition within HMO
markets but also substantial product differentiation. They suggest that there is virtually no
competition between local and national HMOs.
    The papers cited so far indicate fairly consistent evidence that insurer competition in the
US private insurance market affects prices. Several studies suggest that in other markets,
where individual consumers rather than large employers make purchasing decisions, insurer
competition has less impact. Frank and Lamiraud (2009) consider health insurance markets
in Switzerland, where all residents are required to have health insurance. The government
defines a standardized benefit for the required coverage, adjusts the payments insurers receive
to compensate them for risk, and provides public information on prices. Individual consumers
then pick their plans. The authors document a high degree of price dispersion in Swiss health
insurance markets, with little evidence of reductions over time even though the number of
health plans per market rose over the time period studied.
   They speculate that the large number of choices may lead to decision overload on the
part of consumers. They use survey data on individuals and publicly reported information
on health insurance plans to estimate a model of health plan switching and find evidence
that switching is significantly more common in areas with fewer plans, and that those who
switched paid significantly less than those staying with the same plan.
   While the institutions in the Swiss individual health insurance market are of course quite


                                                36
different from those in the US large employer market, this suggests that individual decision-
making is more likely to be affected by transactions costs or irrationality than is that by large
corporations. Similar patterns with regard to price dispersion in markets where choices are
made by individual consumers have been documented in the US market for Medigap insurance
(Maestas et al., 2009) and the Netherlands health insurance market (Bolhaar et al., 2010).
    Two additional papers model the Medigap and Medicare + Choice / Medicare Advantage
markets.58 They are consistent with insurer markets being quite concentrated, leading to
fairly high prices. Starc (2014) models the Medigap market. She documents that the national
four-firm concentration ratio is 83 percent (compared to 44 percent for private passenger
automobile insurance and 34 percent for life insurance) and two firms (United Health, 46
percent, and Mutual of Omaha, 24 percent) account for almost all of that. Starc documents
substantial price dispersion for Medigap policies even though plans are standardized (Maestas
et al., 2009, document the same finding) and a positive relationship between premiums and
market concentration. A 1 percent increase in the 2-firm concentration ratio is associated
with a 0.26 percent increase in premiums.
    Starc then estimates a structural model of insurance demand, claims, and seller costs
(variable, fixed and sunk) using data from the National Association of Insurance Commis-
sioners (NAIC) and the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survery for 2006-2008. She estimates
the average price elasticity of demand to be -1.12. This is a very low elasticity for firm
demand, especially given the standardization of the products sold in this market. The small
number may be due to aggregation (the NAIC data are at the level of the state and the true
geographic market is likely much smaller than that); it may also be caused by weak instru-
ments. Starc’s interpretation is that the low elasticity is caused by strong brand loyalty. The
estimated claims function indicates a positive relationship between premiums and claims:
sicker consumers sort into more expensive plans from trusted (brand-name) insurers. This is
indicative of the presence of adverse selection.
    Starc also recovers estimates of cost parameters. She recovers variable costs using the
usual pricing equation and assumption about conduct but also accounting for the issue that
health insurers are subject to minimum loss ratio regulations by the federal government. 65
percent of premiums collected are required to be paid out to enrollees as reimbursements
for covered services. Estimates of bounds on fixed and sunk costs are recovered using a
revealed preference approach; the magnitudes are reasonable but the standard errors on the
estimates are very large. Finally Starc takes her estimates and proceeds to welfare analysis.
She calculates the impact of setting premiums equal to average cost. This leads to a large
reduction in prices: equilibrium prices fall by 17%. The results emphasize the substantial
market power exercised in this market.
       Lustig (2010) examines the market for Medicare + Choice plans in 2000-2003. These
  58
    Medicare’s private insurance program whereby beneficiaries can opt out of traditional Medicare and
enroll in a private plan has been referred to by several names over its history including Medicare + Choice
and is currently called Medicare Advantage. Medigap refers to private insurance purchased by Medicare
beneficiaries to cover Medicare’s “gaps” in coverage – cost-sharing or uncovered services.


                                                    37
are private managed care plans that Medicare beneficiaries may choose as an alternative
to traditional Medicare (the current version of this program is called Medicare Advantage).
Lustig recovers preferences from demand estimation and then estimates plans’ cost functions.
He uses the estimates to investigate the welfare loss due to insurer market power relative to
that due to adverse selection. He finds that generosity preferences have a significant impact
on plans’ fixed costs but not on the marginal cost of plan generosity. Further, consumers’
health risk has no significant impact on insurers’ costs. These results suggest that adverse
selection may not be an important issue in the Medicare + Choice market. Lustig then
simulates welfare changes when adverse selection is eliminated in markets with increasing
numbers of insurers. He finds that the gains to eliminating adverse selection (as a percent of
the total welfare difference between the observed and the socially optimal outcome) increase
monotonically in the number of insurance firms. That is, when there are few firms in the
market, most of the welfare loss is due to the exercise of market power rather than to adverse
selection.
    An earlier paper by Town and Liu (2003) focuses on estimating the welfare associated
with Medicare + Choice and the impact of competition on welfare; it does not allow for
adverse selection. The authors find strong evidence of competitive effects consistent with
Lustig. Consumer surplus increases in the number of plans in the county and most of the
increase in welfare is due to increased premium competition. Comparing monopoly markets
to markets with four firms, they find that 81% of the difference in welfare is due to increased
premium competition.
   Overall the literature on health insurer competition indicates that while the US insurer
market is fairly concentrated, implying high premiums, increases in competition do generate
premium reductions in cases where large employers make plan choices. In other markets,
where consumers instead of firms choose plans, this result does not always seem to hold. We
note that this finding is relevant for the Health Insurance Exchanges to be introduced under
the ACA health reforms; we return to this issue below.


7    Models of Health Plan Choice

Moving to the next stage in the overarching model in Section 2, once insurers have set their
premiums, consumers observe each health plan’s characteristics (including provider networks)
and choose their plans. The welfare outcome depends not just on insurer characteristics but
also on consumers’ ability to choose the plan that best matches their preferences (and medical
needs). In this section we review recent papers that investigate the frictions and issues that
arise in consumer choice of health plans.
    We note above that the US commercial insurance market often involves employers choos-
ing a menu of plans and employees choosing from within that menu. The first question we
consider is the extent to which employers act as perfect agents for consumers in choosing their
menus: that is, the extent to which consumers would benefit from being offered a larger choice
set of plans. The literature here is quite limited. Dafny et al. (2013) and Dafny et al. (2010)

                                              38
use the same dataset employed in Dafny (2010) to consider this question. Their approach
has three steps. First they estimate a discrete choice multinomial logit model of employee
demand for healthplans, conditioning on the set of plans offered by the relevant employer in
the relevant geographic market and year. The parameters from this model reflect the values
placed by employees on individual plan characteristics. Second, they estimate an hedonic
model of premiums that permits them to predict the premiums a given employee would face
for each plan offered in her local market (implicitly assuming continuing group-based pricing
due to their underlying data). Third they use the demand estimates, together with the pre-
dicted premiums, to predict employee choices of plans and their expected utility when offered
additional plans that exist in the relevant market and year. Dafny et al explicitly address
a well-known problem with the logit choice model: that the logit error term has unbounded
support, implying that the gain to consumers from increasing the size of the choice set will
be biased upwards. Their preferred simulations hold fixed the number of choices offered to
each consumer and predict the welfare gains from substituting consumers’ most-preferred
plans for those actually offered by their employers. This change in plan menus (assuming
continued group-based pricing) is predicted to generate a benefit to consumers equivalent to
13% of combined employer and employee contributions. The authors conclude that, while
moving away from employer-based insurance would likely generate premium increases due
to reduced risk pooling and higher administrative costs, the offsetting benefit to consumers
from increased choice would be substantial. The estimates indicate that employers are quite
far from being perfect agents for their employees.
    These results suggest that moving away from an employer-based system towards a system
where consumers have more flexible choice should be welfare-improving (with the caveat
that premiums would likely increase as a result and this price increase was not factored
into the welfare analyses). However, the analysis assumes that the data reflects optimal
decision-making on the part of consumers. The authors implicitly assume that there are no
informational asymmetries and that consumers are able to predict the probability that they
will fall ill with different diagnoses in the following year, and understand the coverage and
services offered by each plan for each diagnosis, so that their chosen plan offers the highest
expected utility of all the plans offered to them.59 We now review several recent papers that
investigate these assumptions.
   As noted above there is a sizeable literature considering the impact of asymmetric in-
formation on health plan choice and welfare (see for example Einav and Finkelstein (2010)
and Einav et al. (2013)). Rather than providing an additional review of this literature, we
focus on papers that investigate other frictions affecting consumer demand in this setting.
Handel (2013) fits into this category. The author estimates demand using data on insurance
choices within a single large firm. The data contain a major change to insurance provision
that can be used to identify consumer inertia - including switching costs - separately from
persistent preference heterogeneity. The firm changed its menu of five health plan offerings
during the six-year period captured by his data, forced employees to leave the plans they
  59
     If this assumption is incorrect it may help explain why unregulated employers often offer limited choice
sets. However this could also be due to high contracting costs.

                                                     39
had been enrolled in, and required them to actively choose a plan from the new menu with
no default options. In subsequent years the plan options remained the same, although prices
changed over time, and consumers had their previous choice as a default option.
    Handel therefore observes both unambiguously active choices - in the year when the menu
changed - and choices in a more usual passive environment. He notes that, in cases where
premiums changed over time so that particular consumers’ default options were unambigu-
ously dominated by other plans, the majority of such consumers did not switch plans. He also
documents that the choices of incoming cohorts of new employees at the firm reflect current
prices and characteristics while prior cohorts of employees make different choices that reflect
past plan characteristics. Both findings are evidence of inertia on the part of consumers.
    He then estimates a structural demand model that uses this variation in the data to
identify consumer inertia separately from risk preferences and ex ante health risk. Inertia
is modeled as the implied dollar cost of choice persistence and its estimated magnitude is
large: it causes the average employee to forego $2032 per year, with a population standard
deviation of $446. This is a strikingly large effect compared to the average family’s annual
spending of $4500.
    In a second step Handel specifies a simple insurer pricing model that fits his application
closely: the (self-insured) firm sets a premium equal to the average cost of the prior period
plus a fixed per-covered dependent administrative cost. He then applies the estimates to a
counterfactual that reduces inertia: for example this could potentially occur through tar-
geted information provision or simplified insurance plan benefit descriptions. He finds that,
holding prices fixed, reduced inertia leads to improved choices by consumers and therefore
increased consumer surplus. However, if premiums are allowed to adjust in response to con-
sumer sorting, then a policy that reduces inertia by three-quarters improves consumer choices
but also exacerbates adverse selection, leading to a 7.7% reduction in welfare. In this coun-
terfactual consumers who are healthy but also value comprehensive insurance can no longer
reasonably purchase it because of the high premiums caused by sorting of sicker patients into
higher-coverage plans. The welfare loss from adverse selection is therefore much greater in
a market with fewer frictions, an interesting result that suggests an explanation for other
papers’ findings (e.g., Lustig, 2010) that adverse selection is not a major problem in some
health insurance markets.
    One question raised by Handel (2013) is what causes this substantial consumer inertia,
and what policy changes could (or should) be made to address it. Handel suggests that
it could stem partly from tangible switching or search costs (although these are limited in
his setting because all plans offer the same provider networks and cover the same medical
services) and also from inattention and other psychological costs. Handel’s main finding is
that inertia can mitigate the welfare loss from adverse selection; however it is also likely
to reduce the welfare gain from improved matching of consumers to plans when choice sets
expand. It could also reduce the premium reductions generated from insurer competition.
  Additional evidence of consumer choice behavior that is not fully rational comes from
Medicare Part D. This program, which was established in 2006, provides pharmaceutical

                                              40
benefits to seniors. While traditional Medicare Parts A and B are organized as a single-payer
system, Part D benefits are provided by private health insurers which receive a subsidy from
the government as well as payments from their enrollees. A large number of plans are offered
in each geographic region: the median market contained 48 plans by November 2006. The
introduction of Part D quickly elicited a substantial amount of research evaluating consumer
choices in that program.
    Kling et al. (2012) documents a field experiment which provided consumers with informa-
tion about the relative costs of each of the available plans in 2007, computed using their 2006
claims. The information was already available for free to consumers who used an online tool
or called a Medicare help-line. However, the providing the information directly to consumers
rather than them having to actively access it has an impact. They find that individuals who
receive this information are more likely to switch plans and more likely to have lower costs:
average costs decline by about $100 per year in the intervention group relative to the control
group.
    Abaluck and Gruber (2012) is another important early paper that analyzes 2005-6 claims
data from Wolters Kluwer, a firm that transfers information between plans. The claims are
taken from a subset of pharmacies representing 31% of all prescription drug claims in the
United States. The authors predict the out-of-pocket price each enrollee would have paid in
every other plan in the choice set by binning enrollees into deciles of drug expenditure, days’
supply of branded drugs, and days’ supply of generics and taking averages (and variances)
within each bin. These other-plan out-of-pocket prices are used as an input to a multinomial
logit demand model. The estimated coefficient on premium is much more negative than that
on expected out-of-pocket costs (more than five times as large in some specifications).
    The authors interpret this finding as evidence that consumers irrationally place more
weight on premiums than on the total cost of enrolling in a particular plan. Consumers also
exhibit strong preferences about observed characteristics such as donut hole coverage and
size of the deductible, even conditional on out-of-pocket risk. Of course it is possible that the
results are caused by consumers taking account of factors that are not included in the model
when making their choices - perhaps well-known, trusted brands offer donut hole coverage,
for example. However it seems likely that (perhaps in addition to such factors) consumers
made substantial mistakes in choosing their Part D plan in the first year of the program.
   Heiss et al. (2012) conduct a similar exercise using administrative data from CMS from
2006-8. The authors compare the observed plan choices in the data to those under various
counterfactual scenarios including perfect foresight (the consumer chooses her plan to mini-
mize costs using exact actual consumption in the subsequent year), static beliefs (she chooses
the plan that minimizes expected out-of-pocket expenses given drugs purchased in the cur-
rent year) and a minimum premium rule. The observed choices lead to higher spending on
average than any of these three decision rules. Their analysis suggests that less than 10 per-
cent of individuals enroll in plans that are ex post optimal with respect to total out-of-pocket
payments. Relative to the static beliefs benchmark individuals lose on average about $300
per year. The authors conclude that unless a large number of consumers value something


                                               41
other than costs, they must be choosing sub-optimally.
    Finally Ketcham et al. (2012) demonstrate that enrollees make mistakes, but that they
also switch plans and experience better outcomes after switching. The authors use panel data
from insurance plans offered by the prescription benefit manager CVS / Caremark in 2006
and 2007. Like the previous papers, they document substantial overspending by enrollees
relative to the lowest-cost plan. However they also show that enrollees with the largest errors
in 2006 are most likely to switch plans at the end of the year. Enrollees who switch, and those
with the highest out-of-pocket spending in 2006, are the most likely to reduce their out-of-
pocket spending in 2007. These results are interesting and potentially important, indicating
that the mistakes made by seniors in the first year of Part D might not extend to future years
of the program. The results indicate that overspending by as little as $25 per month ($300
per year) in 2006 resulted in a 49 percentage point increase in an individual’s probability of
switching in 2007.


8        Physician Treatment and Referral Decisions

In the final stage of the overall framework we employ some consumers get sick and utilize
providers. The consumer chooses her primary care physician from the network offered by the
plan; that physician refers the patient to the hospital if further care is needed. The referral
decision is likely to be made with some input from the patient, either because the physician
incorporates the patient’s opinions in his decision or because the patient chooses a physician
with admitting privileges at her preferred hospital. Of course the hospital chosen affects both
the consumer’s utility and also the cost of care. There is a growing literature that considers
the impact of physician incentives on these referral choices.60
    Early papers consider HMO gatekeeping. HMOs are managed care organizations that
have restricted provider networks and also often give physicians cost-control incentives. The
early papers focus on the ability of HMOs to reduce costs. This literature has been reviewed
by Glied (2000). The summary suggests that HMOs have lower inpatient admissions and
costs than other insurers. However the early study results are often difficult to interpret
because, for example, physicians and patients who prefer a low treatment intensity may
select into HMOs. More recent papers address these issues. Cutler et al. (2000) compare
the treatment of heart disease in HMOs and traditional insurance plans and find that HMOs
have 30% to 40% lower expenditures. Virtually all the difference comes from lower unit
prices rather than differences in actual treatments, suggesting either that HMOs are able to
negotiate lower prices than other insurers within a hospital or that they tend to refer patients
to cheaper hospitals.
    60
     There is also a growing literature on other aspects of physician behavior: for example Dranove et al.
(2003b) consider the implications of provider responses to the introduction of quality “report cards”. Kolstad
(2013) uses the introduction of report cards for cardiac surgery to investigate whether surgeons respond only
to financial incentives or also incorporate non-financial incentives in their objective functions. However the
details of this literature are outside the scope of this paper.


                                                     42
    Gaynor et al. (2001) look in more detail at how HMOs achieve cost savings. They analyze
physician responses to group-based financial incentive contracts within a single HMO. In
the years of their data this HMO contracted directly with independent physicians or group
practices. Doctors were grouped by the HMO into ”panels” that comprised between 3 and
30 physicians. Each physician was given a global budget for all his patients and was free
to allocate spending as he wished. He received substantial performance payments (bonuses
of 10 to 20 percent of total fees) only if his panel’s expenditures for the year were lower
than a pre-specified budget. Gaynor et al write down a model of moral hazard in teams
which predicts that expenditure per patient will be higher in larger panels (where individual
physicians generally have relatively low shares of the panel’s patients and therefore face weak
incentives) than in smaller panels.
    They use data from the HMO to analyze the correlation between spending on utilization
and the intensity of incentives, identified using variation in the physician’s share of his panel’s
patients and the number of physicians in a panel. They begin with physician-level analysis,
including specialty fixed effects, and find a negative significant relationship between expen-
diture per patient and the physician’s share of his panel’s patients. A panel data analysis
adds a broader set of controls and generates consistent results: panels with more physicians
have higher expenditures per patient. An increase in panel size from 10 to 12 physicians
is associated with an increase in expenditures of $6.58 (or 7.3 percent of the sample mean)
per month. An additional analysis indicates that cost reductions are focused on outpatient
rather than inpatient spending.
    Overall this paper indicates that physician groups which contracted with this particular
HMO responded to the financial incentives introduced by the insurer, but a moral hazard
in teams problem led the response to be negatively correlated with the size of the physician
panel. The designers of the HMO’s incentive system apparently understood the problem but
hoped that peer pressure between physicians would overcome the dilution of incentives that
occurs in group settings; this turned out not to be the case. An additional question, left for
future research, is the impact of cost-control incentives on the quality of care provided.
    Ho and Pakes (2013) analyze patient referrals in California. They investigate the response
of physicians’ hospital referrals to the cost-control incentives generated by capitation con-
tracts and also consider the trade-offs made between price, quality and patient convenience.
Commercial health insurers in California often pay large physician groups through global
capitation contracts where the physician group is paid a fixed amount per patient to cover
all costs of treating the patient (including hospital inpatient costs). An alternative is profes-
sional services capitation; this usually includes a “shared risk” arrangement under which the
physician group receives a share of savings made relative to some pre-agreed benchmark, in-
cluding hospital costs. Ho and Pakes analyze hospital referral choices for patients enrolled in
six California health insurers that use these capitation contracts, rather than fee-for-service
contracts, to different extents. They consider birth episodes.
   The paper estimates a utility equation for each insurer that summarizes the preferences
implied by observed hospital referrals. Two estimation issues need to be addressed. First,


                                                43
the price variable contains measurement error, which may bias the estimates. Second, the
price for a patient with a particular severity is likely to be correlated with the unobserved
hospital quality for that severity. The utility equation therefore needs to include hospital
fixed effects that vary freely with severity of diagnosis.
    Ho and Pakes develop an estimation procedure based on revealed preference. They assume
that the hospital chosen for each patient generates greater expected utility than any of the
other hospitals in her choice set. The utility equation for each insurer is assumed to be
additively separable in price, distance and a set of severity-specific hospital “quality” fixed
effects. The authors identify pairs of patients who have the same severity and are members
of the same insurer but who chose different hospitals. By defining the alternative of each
patient as the chosen hospital of the other and summing the two patients’ inequalities, they
difference out the severity-hospital quality terms from the utility equation. By averaging the
resulting inequalities over patients and hospitals they eliminate the effects of errors in price
measurement. The result is a relatively straightforward estimator of bounds on the price
coefficient. The estimates indicate that the price coefficients are much more negative than
those estimated in a more standard multinomial logit analysis (which does not address either
of the estimation problems). They are significantly more negative the higher the capitation
rate of insurer payments.
     Finally, the authors use the price coefficients to back out bounds on the hospital-severity
specific quality terms in the utility equation. They add some structure that allows them to
represent preferences as a linear function of price, quality and distance which differs across
insurers only in the coefficients of these variables. Econometric tests indicate that very little
is lost in terms of fit by adding this structure. As a result they can examine how the trade-offs
between price, quality and distance vary with capitation rates.
     Their findings indicate that, though the price coefficient varies directly with the cap-
itation rate, so does the quality coefficient. The ratio between the two differs extremely
little across the insurers in the data. That is, while the trade-off between distance and price
differs substantially across insurers, the trade-off between price and quality does not. Highly-
capitated more price-sensitive plans tend to send their patients longer distances to obtain
similar-quality service at a lower price (but do not trade-off costs against quality differently).
Consistent with this, severity-adjusted outcomes also do not differ significantly across plans.
    A few very recent papers evaluate initiatives that implement cost-control incentives like
those planned for Accountable Care Organizations. Accountable Care Organizations are
part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010). They are intended to provide
incentives for providers of various types (e.g., physicians, hospitals, post-acute care facilities)
to come together to coordinate care for Medicare beneficiaries.61 The notion is that by
coordinating their activities these organizations can provide better quality care at lower cost.
      For example the Alternative Quality Contract (AQC) was adopted by Blue Cross Blue
 61
   For more information on ACOs see http://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/aco/, http://www.
kaiserhealthnews.org/stories/2011/january/13/aco-accountable-care-organization-faq.aspx.



                                                44
Shield of Massachusetts in 2009. It introduced physician incentives similar to those created
by the global capitation contracts in California. Physician groups entered into five year
global budget contracts under which they received a budget per enrolled patient and were
accountable for costs of all services provided to those patients, including inpatient care.
Song et al. (2011) use a propensity-weighted difference in difference approach and find that,
in the first year, this initiative was associated with reduced growth in spending on outpatient
services and improved quality of care. Most of the savings came from referring patients to
lower-priced providers.
   Colla et al. (2012) study the Physician Group Practice Demonstration (PGPD), an early
program launched by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to test the ACO model.
Under the PGPD, ten participating physician groups were eligible for up to 80% of any savings
they generated (after crossing a 2% savings threshold) if they were also able to demonstrate
improvement on 32 quality measures, largely process measures of the adequacy of preventive
care and chronic disease management. The study uses a difference-in-difference approach,
comparing pre-intervention and post-intervention trends in spending of PGPD participants to
local control groups (Medicare beneficiaries from the same regions who received care largely
from non-PGPD physicians). The results indicate very modest average annual savings per
beneficiary (an average of $114 per person per year). There were no significant savings for
individuals eligible only for Medicare (the bulk of Medicare beneficiaries), but annual savings
were significant for patients eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid - vulnerable populations
who consume a disproportionate share of Medicare and Medicaid spending. Substantial
savings achieved by some participating institutions were offset by a lack of saving at others.
    The Pioneer ACO Model is a program established by Medicare to allow health care
organizations and providers that are already experienced in coordinating care for patients
across care settings to move rapidly to become an ACO.62 The results from the initial year
of this program were somewhat mixed. Costs for the Medicare beneficiaries in the Pioneer
ACOs grew by one-half of a percentage point less than did costs for similar beneficiaries
with conventional Medicare benefits, and there was improvement on some quality metrics.63
Frech et al. (2013), however, report that only 13 of the 32 participating organizations achieved
savings, while 9 left the Pioneer program, 2 left the Medicare ACO program entirely, and 7
became regular Medicare ACOs.
    Overall the evidence on the impact of these ACO-type physician incentives on costs is
fairly mixed. The largest effects seem to have been from physicians responding to cost-control
incentives by choosing lower-priced outpatient units or hospitals for their patients. (One
reason for the small impact of the PGPD on costs may be that Medicare prices are essentially
fixed across providers.) Ho and Pakes (2013) suggests that the spending reduction from the
move to lower-cost providers may come at the cost of a reduction in patient convenience, but
perhaps not a reduction in quality of care or outcomes.
 62
   http://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/Pioneer-ACO-Model/
 63
   http://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Press-Releases/
2013-Press-Releases-Items/2013-07-16.html


                                              45
9     Conclusion: Research Opportunities, Policy Impacts

9.1   Research Opportunities for Industrial Organization Economists

Health care is an area rich in research possibilities for industrial organization economists. As
we hope this review demonstrates, there has been a great deal of progress in understanding
health care markets, but there is also a great deal that remains to be learned. Hospital
markets have been the most active area of inquiry, in large part because of the availability of
data. The recent availability of some new administrative claims databases will make much
more research possible on all kinds of health care providers, but physicians in particular.
Advances in computing capabilities make it feasible to store and compute models with “Big
Data.” Data on health insurance markets remains problematic, but this may change as the
ACA gets implemented. Hopefully data from the various health insurance exchanges set up
under the ACA will be available. Data on private health insurance markets may also become
more broadly available, perhaps due to regulatory requirements of the ACA, or perhaps
due to a more general trend of “liberating” data. More extensive and detailed modeling
of physician services markets, insurance network formation, and insurance markets should
become possible as more and better data become available.
   Obviously more research is called for in the areas we reviewed. One obvious extension is
moving beyond the econometric models that have been estimated and trying to incorporate
more stages of the model described in Section 2. Trying to identify and estimate a complex
multi-stage model is very challenging, but the health care industry is a good place to attempt
such a task. The institutions are a good fit, but just as importantly, as rich detailed data
become available on multiple segments of the market (e.g., hospitals and insurers) empirical
modeling will be facilitated.
    The area of vertical relations is well suited to investigation in health care markets. This
is a very unsettled area in industrial organization, with a paucity of empirical evidence.
While there has been a great deal of horizontal consolidation in healthcare markets, vertical
relations are also evolving rapidly. Various forms of restraints and integration between physi-
cians, hospitals, and insurers are being developed, which provides opportunities for industrial
organization economists to learn about the impacts of these arrangements.
    We noted that research in the industrial organization of health care has moved beyond the
early emphasis on the role of asymmetric information in health care markets. New, detailed
datasets may allow new research that incorporates information asymmetries into the full
model we have outlined here. For example, detailed administrative claims databases contain
information on the identity of the physician who referred a patient for a procedure and
the doctor who performed the procedure, as well as which procedure or service the patient
obtained. There are commonly many patients referred or treated by the same physician
in these large (billions of records) databases. As a consequence, it should be possible to
specify and estimate models which recover patient and physician preferences, and therefore
learn more about the role of asymmetric information via physician agency. If, in addition,


                                              46
information is available about provider contracts and financial incentives, (e.g., as in Gaynor
et al., 2001; Ho and Pakes, 2013), that can provide another important source of identifying
information.
    Last, in most of the research we’ve reviewed, patients’ actual choice sets were not known.
Researchers used a variety of more or less ad hoc approaches to deal with this. Obtaining
information on insurers’ actual networks can be surprisingly difficult, although clearly ob-
taining this information and coupling it with data on choices is ideal. Another possibility
is to use econometric approaches to identify consumers’ likely choice sets. This has been
labeled the consideration set approach (Sovinsky Goeree, 2008). Although it hasn’t been
widely employed in IO, and to our knowledge not at all in health care applications, this
approach may have some real promise in health care industrial organization research.


9.2   Data

As we mentioned previously, there are some promising new datasets for the hospital and
physician industries. These datasets provide detailed information on where patients were
treated, what treatments they received, what diagnoses patients had, and the prices that
providers were paid. While this represents a tremendous improvement, these (health insur-
ance claims) data don’t generally contain information on the specifics of a patient’s insurance
benefits or this provider network. Claims data do not include potentially important health
information, such as body height and weight, or test results (e.g., blood glucose or heart
stress tests). Electronic health records (EHR) contain such information (and more). As they
become more widely used, EHR data will likely become available. Merging those with claims
data should allow for better controls for patient health status, which is critical to making
accurate inferences about price and quality. The health insurance industry unfortunately
has no good publicly available source of data for industrial organization economists. As
we mentioned above, it’s possible that the implementation of the ACA will help to rectify
this situation. Last, there are no systematic data on provider contracts and organizational
arrangements. Again, perhaps the implementation of the ACA, particularly with regard to
ACOs, will spur data collection and dissemination.


9.3    Potential Effects of Health Reform

The primary objectives of the ACA is to expand health insurance coverage and provide in-
centives for health care providers to reduce costs. Changes in market structure introduced
to support these objectives could affect quality, prices and costs through numerous mecha-
nisms, several of which are suggested by the findings in the literature reviewed above. For
example, Health Insurance Exchanges (HIEs) are being established to provide a forum where
consumers who do not have access to large- or small-group health insurance through their
employers can access health insurance with low search costs. In addition they are intended
to play a role in risk-pooling and to facilitate competition between health insurers with the
goal of generating reduced prices and increased coverage.

                                              47
    Papers on health insurer choice such as Dafny et al. (2013) indicate that rational con-
sumers would incur a substantial welfare gain from the expanded choice sets offered by HIEs.
However, any frictions in the decision-making process, caused by switching costs or other
types of inertia (Handel, 2013), could limit the increase in consumer welfare. Frank and
Lamiraud (2009) suggest that this could also feed through to premiums: consumer inertia
could undermine the market mechanism and reduce the price (and quality) effects of insurer
competition. Ho and Lee (2013) point out a possible downside of increased competition that
could come with HIEs: intensified competition between insurers may give attractive hospi-
tals increased leverage in the price bargaining process and lead to hospital price increases.
Further research would be useful to investigate the relative importance of these effects and
give guidance to policymakers as health reform moves beyond its initial rollout phase.
    The reforms also establish Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) whose objective is to
generate incentives for groups of health care providers, who together offer services to a large
number of Medicare or privately-insured patients, to reduce costs and improve the quality of
care. The structure of the ACOs that have emerged to date varies: for example some include a
member hospital while others comprise multi-specialty physician groups which contract with
hospitals outside the organization. Payment mechanisms also vary. In general the payer
(Medicare or the private insurer) commits to allowing the ACO to share in cost savings made
relative to some pre-agreed target, but ACOs do not always bear risk as under a global
capitation contract. Such details are likely to have important effects on the overall impact
of ACOs. For example the question of whether ACOs should include member hospitals
is potentially important. Vertically-integrated organizations that include hospitals could
potentially generate improved coordination of care, reduced hospital admission rates and
improved outcomes, perhaps resulting in substantial cost reductions in the long term.
   However, this type of ACO would likely imply a reduction in horizontal competition
between physician groups (depending on the specifics of the market, for example, if a small
number of hospitals within a market formed integrated organizations with a larger number of
physician practices) and potentially affect the vertically integrated organizations bargaining
position with MCOs. This could lead to price increases in the physician group market and/or
across a broader array of health care services. It could also imply the loss of some savings
that would otherwise be generated when physicians were given incentives to reduce costs.
    Ho and Pakes (2013) and Song et al. (2011) provide evidence that physicians respond to
cost-control incentives by referring their patients to lower-cost secondary providers, perhaps
without a negative impact on quality. If hospitals were not members of ACOs, and referring
physicians moved patients towards lower-priced hospitals, this could both directly reduce
costs and also give very high-priced hospitals a new incentive to lower their prices relative to
the pre-ACO equilibrium. We note, however, that competition between hospitals to join a
vertically integrated ACO could potentially yield similar benefits. As mentioned previously,
however, early results from the Medicare Pioneer ACO demonstration are less conclusive
regarding the impact of ACOs. As yet the data available to study the impact of vertically
integrated ACOs on quality and coordination of care are very sparse. Physician groups, too,
are an important piece of the picture but have been under-studied, again largely due to a lack

                                              48
of data. There will be opportunities for important research in these areas as the necessary
data become available. This will allow for opportunities to make important contributions to
the research literature, and to have an impact on important policy problems.


9.4    Policy Impacts

In an applied area such as the industrial organization of health care, research can have a real
impact on policy. The ACA provides both opportunities for new research and for affecting
policy. While we have highlighted the ACA, we also want to be clear that there are broad,
important questions and issues on the functioning of health care markets that research in the
industrial organization of health care can address that are not specifically linked to the ACA.
Research evidence is very much relevant to policymakers concerned with the functioning of
existing health care markets as well as designing new markets, such as the health insurance
exchanges.
    Evidence of this is provided by the fact that research on the industrial organization of
health care has had a noticeable impact on antitrust. Research results are of great interest
to the antitrust enforcement agencies and the antitrust community more broadly. The re-
search results we reported in Section 5.3 have shifted the evidence base in hospital merger
cases (Dranove and Sfekas, 2009). Prior to the appearance of this research in the literature
and its diffusion into antitrust, the US antitrust agencies had lost all but one of the hos-
pital merger cases they brought in the 1990s, even though these mergers were very likely
harmful to competition. This trend has been reversed in recent years, undoubtedly due in
part to the evidence introduced by the research literature. This includes the previously men-
tioned hospital retrospective studies undertaken by the FTC itself (Tenn, 2011; Haas-Wilson
and Garmon, 2011; Thompson, 2011). In addition, the enforcement agencies adopted new
methods developed in the research literature and changed their approach to hospital merg-
ers (Dranove and Sfekas, 2009). The current approach to hospital mergers at the Federal
Trade Commission is described by Farrell et al. (2011). This approach involves the use of a
bargaining model for both a theoretical and empirical framework, analogous to the approach
described in Section 5.2.64
    The functioning of health care markets has become a topic of intense interest to policy-
makers (e.g., Baicker and Levy, 2013; Berenson et al., 2010, 2012; Cutler and Scott Morton,
2013). As research moves forward invigorated by new methods, data, and researchers, we
can expect to see substantial real world impact of the new evidence generated by economic
research.
  64
    Another example of the impact of research on policy is the adoption of the Logit Competition Index
(LOCI, Akosa Antwi et al., 2013) by the Netherlands Healthcare Authority as part of their process of
assessing competition in health care markets.




                                                 49
References

Abaluck, J. and Gruber, J. (2012). Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: Evidence from
 plan choice in the Medicare part D program. American Economic Review.

Akosa Antwi, Y. O. D., Gaynor, M., and Vogt, W. B. (2013). A competition index for
  differentiated products oligopoly with an application to hospital markets. unpublished
  manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.

Allen, R. and Gertler, P. J. (1991). Regulation and the provision of quality to heterogeneous
  consumers. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 3:60–75.

American Medical Association (2009). Physician characteristics and distribution in the US.
 Chicago, IL.

Baicker, K. and Chandra, A. (2006). The labor market effects of rising health insurance
  premiums. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3):609–634.

Baicker, K. and Levy, H. (2013). Coordination versus competition in health care reform.
  New England Journal of Medicine, 369(9):789–791.

Bajari, P., Hong, H., Park, M., and Town, R. (2010). Regression discontinuity designs with an
  endogenous forcing variable and an application to contracting in health care. unpublished
  manuscript, University of Minnesota.

Berenson, R., Ginsburg, P., and Kemper, N. (2010). Unchecked provider clout in California
  foreshadows challenges to health reform. Health Affairs, 29(4):699.

Berenson, R. A., Ginsburg, P. B., Christianson, J. B., and Yee, T. (2012). The growing power
  of some providers to win steep payment increases from insurers suggests policy remedies
  may be needed. Health Affairs, 31(5):973–981.

Berndt, E. (2002). Pharmaceuticals in US health care: Determinants of quantity and price.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4):45–66.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
  Econometrica, 63(4):841–890.

Bhattacharya, J. and Bundorf, M. K. (2005). The incidence of the healthcare costs of obesity.
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 11303.

Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices
  across firms and nations. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1351–1408.

Bolhaar, J., Lindeboom, M., and van der Klaauw, B. (2010). Insurance search, switch-
  ing behavior and the role of group contracts. unpublished manuscript, Vrije Universiteit
  Amsterdam.

                                             50
Bresnahan, T. (1989). Empirical studies of industries with market power. In Handbook of
  Industrial Organization, volume 1. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam.
Bresnahan, T. and Reiss, P. (1990). Entry in monopoly markets. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 57(4):531–553.
Breyer, F., Bundorf, M. K., and Pauly, M. V. (2012). Health care spending risk, health
  insurance, and payment to health plans. In Pauly, M. V., McGuire, T. G., and Pita Barros,
  P. P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 2, chapter 11, pages 691–762. Elsevier
  North-Holland.
Capps, C. (2005). The quality effects of hospital mergers. unpublished manuscript, Bates
  White LLC.
Capps, C., Carlton, D., and David, G. (2010). Antitrust treatment of nonprofits: Should
  hospitals receive special care? unpublished manuscript, Bates White LLC, University of
  Chicago, University of Pennsylvania.
Capps, C. and Dranove, D. (2004). Hospital consolidation and negotiated PPO prices. Health
  Affairs, 23(2):175–181.
Capps, C., Dranove, D., and Satterthwaite, M. (2003). Competition and market power in
  option demand markets. RAND Journal of Economics, 34(4):737–763.
Carlton, D. W. and Perloff, J. M. (2005). Modern Industrial Organization. Addison-Wesley,
  Boston, MA.
Chandra, A. and Skinner, J. (2012). Technology growth and expenditure growth in health
  care. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3):645–80.
Chernew, M. (1995). The impact of non-IPA HMOs on the number of hospitals and hospital
  capacity. Inquiry, 32(2):143–154.
Chung, A. P., Gaynor, M., and Richards-Shubik, S. (2013). Subsidies and structure: The
  lasting impact of the Hill-Burton program on the hospital industry. unpublished manscript,
  Carnegie Mellon University.
Colla, C., Wennberg, D., Meara, E., Skinner, J., Gottlieb, D., Lewis, V., Snyder, C., and
  Fisher, E. (2012). Spending differences associated with the Medicare physician group
  practice demonsration. Journal of the American Medical Association, 308(10):1015–1023.
Collard-Wexler, A., Gowrisankaran, G., and Lee, R. S. (2013). Bargaining in bilateral
  oligopoly: An alternating offers representation of the “Nash-in-Nash” solution. unpub-
  lished manscript, New York University.
Cooper, Z., Gibbons, S., Jones, S., and McGuire, A. (2010). Does hospital competition save
  lives? Evidence from the English NHS patient choice reforms. unpublished manuscript,
  London School of Economics.

                                             51
Crawford, G. and Yurukoglu, A. (2010). The welfare effects of bundling in multichannel
  television markets. unpublished manscript, University of Warwick, Stanford University.

Cutler, D., McClellan, M., and Newhouse, J. (2000). How does managed care do it? RAND
  Journal of Economics, 31(3):526–548.

Cutler, D. and Scott Morton, F. (2013). Hospitals, market share, and consolidation. JAMA,
  310(18):1964–1970.

Cutler, D. M., Huckman, R. S., and Kolstad, J. T. (2010). Input constraints and the efficiency
  of entry: Lessons from cardiac surgery. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  2(1):51–76.

Dafny, L. (2009). Estimation and identification of merger effects: An application to hospital
 mergers. Journal of Law and Economics, 52(3):pp. 523–550.

Dafny, L. (2010). Are health insurance markets competitive? American Economic Review,
 100:1399–1431.

Dafny, L., Duggan, M., and Ramanarayanan, S. (2011). Paying a premium on your pre-
 mium? Consolidation in the US health insurance industry. American Economic Review,
 forthcoming.

Dafny, L., Ho, K., and Varela, M. (2010). An individual health plan exchange: Which
 employees would benefit and why? American Economic Review, 100:485–489.

Dafny, L., Ho, K., and Varela, M. (2013). Let them have choice: Gains from switching away
 from insurer-sponsored health insurance toward an individual exchange. American Econo,
 5(1):32–58.

Dixon, A. and Poteliakhoff, E. (2012). Back to the future: 10 years of European health
  reforms. Health Economics, Policy and Law, 7(1):1–10.

Dorfman, R. and Steiner, P. (1954). Optimal advertising and optimal quality. American
 Economic Review, 44(5):826–836.

Douglas, G. W. and Miller, J. C. (1974). Quality competition, industry equilibrium, and
 efficiency in the price-constrained airline market. American Economic Review, 64(4):657–
 669.

Dranove, D., Gron, A., and Mazzeo, M. (2003a). Differentiation and competition in HMO
  markets. Journal of Industrial Economics, 51(4):433–454.

Dranove, D., Kessler, D., McClellan, M., and Satterthwaite, M. A. (2003b). Is more infor-
  mation better? The effects of report cards on health care providers. Journal of Political
  Economy, 111(3):555–588.



                                             52
Dranove, D. and Ludwick, R. (1999). Competition and pricing by nonprofit hospitals: A
  reassessment of lynk’s analysis. Journal of Health Economics, 18(1):87 –98.

Dranove, D. and Sfekas, A. (2009). The revolution in health care antitrust: New methods
  and provocative implications. Milbank Quarterly, 87(3):607–632.

Dranove, D., Simon, C., and White, W. (2002). Is managed care leading to consolidation in
  health-care markets? Health Services Research, 37(3):573–594.

Dranove, D. D. (2012). Health care markets, regulators, and certifiers. In Pauly, M. V.,
  McGuire, T. G., and Pita Barros, P. P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 2,
  chapter 10, pages 639–690. Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam and London.

Dranove, D. D. and Satterthwaite, M. A. (2000). The industrial organization of health
  care markets. In Culyer, A. and Newhouse, J., editors, Handbook of Health Economics,
  volume 1B, chapter 20, pages 1094–1139. Elsevier Science, North-Holland, New York and
  Oxford.

Duggan, M. (2000). Hospital ownership and public medical spending. Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 115(4):1343–1373.

Duggan, M. (2002). Hospital market structure and the behavior of not-for-profit hospitals.
 The RAND Journal of Economics, 33(3):433–446.

Dunn, A. and Shapiro, A. (2012). Physician market power and medical-care expenditures.
 Working Paper, Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Department of Commerce.

Durrance, C. P. (2009). The impact of pharmacy-specific any-willing-provider legislation on
 prescription drug expenditures. Atlantic Economic Journal, 37(4):309–423.

Einav, L. and Finkelstein, A. (2010). Selection in insurance markets: Theory and empirics
  in pictures. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25:115 – 138.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Cullen, M. (2010). Estimating welfare in insurance markets
  using variation in prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):877–921.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Schrimpf, P., and Ryan, S. (2013). Selection on moral hazard in
  health insurance. American Economic Review, 103(1).

Emanuel, E. and Fuchs, V. R. (2008). Who really pays for health care? The myth of “shared
 responsibility”. Journal of the American Medical Association, 299(9):1057–1059.

Farrar, S., Sussex, J., Yi, D., Chalkley, M., Scott, T., Sutton, M., and Yuen, P. (2007).
  Evaluation of payment by results: Draft final report to the Department of Health. Tech-
  nical report, Health Economics Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, Health Economics
  Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, Polwarth Building, Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB25
  2ZD, Scotland.

                                            53
Farrell, J., Balan, D. J., Brand, K., and Wendling, B. W. (2011). Economics at the FTC: Hos-
  pital mergers, authorized generic drugs, and consumer credit markets. Review of Industrial
  Organization, 39(4):271–296.

Federal Trade Commission and Department of Justice (1992). Horizontal merger guidelines.
  Issued April 2, 1992, Revised September, 2010.

Frank, R. and Lamiraud, K. (2009). Choice, price competition and complexity in markets
  for health insurance. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 71:550–562.

Frech, H.E., I., Handel, B. R., Bowers, L., Simon, C. J., Scheffler, R. M., and Whaley, C.
  (2013). Market power, transactions costs, and the entry of Accountable Care Organizations
  in health care. unpublished manuscript, University of California, Santa Barbara.

Fuchs, V. (2007). Managed care and merger mania. Journal of the American Medical Asso-
  ciation, 277(11):920–921.

Gal-Or, E. (1997). Exclusionary equilibria in health-care markets. Journal of Economics and
 Management Strategy, 6(1):5–43.

Gaynor, M. (2006). What do we know about competition and quality in health care mar-
 kets? Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics, 2(6). http://www.nowpublishers.
 com/product.aspx?product=MIC&doi=0700000024.

Gaynor, M., Moreno-Serra, R., and Propper, C. (2013). Death by market power: Reform,
 competition and patient outcomes in the British National Health Service. American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4):134–66.

Gaynor, M., Propper, C., and Seiler, S. (2011). Free to choose: Reform and demand re-
 sponse in the British National Health Service. unpublished manuscript, Carnegie Mellon
 University, Imperial College London, London School of Economics.

Gaynor, M., Rebitzer, J. B., and Taylor, L. J. (2001). Physician incentives in health main-
 tenance organizations. Journal of Political Economy, 112(4):915–931.

Gaynor, M. and Town, R. J. (2012). Competition in health care markets. In McGuire, T. G.,
 Pauly, M. V., and Pita Barros, P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 2,
 chapter 9. Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam and London. forthcoming.

Gaynor, M. and Vogt, W. (2003). Competition among hospitals. RAND Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 34:764–785.

Gaynor, M. and Vogt, W. B. (2000). Antitrust and competition in health care markets.
 In Culyer, A. and Newhouse, J., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1B,
 chapter 27, pages 1405–1487. Elsevier Science, North-Holland, Amsterdam.



                                            54
Ginsburg, P. (2010). Wide variation in hospital and physician payment rates evidence of
  provider market power. HSC Research Brief No. 16, Center for Studying Health System
  Change.

Glied, S. (2000). Managed care. In Culyer, A. and Newhouse, J., editors, Handbook of Health
  Economics, volume 1A, chapter 13, pages 707–753. Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Government Accountability Office (2009). State small group health insurance markets. Tech-
 nical report, U.S. Government Accountability Office, Washington, DC. GAO-09-363R.

Gowrisankaran, G. (2011). Estimating the impact of a hospital merger using the difference-
 in-differences of prices. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18(1):83–89.

Gowrisankaran, G., Nevo, A., and Town, R. (2013). Mergers when prices are negotiated: Ev-
 idence from the hospital industry. Working Paper No. 18875, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Gravelle, H., Santos, R., Siciliani, L., and Goudie, R. (2012). Hospital quality competition
  under fixed prices. Research Paper 80, Centre for Health Economics, University of York.

Grennan, M. (2010). Price discrimination and bargaining: Empirical evidence from medical
  devices. unpublished manscript, University of Toronto.

Gruber, J. (1994). The incidence of mandated maternity benefits. American Economic
  Review, 84:622–641.

Haas-Wilson, D. and Garmon, C. (2011). Hospital mergers and competitive effects: Two
  retrospective analyses. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18(1):17–32.

Halbersma, R., Mikkers, M., Motchenkova, E., and Seinen, I. (2010). Market structure and
  hospital-insurer bargaining in the Netherlands. European Journal of Health Economics.
  Online Paper, http://www.springerlink.com/content/477hx26326t61467/.

Handel, B. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When nudging
  hurts. American Economic Review, 103(7):2643–2682.

Hartman, M., Martin, A. B., Benson, J., Catlin, A., and the National Health Expenditure
  Accounts Team (2013). National health spending in 2011: Overall growth remains low,
  but some payers and services show signs of acceleration. Health Affairs, 32(1):87–99.

Heiss, F., Leive, A., McFadden, D., and Winter, J. (2012). Plan selection in Medicare Part
  D: Evidence from administrative data. NBER Working Paper 18166.

Helderman, J.-K., Bevan, G., and France, G. (2012). The rise of the regulatory state in health
  care: a comparative analysis of the Netherlands, England and Italy. Health Economics,
  Policy and Law, 7(1):103–124.



                                             55
Ho, K. (2006). The welfare effects of restricted hospital choice in the US medical care market.
  Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(7):1039–1079.

Ho, K. (2009). Insurer-provider networks in the Medical Care Market. American Economic
  Review, 99(1):393–430.

Ho, K. and Lee, R. (2013). Insurer competition and negotiated hospital prices. unpublished
  manuscript, Columbia University.

Ho, K. and Pakes, A. (2013). Hospital choices, hospital prices and financial incentives for
  physicians. unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.

Ho, V. and Hamilton, B. H. (2000). Hospital mergers and acquisitions: Does market consol-
  idation harm patients? Journal of Health Economics, 19(5):767–91.

Horn, H. and Wolinsky, A. (1988). Bilateral monopolies and incentives for merger. RAND
  Journal of Economics, 19(3):408–419.

Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust (2012). Employer
 Health Benefits: 2012 Annual Survey. Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and
 Educational Trust, Menlo Park, CA and Chicago, IL.

Kemp, R. and Severijnen, A. (2010). Price effects of Dutch hospital mergers: An ex post
  assesment of hip surgery. NMa Working Paper No. 2, Netherlands Competition Authority
  (NMa).

Kessler, D. and McClellan, M. (2000). Is hospital competition socially wasteful? Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 115(2):577–615.

Ketcham, J., Lucarelli, C., Miravete, E., and Roebuck, M. (2012). Sinking, swimming, or
  learning to swim in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review, 102(6):2639–2673.

Kleiner, S., Lyons, S., and White, W. D. (2012). Provider concentration in markets for
  physician services for patients with traditional Medicare. Health Management, Policy and
  Innovation, 1(1):3–18.

Klick, J. and Wright, J. D. (2013). The effect of any willing provider and freedom of choice
  laws on prescription drug expenditures. unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylva-
  nia, September 13.

Kling, J. R., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., Vermeulen, L. C., and Wrobel, M. V. (2012).
  Comparison friction: Experimental evidence from Medicare drug plans. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 127(1):199–235.

Kolstad, J. T. (2013). Information and quality when motivation is intrinsic: Evidence from
 surgeon report cards. American Economic Review, 103(7):2875–2910.



                                              56
Lakdawalla, D. and Philipson, T. (2006). The nonprofit sector and industry performance.
  Journal of Public Economics, 90:1681–1698.

Leonard, G. and Olley, G. S. (2011). What can be learned about the competitive effects of
  mergers from natural experiments? International Journal of the Economics of Business,
  18(1):103 – 107.

Lewis, M. and Pflum, K. (2011). Diagnosing hospital system bargaining power in managed
  care networks. unpublished manuscript, Ohio State University.

Lustig, J. (2010). Measuring welfare losses from adverse selection and imperfect competition
  in privatized Medicare. unpublished manuscript, Boston University.

Lynk, W. J. (1995). Nonprofit hospital mergers and the exercise of market power. Journal
  of Law and Economics, 38:437–462.

Maestas, N., Schroeder, M., and Goldman, D. (2009). Price variation in markets with ho-
 mogeneous goods: The case of Medigap. Working Paper No. 14679, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Martin, A., Lassman, D., Whittle, L., and Catlin, A. (2011). Recession contributes to slowest
 annual rate of increase in health spending in five decades. Health Affairs, 30:111–122.

Mazzeo, M. (2002). Product choice and oligopoly market structure. RAND Journal of
 Economics, 33(2):221–242.

McGuire, T. G. (2000). Physician agency. In Culyer, J. J. and Newhouse, J. P., editors,
 Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1A of Handbooks in Economics, chapter 9, pages
 461–536. Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Melnick, G., Shen, Y.-S., and Wu, V. (2011). The increased concentration of health plan
 markets can benefit consumers through lower hospital prices. Health Affairs, 30(9):1728–
 1732.

Moriya, A. S., Vogt, W. B., and Gaynor, M. (2010). Hospital prices and market structure in
 the hospital and insurance industries. Health Economics, Policy and Law, 5:459–479.

Pakes, A. (2010). Alternative models for moment inequalities. Econometrica, 78(6):1783–
  1822.

Pakes, A., Porter, J., Ho, K., and Ishii, J. (2006). Moment inequalities and their application.
  unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.

Park, M. and Town, R. J. (2014). Market structure beliefs and hospital merger waves. Journal
  of Economics and Management Strategy.




                                              57
Pinkovskiy, M. L. (2013). The impact of the managed care backlash on health care costs:
  Evidence from state regulation of managed care cost containment practice. unpublished
  manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October 17.

Pope, G. C. (1989). Hospital nonprice competition and Medicare reimbursement policy.
  Journal of Health Economics, 8(2):147–172.

Propper, C., Bloom, N., Seiler, S., and Van Reenen, J. (2010). The impact of competition on
  management quality: Evidence from public hospitals. Working Paper No. 10/237, Centre
  for Market and Public Organisation, University of Bristol.

Propper, C., Burgess, S., and Gossage, D. (2003). Competition and quality: Evidence from
  the NHS internal market 1991-1999. Unpublished paper, University of Bristol.

Propper, C., Burgess, S., and Green, K. (2004). Does competition between hospitals improve
  the quality of care? Hospital death rates and the NHS internal market. Journal of Public
  Economics, 88(7):1247–1272.

Romano, P. S. and Balan, D. J. (2011). A retrospective analysis of the clinical quality
  effects of the acquisition of Highland Park Hospital by Evanston Northwestern Healthcare.
  International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18(1):45–64.

Schäfer, W., Kroneman, M., Boerma, W., van den Berg, M., Westert, G., Devillé, W., and
  van Ginneken, E. (2010). The Netherlands: Health system review. Health Systems in
  Transition, 12(1):1–229.

Scherer, F. (2000). The pharmaceutical industry. In Culyer, A. J. and Newhouse, J. P.,
  editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1B, chapter 25, pages 1297–1338. Elsevier
  North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Schmalensee, R. (1977). Comparative static properties of regulated airline oligopolies. Bell
  Journal of Economics, 8(2):565–576.

Schmalensee, R. (1989). Inter-industry studies of structure and performance. In Schmalensee,
  R. and Willig, R., editors, Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 2, chapter 16, pages
  951–1009. Elsevier Science, North-Holland, Amsterdam and New York.

Schneider, J., Li, P., Klepser, D., Peterson, N., Brown, T., and Scheffler, R. (2008). The
  effect of physician and health plan market concentration on prices in commercial health
  insurance markets. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 8:13–26.

Scott Morton, F. and Kyle, M. (2012). Markets for pharmaceutical products. In Pauly,
  M. V., McGuire, T. G., and Pita Barros, P. P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics,
  volume 2, chapter 12, pages 763–824. Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Simpson, J. (2003). Geographic markets in hospital mergers: A case study. International
  Journal of the Economics of Business, 10(3):291–303.

                                             58
Sloan, F. A. (2000). Not-for-profit ownership and hospital behavior. In Culyer, A. and
  Newhouse, J. P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1B, chapter 21, pages
  1141–1174. Elsevier North-Holland, Amsterdam and London.

Song, Z., Safran, D., Landon, B., He, Y., Mechanic, R., Day, M., and Chernew, M. (2011).
  Health care spending and quality in year 1 of the alternative quality contract. New England
  Journal of Medicine, 365(1):909–918.

Sovinsky Goeree, M. (2008). Limited information and advertising in the U.S. personal com-
  puter industry. Econometrica, 76(5):1017–1074.

Spang, H., Bazzoli, G., and Arnould, R. (2001). Hospital mergers and savings for consumers:
  Exploring new evidence. Health Affairs, 20(4):150–158.

Starc, A. (2014). Insurer pricing and consumer welfare: Evidence from Medigap. RAND
  Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Tay, A. (2003). Assessing competition in hospital care markets: The importance of accounting
  for quality differentiation. Rand Journal of Economics, 34(4):786–814.

Tenn, S. (2011). The price effects of hospital mergers: A case study of the Sutter-Summit
  transaction. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18(1):65–82.

Thompson, E. (2011). The effect of hospital mergers on inpatient prices: A case study of the
  New Hanover-Cape Fear transaction. International Journal of the Economics of Business,
  18(1):91–101.

Town, R., Feldman, R., and Kralewski, J. (2011). Market power and contract form: Evi-
  dence from physician group practices. International Journal of Health Care Finance and
  Economics, 11(2):115–132.

Town, R. and Vistnes, G. (2001). Hospital competition in HMO networks. Journal of Health
  Economics, 20(5):733–752.

Town, R., Wholey, D., Feldman, R., and Burns, L. (2006). The welfare consequences of
  hospital mergers. Working Paper No. 12244, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Town, R., Wholey, D., Feldman, R., and Burns, L. (2007a). Hospital consolidation and
  racial/income disparities in health insurance coverage. Health Affairs, 26:1170–1180.

Town, R., Wholey, D., Feldman, R., and Burns, L. (2007b). Revisiting the relationship
  between managed care and hospital consolidation. Health Services Research, 42(1):219–
  238.

Town, R. J. and Liu, S. (2003). The welfare impact of Medicare HMOs. RAND Journal of
  Economics, 34:719–736.



                                             59
Trish, E. and Herring, B. (2012). How do health insurer market concentration and bargaining
  power with hospitals affect health insurance premiums? unpublished manuscript, Johns
  Hopkins University.

Vander Weide, J. H. and Zalkind, J. H. (1981). Deregulation and oligopolistic price-quality
  rivalry. American Economic Review, 71(1):144–154.

Vita, M. G. (2001). Regulatory restrictions on selective contracting: An empirical analysis
  of “any willing provider” regulations. Journal of Health Economics, 20(6):955–966.

Volpp, K. G., Williams, S. V., Waldfogel, J., Silber, J. H., Schwartz, J. S., and Pauly, M. V.
  (2003). Market reform in New Jersey and the effect on mortality from acute myocardial
  infarction. Health Services Research, 38(2):515–533.

Vrangbaek, K., Robertson, R., Winblad, U., Van de Bovenkamp, H., and Dixon, A. (2012).
  Choice policies in Northern European health systems. Health Economics, Policy and Law,
  7(1):47–71.




                                             60
Figures




          61
Figure 1: Trends in Hospital Concentration, M&A Activity and HMO Penetration: 1990-2006

                                          !,%'"                                                                     +!"

                                                                                                                    *!"
                                                !,%"
                                                                                                                    )!"
               ../'0'.*1'2%3%4&56(3''



                                          !,$'"




                                                                                                                          !"#$%&'()'*+,-'
                                                                                                                    (!"
                                                !,$"                                                                '!"

                                          !,#'"                                                                     &!"

                                                                                                                    %!"
                                                !,#"
                                                                                                                    $!"
                                          !,!'"
                                                                                                                    #!"

                                                  !"                                                                !"
                                                   #+**" #++!" #++$" #++&" #++(" #++*" $!!!" $!!$" $!!&" $!!(" $!!*"
                                                                                  7%5&'

                                                          --."          -/0"1232456783"       9:;<25"8="/>?"/@?A"




               Figure 2: Scatterplot of MSA HHI in 1990 and HHI in 2006
                             6000       10000
                                        8000
                     HHI in 2006
                    4000                2000
                                        0




                                                   0             2000        4000         6000         8000            10000
                                                                                HHI in 1990




                                                                                  62
