                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              PUBLIC GOODS, HIDDEN INCOME, AND TAX EVASION:
          SOME NONSTANDARD RESULTS FROM THE WARM-GLOW MODEL

                                        Daniel M. Hungerman

                                        Working Paper 19804
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19804


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




I am grateful to Tom Gresik, Terry Johnson, Kali Rath, Guillermo Roque, Tihtina Zenebe Gebre, and
to audiences at George Mason University, McMaster University, the University of California-San
Diego, Peking University, and the University of Notre Dame for comments and assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daniel M. Hungerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Public Goods, Hidden Income, and Tax Evasion: Some Nonstandard Results from the Warm-Glow
Model
Daniel M. Hungerman
NBER Working Paper No. 19804
January 2014
JEL No. H26,H41,O17

                                            ABSTRACT

A large literature explores crowd out in situations where public goods are jointly provided; work in
this area typically depicts a tax system where individuals take taxes as given. But in some settings,
such as those in developing economies, efforts to evade or avoid taxes may be widespread. Using
the canonical warm-glow model, this paper considers joint pubic-good provision in a setting where
individuals can evade taxes by hiding their income. The model's implications change significantly
in this setting: with hidden income, stronger warm glow will lead to greater crowd out, not less. Using
research on crowd out and inter-family transfers, I present suggestive evidence that the model's results
may help to reconcile divergent estimates of crowd out in the literature.


Daniel M. Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
439 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu
Introduction

The joint provision of public goods is a familiar activity in both developed and developing societies. But

developing societies have unique features that can significantly impact economic behavior; for example

they may have weaker institutions for the enforcement of public policy. The challenges introduced by

weak institutional and political environments have long drawn attention from development (and other)

economists;1 the goal of this paper is to consider this issue while focusing on the provision of public goods.

The starting point is the canonical model of public good provision, the warm glow model. The analysis

suggests that key findings of this model are quite sensitive to the economic environment in which public

goods are provided.

   As is well known, individuals in the warm-glow model view resources that they voluntarily donate to

the public good as distinct from tax-based contributions (i.e., individuals get a “warm glow” from voluntary

donations). One of the most studied aspects of the model involves its predictions for crowd out: the idea that

efforts by one party to increase provision of the good may reduce, or crowd out, provision from others. The

implications of warm glow for crowd out are well known: stronger warm glow leads to less crowd out and more

effective policy intervention. Intuitively, if the government (or perhaps a Non-Governmental Organization or

NGO), intervenes to provide more of a public good, warm glow causes individuals to view this intervention

as a poor substitute for their own donations. The reluctance to substitute government funds with private

donations reduces crowd out.

   I show that, if individuals can lower their taxes by choosing to hide a portion of their income from

the government, this relationship between warm glow and crowd out is reversed: stronger warm glow will

correspond with more crowd out, not less. Intuitively, hiding income is an action that is beneficial to the

individual but socially costly. As income is hidden, tax revenues fall and the level of the public good falls. An

exogenous intervention to increase the public good can thus induce a response—more hidden income—that

makes the intervention less effective. This hidden-income response will be large when individuals place

a high value on their own voluntary donations relative to the value they place on the public good. But

this is what the warm glow captures: stronger warm glow means individuals have stronger preferences

for their own private behavior relative to social outcomes, and thus stronger warm glow will exacerbate a

hidden-income-response that negates policy intervention. I illustrate this result with a simple example and

show that the presence of hidden income can lead to much larger crowd out than one would see without

hidden income. The analysis here assumes interiority (as is standard) and that individuals choose to hide

some, but not all, income. In Section 3, I discuss these assumptions and the extension this result to situations
   1 For example, economists have considered the unique challenges of tax policy in developing contexts; Besley and Persson

(2013) and Burgess and Stern (1993) both provide good introductions to this area.



                                                            2
where some individuals hide income and some do not.

    Next, I compare the effect on public-good provision from a change in the tax rate to the effect from a

change in the cost of hiding income. While Andreoni (1990) found that subsidies have stronger effects than

taxation on public good provision, the relative merit of taxation with hidden income is ambiguous. Further,

in this setting the relative efficacy of taxation on the level of the public good may depend on the price

sensitivity of demand for the public good, an unconventional warm-glow result but a possibility considered

by earlier work (cf. Feldstein, 1980). Finally, I show that an exogenous increase in public good provision

(such as an increase in NGO provision) can lower tax revenue, and that this effect is greater as warm glow

increases.

    Many prior crowd out studies consider settings where institutions are relatively strong and efforts to hide

income appear to be limited (Schneider and Enste, 2000); the results of this paper indicate that, in settings

where efforts to hide income are pervasive, one may see an attenuated—or even negative—relationship be-

tween the strength of crowd out and warm glow. I undertake a suggestive exploration of this possibility by

examining how estimates in a particular literature in development—crowd out and inter-family transfers—

correlate with warm glow. My measure of warm glow is based on a series of questions in the World Values

Survey. Consistent with the standard model, I find that, in countries where individuals have relatively low

self-stated inclinations to hide income, published crowd out estimates are positively related to warm glow.

But consistent with the model here, in countries with high inclinations to hide income this relationship turns

negative.

    While suggestive, the empirical results help to reconcile the highly diverse set of crowd out estimates

extant in the development literature and contribute to the small area of work that explores how crowd out

varies in different circumstances. Payne (2009) suggests that the setting where crowd out occurs may have

a large influence on the magnitude of crowd out, but the body of work relating environmental attributes

to crowd out behavior is limited and has not considered how efforts to avoid taxation—or features of the

tax system more generally—may impact the efficacy of policy interventions.2 The next section provides

motivation for the analysis and introduces the model. Section 3 presents the analysis. Section 4 considers

prior crowd out estimates, and section 5 concludes.
   2 Attributes considered by prior work include community size (Ribar and Wilhelm, 2002), community diversity (Hungerman,

2009), and income (Cox, Hansen, and Jimenez, 2004), but empirical estimates seem to vary in cases where these factors seem
unimportant (cf. Kingma, 1989; Straub and Manzoor, 2005; Payne, 1998; Khanna and Sandler, 2000; Cox, Hansen, Jimenez,
2004; Gibson, Olivia, and Rozelle, 2011). Some work has also explored variation in crowd out by considering variation in
preferences, rather than in technologies. Among such papers, perhaps the paper closest to this one is a study by Krause (2011),
who considers a model where utility depends upon one’s voluntary giving relative to the giving of others; Krause provides
numerical examples where stronger preferences for “out-donating” others leads to greater crowd out. While interesting, this
notion of “relative giving” differs from the traditional depiction of warm glow considered here.




                                                              3
2. The Warm-Glow Model with Hidden Income

2A. The Potential Role for Hidden Income

This section presents the basic warm glow model with hidden income. Before considering the model, however,

it will be useful to discuss the significance of hidden income as an economic activity. First, one might ask,

do people hide income? The answer frequently appears to be “yes.” Recent work has documented numerous

settings where individuals avoid tax obligations by hiding or concealing taxable resources. Schneider and

Enste (2000) show that “shadow” or “clandestine” economic activity is common in developed countries, and

they argue that efforts to conceal income may be even more common in developing societies; Andreoni,

Erard, and Feinstein (1998) also discuss high levels of tax evasion in developing countries.3

   Further, there is evidence that decisions to conceal income may respond to pressures to provide resources

that will be transferred to others. For example, Schneider and Enste (2000) conclude that the rise of

social security burden (a source of crowd out that will receive more attention below) is “one of the most

important causes” of underground economic activity in the world. Social security programs are a case

where those making interpersonal transfers (e.g., adult children supporting the elderly) may thus do so

through a public program (by complying with taxation) or not. A related decision could be whether to earn

income for remittances through the formal or informal sector. As discussed below, the model here extends

to individuals deciding how to divide time between formal and informal labor; work suggests that both

formal and informal labor opportunities matter for rural-to-urban migrant workers (Meng, 2001; Banerjee,

1983), sometimes within a given household (Merrick, 1976). Such a decision may also involve a warm glow

component: a government social security or pension program may be viewed as a non-perfect substitute for

family remittances, e.g., because supporting one’s parents directly provides warm glow by securing familial

approval.4 Additionally, observers have noted that informal activities may hamper or discourage cooperation

with government programs to help those in need (Kaser, 2000; Foster, 1985; Monaco-Mancini, 1999).

   The discussion below focuses on a situation where individuals choose to pay taxes on a portion of their

resources; but in many settings in developing societies individuals may either be outside of or inside of the

formal economy entirely. There are several observations on this point. First, importantly, the analysis here

can incorporate situations where some individuals when choosing how much income to hide arrive at “corner

solutions.” Second, there is evidence that, at least in some settings in developing economies, the decision to

pay some taxes but to underpay them is economically relevant. For example, Alm, Bahl, and Murray (1991)
   3 Gordon and Li (2005) also argue that difficulty in monitoring taxable activity is a salient aspect of economic policy in

developing countries. While developing countries often rely less than other countries on individual-income taxation (which is
the type of tax considered here), Miller et al. (2011) show income taxation is common in both poorer and richer nations.
   4 It has been recognized at least since Warr (1982) that such interpersonal transfers can be considered contributions to a

public good.



                                                             4
use a variety of data from Jamaica and find that lost taxes from underreporting results in large declines in

tax revenue while they also conclude that tax evasion from nonfiling is “enormous.”5 As mentioned above,

the model can also extend to cases where individuals choose to divide labor between informal and formal

employment. The model here can also extend to settings where efforts to raise revenues from public goods

is informal. For example, a household might face a request to provide an interhousehold transfer (such

as in-kind aid or financial assistance to a distressed household) through a community organization; if the

household has an incentive to provide such aid directly (for instance, direct aid might help the household

fulfill a familial obligation or improve the household’s reputational status)6 such incentives might lower

the household’s professed ability to participate in the community organization.7 Ultimately, the relevance

of these applications of the model is an empirical question; it is encouraging that the suggestive results

below indicate the analysis here may have empirical relevance for reconciling past research in the area of

remittances.

    Thus there is evidence that individuals may hide income from the government or each other, that hidden

income may play a role in interhousehold transfers, that the decision to hide resources is responsive to

pressure to share income, and that efforts to hide income involve costly behavior. The model described next

considers how such efforts to hide income could impact crowd out.


2B. Introducing the Basic Model

The model is a standard warm-glow model with two alterations. First, I consider a case where taxes are

proportional to income rather than lump sum. This change is, in itself, unimportant and would not alter

the standard relationship between warm glow and crowd out. Second, I allow individuals to hide income

from taxation. Consider a model where individuals and a central authority both contribute towards a public

good. Let n be the total number of individuals. Individual i receives utility from three things: consumption
    5 Burgess and Stern (1993) also discuss underreporting taxes (see section 5.2 of their paper); Alexandrova (2013) gives a

non-academic discussion. Moreover, even when individuals comply with the tax code, the model here can also extend to
situations of tax avoidance, where individuals take legal but inefficient actions to avoid taxation; Alm, Bahl, and Murray (1991)
find evidence that reliance on tax-favored forms of compensation leads to a large discrepancy between potential and realized
tax revenue (see Table 6 in their paper).
    6 Shokkaert (2006) writes that several incentives fitting the notion of warm glow would appear to be “essential” in the

promotion of household transfers; although he notes that non-altruistic motives for such transfers appear to be important and
that more work is needed to refine the exact determinants of such behavior.
    7 Olken and Singhal (2011) present evidence that, after including “informal” forms of taxation, households in developing

countries may spend a reasonably large share of income on taxes; the average household in the modal country they study
spends about 8% of income on informal and formal taxes (see Table 4 in their paper; the 8 percent figure was arrived at by
dividing the values in row 1 by those in row 3). Their results exclude some contributions to organizations such as local social
organizations; including such activity might push the relevant concept of expenditures higher. Recent work has also documented
efforts to hide income in these settings; Jakiela and Ozier (2011), Dupas and Robinson (2011), and Goldberg (2010) all argue
that individuals in a developing economy may hide income in an effort to avoid pressure from others in their community to
share (see also Kinnan, 2012). These papers also highlight potential costs from these behaviors; for example, Jakiela and Ozier
(2011) report results from rural Kenya where women choose to hide income earned during an experiment despite the fact that
doing so reduces expected earnings, and Dupas and Robinson (2011) show that women in Kenya are willing to invest in savings
accounts with negative de facto interest rates in an effort to conceal their income from others.



                                                               5
of a private good, ci , the total amount of the public good provided in the community, Y , and a “warm glow”

component that depends upon the individual’s own voluntary public-good donation, gi . The individual’s

preferences may be expressed by the utility function U i (ci , Y, gi ), which is continuous, twice differentiable

and quasi-concave. It is assumed that goods are normal.

    Individual i is endowed with income wi . Income is subject to taxation at tax rate τ , 1 > τ > 0. However,

individuals may choose to hide an amount si of their income; individuals do not pay taxes on hidden income.

Individuals may use hidden income (along with net-of-tax unhidden income) to consume the private good or

to make donations that provide warm glow. The “tax” levied here could refer to income taxes levied by the

government, in which case efforts to hide income would reflect efforts to avoid income taxes. Alternately, the

tax here could reflect non-governmental efforts (such as efforts from an NGO or community organization) in

which case efforts to hide income may reflect actions to conceal resources from community members, NGO

officials, or family members.

    Hiding income is costly; a fraction θ of hidden income is lost. This lost income may reflect, for example,

an expected loss which depends upon the possibility of an audit or resources exerted in the act of hiding. As

mentioned in prior subsection, there is evidence that individuals are willing to incur such costs when hiding

income from others. More generally, the loss of income represents the fact that efforts to avoid taxation can

create deadweight loss.8 It is assumed that the cost of hiding resources is small enough to make hiding an

attractive option, θ < τ , or else individuals would never choose to hide anything. A situation where the

marginal cost of hiding is non-constant is discussed in the appendix. An individual’s budget constraint is:


                                          ci + gi = (wi − si )(1 − τ ) + si (1 − θ).


The first term to the right of the equal sign represents “unhidden” income, net of taxes. The second term

represents untaxed hidden income, net of deadweight loss. Together they equal disposable income.9

   As is standard, let the public good be provided by a simple linear technology that aggregates all donations
                       P
and tax revenue: Y = k (wk −sk )τ +gk . For any individual i this can be written as Y = Y−i +(wi −si )τ +gi ,
             P
where Y−i = k6=i (wk − sk )τ + gk . Individuals will choose optimal levels of ci , gi , and si while taking Y−i as

given. Re-arranging the above, let gi = Y − Y−i − (wi − si )τ . Plugging this into the budget constraint yields

ci = wi − si θ + Y−i − Y . This expression resembles the standard warm-glow depiction of private consumption
    8 In addition to the evidence in the previous subsection, see (e.g.) Slemrod (2007) for a discussion of the efficiency costs of

tax evasion, as well as some interesting examples of the efforts individuals have taken throughout history to hide their resources
from taxation.
    9 This budget constraint could also represent a decision to split time between formal and informal labor. If total time working

was T , informal labor was s, formal labor earned wage wf , and informal labor earned a premium α over net-of-tax formal labor,
winf = wf (1 − τ ) + α, the right-hand-side of the constraint would be (T − s)wf (1 − τ ) + swinf . Letting α = τ − θ, plugging
in for winf , and rearranging gives the same constraint as above where wi = T wf (note the constraint above can be rewritten
wi (1 − τ ) + si (τ − θ)).



                                                                6
with the additional term si θ; this new term appears because the decision to hide income affects the total

amount of resources available in the community.

   Substituting in for ci and gi , the individual’s maximization problem can be represented as involving the

optimal choices of Y and si :


                           max U i (wi − si θ + Y−i − Y, Y, Y − Y−i − (w − si )τ ) .                        (1)
                           Y, si



The first-order condition with respect to Y can be written as:


                                                UYi + Ugii = Ucii                                           (2)


Equation (2) is standard and shows that the marginal utility from private consumption must equal the

marginal utility (both from the public good and the warm glow) from a voluntary donation. The first order

condition with respect to si is −θUcii + τ Ugii = 0. Using (2) to plug in for Ucii , this can be written:

                                                  UYi    τ −θ
                                                       =                                                    (3)
                                                  Ugii     θ

Equation (3) reflects incentives to hide income and merits discussion; it captures much of the intuition for

the analysis.

   The first-order condition in (3) equates a marginal rate of substitution with a ratio of prices, where the

relevant “price” is not the price of a commodity but rather the cost of hiding income. Suppose an individual

decides to hide a dollar and use the resultant income on warm glow. Hiding the dollar lowers tax obligations

(and thus raises disposable income) by τ . However, a fraction θ of the dollar is lost, so the net gain to

disposable income is τ − θ. Now consider the effect of hiding a dollar of income on the total amount of the

public good. The hidden dollar lowers tax revenue by τ . If the individual spends the increase in disposable

income on warm glow, the individual’s public-good contribution increases by τ − θ. Thus, the total amount

of the public good falls by θ. By hiding income, individuals can thus increase warm glow but they “pay” for

this increase by seeing a decline in the total amount of the public good. In the standard model, voluntary

donations that increase warm glow will also increase public good provision (all else equal). The ability to

hide income allows individuals to break this link; individuals can now make warm-glow based decisions that

are socially costly.

   Now consider an exogenous intervention that increases Y . This will cause the numerator in (3), UYi , to

decrease, all else equal. By hiding additional income, individuals can “convert” Y into gi , thus restoring

equality in (3). But since every dollar of Y converted to gi lowers Y by θ, this conversion process undermines


                                                        7
the efficacy of the exogenous intervention. Equation (3) thus identifies a channel through which warm glow

incentives can actually lead to crowd out. The following section provides a more rigorous exploration of this

intuition.



3. Implications of Hidden Income

3A. Crowd out and Hidden Income

Consider a Nash Equilibrium where individuals are at an interior solution where some income is hidden:

0 < s∗i < wi , where s∗i is the amount of hidden income solving (1). Interiority is a standard assumption

when analyzing the warm glow model; this assumption will be discussed more below.

    The above first-order conditions depict an optimal choice of the public good (taking other contributions
                                                          ∂f i
as given), Y ∗ = f i (wi , Y−i , τ, θ). Let fYi −i =     ∂Y−i .   Suppose there is an agent in the economy, agent n + 1,

who voluntarily donates nothing and hides nothing, and consider an increase in the public good financed by

increasing taxes on this individual. The equilibrium effect of such a tax increase will be:

                                                                  n
                                                                                   !!−1
                                               dY                 X       1
                                                    =     1+                     −1                                              (4)
                                              dτn+1               i=1
                                                                        fYi −i


(cf. Andreoni, 1989), which is monotonically increasing in fYi −i . Larger crowd out corresponds to a

smaller value in (4). This equation, and the analysis below, could also considered in the context where

an increase in public good provision comes from an exogenous increase in NGO activity. In that case,
               P
Y−i = gN GO + k6=i (wk − sk )τ + gk for all individuals, where gN GO represents the NGO’s provision, and
                                   dY           dY
(as shown in the appendix)        dτn+1   =   dgN GO .

    To consider how equation (4) varies with the strength of warm glow, one first needs a measure of the

strength of warm glow. The first measure of warm glow considered here is simply an individual’s marginal
                                                                                              ∂gi∗
propensity to spend on warm glow in response to a public-good shock,                         ∂Y−i ,   where gi∗ represents the best-
                                                                                  ∂gi∗
response voluntary donation which solves (1) .10 Intuitively, if                 ∂Y−i    increases, then individuals will increase

their own donations by more (or decrease their donations by a smaller amount) in response to an increase

in others’ provision of the public good and (in the standard model) this will lead to smaller crowd out.11

    The model with hidden income is different, however. Before discussing crowd out, one complication with

hidden income is choice of private consumption ci . In the standard model, individuals split their income

between donations and private consumption and so a larger propensity to spend income on gi directly implies
  10 Similar results hold if one uses instead the marginal propensity to spend income on warm glow.
  11 This is straightforward to show: in the standard model f i = g + τ wi + Y−i and fYi −i = ∂gi∗ /∂Y−i + 1 ; thus by equation 4
increases in ∂gi∗ /∂Y−i lead to smaller crowd out.


                                                                   8
a smaller propensity to spend on ci . With hidden income, this is no longer the case. For example, an indi-

vidual who responds to an increase in Y−i by increasing the amount of income hidden would be able to have

a greater propensity to spend on both gi and ci than would someone who does not hide additional income

after an increase in Y−i . To keep the focus on warm glow incentives, the following proposition holds the

propensity to spend income on ci constant while the letting the propensity to spend on warm glow change.

An example of preferences where the propensity to spend on gi varies but the propensity to spend on ci does

not is given below. Also, a result which relaxes the assumption that ∂c∗i /∂Y−i is constant will be considered

momentarily. The proposition presents the counter-intuitive result that the greater the propensity to spend

on warm glow, the greater is crowd out:


                                                 ∂c∗
Proposition 1: Given τ , wi , θ, and            ∂Y−i ,
                                                   i
                                                         greater propensity to spend on warm glow leads to greater crowd
                                     ∂gi∗                                dY
out; that is, larger values of      ∂Y−i    lead to smaller values of   dτn+1 .




Proofs are given in the appendix. Intuitively, if there is an exogenous increase in Y−i , individuals with strong

warm glows will exploit the increase in the public good by hiding additional income, essentially transforming

this increase in resources into a increase in warm glow. But such a transformation is socially wasteful and

leads to crowd out.

    The result above considers a readily intuitive concept of warm glow, but also assumes that the propensity

to consume the private good ci does not change as warm glow changes. The following result relaxes this

assumption by considering a more general concept of warm glow. Intuitively, the strength of warm glow

involves individuals’ willingness to substitute private income with external donations to the public good;

this second measure of warm glow is based on this notion. Following Andreoni (1989), imagine reducing

an individual’s endowed income by a dollar and using this dollar to increase the public good. The impact

of such a transfer on the individual’s preferred amount of public good, all else equal, is represented by
 ∂f i       ∂f i
∂Y−i    −   ∂wi    = fYi −i − fwi i ; where f i is an individual’s best-response choice of the level of the public good.

The measure of warm-glow used next will be this difference, fYi −i − fwi i .

    The difference fYi −i − fwi i corresponds to the term fie , the “egoistic” derivative of f i that comes from

warm glow, in Andreoni’s (1989) analysis; it is straightforward to show that increases in this “egoistic” term
                                                                                                                              ∂gi∗
lead to smaller crowd out in the standard model.12 This measure is linked to the earlier measure; if                         ∂Y−i

   12 Intuitively, in the standard no-hidden-income model with no warm glow, individuals view their own income as perfectly

substitutable with Y−i . Thus, if private income falls by a dollar and Y−i increases by a dollar, individuals would simply lower gi
by a dollar so that the income transfer would have no effect on the public good: fYi −i − fw i = 0. With warm glow, individuals
                                                                                               i
view Y−i as an imperfect substitute for private income; thus when a dollar of income is transferred to Y−i private donations
gi fall by less than a dollar, because individuals wish to preserve warm glow. Warm glow incentives thus lead the difference
fYi −i − fwi to increase. See pages 1451-1453 of Andreoni (1989) for additional discussion of this term in the standard model.
            i




                                                                  9
                      ∂c∗
increases holding       i
                     ∂Y−i   constant, then fYi −i − fwi i will increase (this is shown in the appendix at the end of the
                                                                                                 dY
proof for Proposition 2). Initially, it seems like a positive relationship between              dτn+1   and fYi −i − fwi i should
                                 dY
hold “mechanically,” since      dτn+1   is monotonically increasing in fYi −i (as equation (4) shows) and presumably

growth in fYi −i would also increase fYi −i − fwi i . However, a negative relationship holds when income is hidden:


                                                                                                               dY
Proposition 2: Given τ , wi , and θ, larger values of fYi                 − fwi lead to smaller values of     dτn+1 .
                                                                     −i       i




Proposition 2 shows that the result holds even without making explicit assumptions on the propensity to

consume the private good.

    These results, as is typically the case in warm-glow analysis, assume an interior solution, including the

assumption that individuals choose to hide a fraction of income. Of course, this may not always hold,

and some individuals (e.g., those who hide no income at all) may behave as in the standard warm glow

model. Suppose there are two types of individuals; type 1 individuals and type 2 individuals. Let f j be

the best-response choice of Y for all type j individuals. Suppose that type 1 individuals’ behavior fits the

standard warm glow model; for instance, these individuals may not hide any income for ethical reasons

or because their income is independently reported. Suppose that type 2s hide some income and fit the

assumptions for the propositions here.13 Letting the fraction of type 1 individuals be φ, equation (4) can be

written dY /dτn+1 = (1 − n + n(φ/fY1−i + (1 − φ)/fY2−i ))−1 . In the standard model, greater warm glow leads

to less crowd out, i.e. larger values of fY1−i .14 But for type 2 individuals (as the proofs in the appendix show)

stronger warm glow leads to a decrease in fY2−i . Thus if warm glow increased for both types, the overall

effect of stronger warm glow would be a weighted average of the situations using the standard intuition and

situation where some income is hidden. As φ approaches one the result approaches the standard case and

as φ approaches zero the result approaches the hidden-income case.

    One feature of the model that may influence interiority is the total number of individuals in the community

of donors. In particular, as the total number of donors grows, the assumption of an interior solution will

become less tenable. Intuitively, if individuals each contribute to the public good in order to get some

warm glow for themselves, then the public good may grow without bound as the population increases.15

This will lead individuals towards corner solutions, as indicated by the representation of the first order
  13 This discussion will take type as fixed, ie, individuals are assumed not to respond to a shock by moving off of (or onto) a

corner solution; this could be reasonable for relatively small shocks (or, as noted above, if an individuals’ type is determined by
factors such as whether wages are independently reported). The appendix shows that an individual who always hides all income
(e.g., because of employment in an illicit industry) solves the same optimization problem as a type 1 hide-nothing individual
with different endowments of income and Y−i .
  14 As mentioned earlier, the relationship between crowd out and f 1
                                                                       Y−i can be seen in equation (4). The relationship between
warm glow and fY1−i in the standard model has been discussed in earlier work, cf. Hungerman (2007).
 15 A formal discussion of this possibility is given in Ribar and Wilhelm (2002).




                                                                10
conditions in (3). Fortunately, there are some interesting situations—such as situations involving crowd

out with interfamily transfers as considered in section 4—where the relevant population of donors may be

reasonably small.16 Before turning to real-world applications, however, the following subsections illustrate

the main result using a simple example and consider some additional comparative statics.


3B. An Example

Consider a simple example where individuals’ preferences can be represented with a Cobb-Douglas utility

function:

                                  U i (ci , Y, gi ) = α1 log(ci ) + α2 log(Y ) + α3 log(gi ).


Here, larger values of the parameter α3 represent greater utility derived from warm glow. The agent’s
                                                                                                    α2 (Y−i +wi µ)
best-response choice of the public good in this case is Y ∗ = f i (wi , Y−i , τ, θ) =               (α1 +α2 +α3 ) ,   where µ =
τ (1−θ) 17
  τ −θ .     This yields the simple expression:

                                               ∂Y ∗                 α2
                                                    = fYi −i =                                                                (5)
                                               ∂Y−i            α1 + α2 + α3

which is decreasing as α3 grows. Indeed, as the warm glow term α3 grows increasingly larger the expression

in (5) falls towards zero, leading to a full-crowd-out result resembling the type of outcome usually ascribed

to the standard model when there is no warm glow at all.18

    Figure 1 illustrates the efficacy of policy intervention in the case of hidden income and in the standard

case with no hidden income. Panel A of Figure 1 depicts an equilibrium where individuals can hide income.

Here, n = 5, α1 = 1 − α2 − α3 , and α2 = 1/2 − α3 (along with α3 , these are the only parameters that

determine crowd out; these parameter choices are discussed more momentarily).19 The y-axis shows the
                                                                                          dY
equilibrium change in the public good from an exogenous intervention,                    dτn+1   ; i.e., the figure shows the

expression in (4) using the result in (5). Larger values on the y-axis correspond to smaller crowd out and

more effective policy intervention. The x-axis shows the strength of the warm glow parameter α3 , which

varies between 0.1 and 0.3. Panel B of the figure shows equilibrium crowd out when individuals are unable
  16 Further, there is empirical evidence that under-reporting of income—income is reported but not fully, fitting the interior

solution here—is a widespread economic activity, cf. Alm and Yunus (2009), Schneider and Enste (2000), Alm, Bahl, and
Murray (1991 and 1990), Poterba (1987), and Clotfelter (1983).
  17 This result it notable for its analytical simplicity, as most warm-glow examples have exceedingly complex solutions. The

simplicity is gained from the new first-order condition in equation (3), which involves only two marginal utility terms (instead
of the three marginal utility terms in (2)).
  18 In fact, in a pure altruism model the derivative in (5) will actually be greater than the zero effect suggested above, as an

increase in Y−i is viewed as an increase in income which (under normality) raises demand for Y .
  19 Here larger values of α translate into larger values of f i      i        ∗                   ∗
                             3                                 Y−i − fwi and ∂gi /∂Y−i , holding ∂ci /∂wi constant. Simply setting
α1 and α2 equal to constants (i.e., not functions of α3 ) and letting α3 increase produces similar results, and would satisfy the
conditions of Proposition 2, but in this case ∂c∗i /∂wi may change as α3 grows.




                                                               11
to hide any income; the scale of the y-axes in the two panels is different. In this case crowd out depends

upon endowed income and the tax rate; in Panel B τ = 0.5, and w = 1.

    The figure shows starkly different implications for policy intervention depending upon whether income
                                                    dY
can be hidden. In the hidden income case,          dτn+1   is diminishing as α3 increases; this corresponds to increasing

crowd out as warm glow incentives grow. Panel B shows that the opposite is true when income cannot be
                                          dY
hidden; here crowd out falls (and        dτn+1   rises) as α3 grows. The figure also highlights a striking difference in

the magnitude of crowd out in the two panels. In panel A crowd out is large, while in panel B crowd out is

negligible.20


3C. Changes in θ and τ

A policy maker concerned with hidden income could attempt to encourage income reporting by decreasing

the tax rate or increasing the cost of hiding income. One might wonder how total provision of the public

good would change in response to a change in τ or θ. It is in general unclear which parameter would lead

to larger changes in the public good’s provision. To see this, consider a change in the cost of hiding income,

θ, on the equilibrium provision of the public good. Let y i = f i (•) − Y−i represent i ’s total public-good

contribution, including both the voluntary and tax components. Totally differentiating this, we have dy i =

fθi dθ + fYi −i dY−i − dY−i . Since Y−i = Y − y i , it follows that dY−i = dY − dy i . Plugging this in for dY−i and
                                      h                   i h         i
collecting terms yields dy i = dY (fYi −i − 1)/fYi −i + fθi /fYi −i dθ. Finally, it must be that dY = i dy i ;
                                                                                                             P

plugging in for dy i in this expression yields

                                                                P        fθi
                                                  dY                 i fYi
                                                                          −i
                                                     =                             .                                        (6)
                                                  dθ            P        fYi   −1
                                                                           −i
                                                           1−    i        fYi
                                                                              −i



                       dY
The expression for     dτ   is the same as the above except that the numerator contains fτi instead of fθi .

    Consider a symmetric equilibrium where f i = f . Using (6), we can compare the effect on the public good

of a decrease in the tax rate to the effect of an increase in the cost of hiding resources:

                                                
                                       dY     dY     dY   dY
                                          − −      =    +    = ς (fθ + fτ )                                                   (7)
                                       dθ     dτ     dθ   dτ

                                 
where ς = 1/ 1 + (fY−i /n) − fY−i . The term ς will be positive if goods are normal and there is no “crowd
   20 It can be verified that interior solutions exist for these parameters. Further, while simple, the example produces levels of

hidden income and donations broadly consistent with prior work. The solutions in Panel A typically suggest that about half of
income is hidden, an amount consistent with the amount of shadow activity reported for many countries in Schneider and Enste
(2000); and the fraction of income spent on warm glow is typically around 0.15. This is an amount consistent with some prior
findings on the average amount of income transferred by households in developing communities to needy friends and family;
see Cox and Fafchamps (2007).



                                                                12
                                     dY       dY
in,” 0 < fY−i < 1. The sign of       dθ   +   dτ   thus depends on the sign of fθ + fτ .

   To explore these partial derivatives of the best response function f , consider the following hypothetical

thought experiment. Imagine that the optimization problem faced by individuals in this model was not a

public-good style problem with two choice variables, but instead was a standard consumer problem with three

choice variables, max         U i (ci , Y, gi )+λ(Mi −pc ci −pY Y −pg gi ), where pc , pg , and pY were the prices for each
                  ci ,Y, gi
good and individuals had income level Mi . This hypothetical problem thus keeps preferences the same but

replaces the model’s public-good and hidden-income technologies with a simple budget constraint, creating a

standard consumer maximization problem. Call the optimal choice of Y in this model Ỹ ∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ); the

derivatives of this function Ỹ ∗ with respect to Mi and prices pc , pg , and pY can be interpreted as standard

income and price effects.

   As discussed in the appendix, one can identify values of prices and income (Mi , pc , pY , pg ) such that the

solution Ỹ ∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ) will equal the best-response-function choice of the public good f (wi , Y−i , τ, θ).

In particular, Ỹ ∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ) will equal f (wi , Y−i , τ, θ) when pg = θ, pY = τ − θ, pc = τ , and M =

Y−i (τ − θ) + w(1 − θ)τ . These parameter values are intuitive in that at these values the price of good j,

pj , represents the opportunity cost, as measured by foregone public-good provision, from consuming good j ;

this will be discussed more momentarily. It follows that Ỹ ∗ can be used to decompose the partial derivatives

fθ and fτ into traditional price and income effects:

                                                    ∂ Ỹ ∗               ∂ Ỹ ∗   ∂ Ỹ ∗
                                          fθ = −           (Y−i + wτ ) +        −                                       (8)
                                                    ∂M                   ∂pg      ∂pY

                                              ∂ Ỹ ∗                    ∂ Ỹ ∗   ∂ Ỹ ∗
                                       fτ =          (Y−i + w(1 − θ)) +        +        .                               (9)
                                              ∂M                        ∂pc      ∂pY
                                                    ∂ Ỹ ∗
Suppose income effects are small, so that           ∂M       is close to zero. Then the difference for public good provision

between lowering the tax rate and raising the cost of hiding income is determined by the simple expression:

                                                              ∂ Ỹ ∗   ∂ Ỹ ∗
                                                    fθ + fτ ∼
                                                            =        +                                                 (10)
                                                              ∂pg      ∂pc

which could be either positive or negative and depends upon the cross-price sensitivity of demand for the

public good. As noted above, pc = τ when Ỹ ∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ) = f (wi , Y−i , τ, θ). Intuitively, an individual

who hides a dollar of income for private consumption lowers the public good by τ ; the term τ is thus the

public-good price of substituting Y for ci . Decreasing τ will therefore have a large effect on the public good

if individuals are willing to substitute between the private good c and the public good; that is, if ∂ Ỹ ∗ / ∂pc

is large.



                                                                   13
   Alternately, an individual hiding a dollar of income for warm glow lowers the public good by θ, so that

θ is the public-good price of substituting Y for gi . The impact on the public good from increasing θ will

thus be relatively large (compared to changing τ ) when individuals view warm glow and the public good

as especially close substitutes; that is, if ∂ Ỹ ∗ / ∂pg is large. Thus either changes in θ or changes in τ may

have particularly large effects on the provision of the public good, and the effect of changing either of these

terms depends upon the extent to which individuals view the public good as substitutable for other types of

consumption gi and ci .


3D. Tax Revenue

It has been widely acknowledged that tax revenue collection is a critical but challenging issue in developing

societies (Besley and Persson, 2013); one might wonder if the results shown earlier have implications for tax

revenue as well. This subsection considers how an exogenous increase in the public good would affect tax

revenue. Let R denote tax revenue:


                                                   X
                                              R=        (wi − si )τ.
                                                    i

   The discussion here will show that an exogenous increase in the public good lowers tax revenue, and this

effect is greater as warm glow grows. For purposes of motivation, suppose in this case that the increase

in public-good provision was an exogenous increase from an NGO. Then we could express the equilibrium

change in tax revenue from this intervention as

                                          dR        X ∂si dY−i
                                               = −τ               .
                                        dgN GO      i
                                                      ∂Y−i dgN GO

                                                                                              P              
We can write Y−i = gN GO + j6=i f j −Y−j . Totally differentiating this gives: dY−i = dgN GO + j6=i fYj −i − 1 dY−j .
                          P

Suppose the equilibrium were symmetric, so that f j = f and dY−i = dY−j for all i and j and that si is the
                                                                  
same for all i. Then we can write dY−i = dgN GO + (n − 1) fY−i − 1 dY−i , or

                                     dY−i                         −1
                                           = 1 − (n − 1) fY−i − 1      .
                                    dgN GO

Plugging this in, the expression for tax revenue becomes

                                 dR           ∂si                     −1
                                      = −τ n      1 − (n − 1) fY−i − 1     .                               (11)
                               dgN GO        ∂Y−i

The following proposition shows the effect of such a contribution on tax revenue. In addition to symme-


                                                        14
try, the proposition takes the same conditions as those in Proposition 1, but adds two further (but mild)

assumptions. First, it is assumed there is no “crowd in,” so that 0 < fY−i < 1. Second, the result adds the
                                  ∂c∗
mild assumption that 0 ≤         ∂Y−i .
                                    i
                                          This condition is sufficient for proving part (b) of the proposition, but part

(a) of the proposition would hold even if this condition were not met. The condition simply says that, given

an exogenous increase in i ’s consumption of the public good, i ’s best-response choice of private consumption

does not go down.


                                                                                           ∂c∗
Proposition 3: Given a symmetric equilibrium and given τ , wi , θ, and 0 ≤                ∂Y−i ,
                                                                                             i
                                                                                                   (a) an exogenous increase
                                                              dR
in the public good will lower tax revenue; that is,         dgN GO   < 0. (b) The greater is warm glow, the greater is
                                                             ∂gi∗
the decline in tax revenue; that is, larger values of        ∂Y−i   correspond to smaller (i.e. more negative) values of
  dR
dgN GO .




   The notion that NGO activity could injuriously affect governance has been raised before (e.g., Bräutigam

and Knack, 2004) although the channel here is different. The intuition follows the earlier results: given an

exogenous increase in the public good, individuals respond by hiding income, which lowers tax revenue. The

greater is the warm glow, the greater is the hidden-income response, and thus the greater the decline in tax

revenue.



4. Application to Crowd Out Estimates

The analysis in the prior sections shows that, if individuals choose to hide a fraction of income, then stronger

warm glow will lead to more crowd out. Subsection 2 discussed evidence motivating the basic setup of the

model, but one may wonder whether this key result has any bearing on empirical estimates of crowd out.

This section provides a brief, suggestive exploration of this possibility.

   Such an exploration requires three things: (1) estimates of crowd out, (2) a measure of individuals’

proclivity to hide income, and (3) a measure of warm glow. Meeting these requirements is potentially

challenging; many papers devote considerable resources simply towards producing a measure of crowd out,

and I am unaware of any prior work providing estimates of warm glow usable here.

   For crowd out estimates, I assembled 22 estimates from 16 different papers in the development literature

on crowd out and inter-family transfers. This literature considers whether a change in a household’s income

(e.g., from a government social-security pension) crowds out informal transfers of income into the household

(e.g., remittances sent by adult children).21 As noted in Warr (1982), transfers of this kind may be considered
 21 One    might be concerned that the set of paper here was chosen (even inadvertently) in a way to fit the model. A subset of



                                                               15
contributions to a public good.22 Another advantage of focusing on this literature is that it provides a

relatively large number of crowd-out estimates that, arguably, are prima facie comparable. An additional

benefit is that many papers in this area focus on crowd out in a particular nation, allowing for an international

comparison of crowd out in different countries.23 The estimates show, on a dollar-for-dollar basis, the extent

to which a one-dollar increase in a household’s income (often from an increase in pension income) reduces

private income transfers into the household. Some papers provided a single estimate for the entire sample

of available individuals; in that case this “entire sample” estimate would be chosen. Some papers instead

provided estimates for different groups separately (e.g., urban/rural); in this case estimates for all subgroups

are included.24

    The second item needed is an estimate of the willingness to hide income. For this I turn to the World

Values Survey (WVS), a survey conducted roughly every five years for about 90 countries (not every country

is surveyed every year). The survey has consisted of five waves: 1981-84 (wave 1), 1989-93 (wave 2), 1994-99

(wave 3), 1999-2004 (wave 4), and 2005-07 (wave 5). The survey includes a question where individuals rate on

a scale of 1 to 10 how “justifiable” it is to cheat on taxes (1 = “never justifiable”, 10 = “always justifiable”);

this question has been asked in every wave of the WVS. I simply take the fraction of individuals in a country

reporting that it is ever justifiable to cheat on taxes (ie, those giving an answer of 2 or greater).25

    The final item required is a measure of warm glow. Remarkably, the WVS contains two questions which

are closely-related to the idea of warm glow. On a 1 to 4 scale (with 1 being strongly disagree and 4 being

strongly agree), individuals evaluate the statement: “I would give part of my income if I were certain that

the money would be used to prevent environmental pollution.” Individuals then use this scale to evaluate

the statement: “I would agree to an increase in taxes if the extra money were used to prevent environmental

pollution.”26 In the warm-glow model the distinction between willingness to donate taxes and willingness to

donate income is captured by the strength of warm-glow preferences: individuals willing to donate income

but unwilling to donate taxes are individuals with high warm glow. Accordingly, the measure of warm glow
these papers are listed in a handbook chapter by Cox and Fafchamps (2007); restricting the analysis to this “exogenous” list of
papers reduces the sample but produces results qualitatively consistent with those shown here.
  22 Moreover, as discussed in (e.g.) Cox and Jimenez (1992), Cox, Eser, and Jimenez (1998), Albarran and Attanasio (2002),

and Cox and Fafchamps (2007), most transfers of this nature take place between close relatives; thus, for a decision to give to a
family member the relevant population of donors would often be other close relatives, a group small enough that the asymptotic
concerns raised in the prior section would plausibly not apply. Several papers provide information on the size of households
among both donors and recipients of transfers (e.g., Cox, Hansen, Jimenez, 2004; Lai and Orsuwan, 2009; Fan, 2010; Juarez,
2009); the typical size is often comparable to the population size in the example used earlier.
  23 The papers here exclude studies in countries not included in the World Values Survey (e.g., Botswana and Fiji).
  24 In most cases the “baseline” crowd out estimate was readily identifiable and was used, but a few cases report multiple

estimates. In general, the results are robust to trading a “robustness” estimate for a “baseline” estimate in a particular paper.
  25 An alternative method of measuring hidden income would be to take measures of the size of a nation’s underground

economy as in Schneider and Buehn (2009). For some countries here, I am unaware of estimates of the shadow economy; the
WVS measure above thus allows a greater sample size. However, using shadow-economy estimates for the subset of countries
where they are available produces results close to those shown here.
  26 In fact, the original scales in the raw data were flipped, with 1 as strongly agree and 4 as strongly disagree. The scales are

reversed here simply to make the measure of warm glow more intuitive.




                                                                16
here is simply the answer to the first question minus the answer to the second, resulting in a variable that

ranges from 3 to -3. Higher values correspond to a stronger warm glow.27

    One concern about this measure of warm glow is that differences in the willingness to pay taxes and

to donate income may stem from individuals’ perception of government efficiency. The WVS also asks

individuals to evaluate, on a 1-5 scale, their confidence in the government. I regress each individual’s warm

glow measure on (a) a set of dummies for country of residence (b) a set of 5 dummies for confidence in the

government, and (c) a set of dummies for survey year. I use the coefficients from the country dummies as the

measure of warm glow. These coefficients show, controlling for confidence in the government, the average

level of warm glow in a country. Simply using the average level of warm glow in a country (not controlling

for confidence in government) produces results qualitatively similar to those shown here.28

    Table 1 shows the list of papers, the nations in each study, the fraction saying cheating is justifiable

in each country, average warm glow (relative to Poland, the omitted country) and estimated crowd out

of inter-family transfers. The table is arranged from the country with the fewest portion of individuals

saying cheating is justifiable (Bangladesh, by far) to the country with the most saying it is justifiable (the

Philippines).29 There is notable variation across all the variables. The warm glow estimates range by about

0.3, which is little less than half a standard deviation. The crowd-out estimates also display some variety;

most are negative and between zero and -0.3 (with clear exceptions).

    Looking at Table 1, there is a break in the fraction saying cheating is justifiable between China and

Peru. Taking Peru, Taiwan, South Africa, Burkina Faso, Poland, Mexico and the Philippines as the “hiding

income” group, the model here suggests that the relationship between warm glow and crowd out should be

attenuated or even negative for this group. (The result here is not overly sensitive to this choice of cutoff.)

Meanwhile, if countries with low levels of hidden income are better described by the standard model, the

relationship between crowd out and warm glow for these countries should be positive.30

    Figure 2 plots the relationship between crowd out and warm glow for the “more hiding” and “less hiding”
  27 This question was not asked in the 1981-1984 wave and the 1994-1999 wave of the survey. Redoing the measure of cheating
on taxes only for the waves where the warm glow measure is available produces similar results.
  28 One might note that this warm glow measure uses questions on pollution whereas the crowd-out estimates look at inter-

family transfers. To the extent that the measure of warm glow used here is specific to pollution, this would presumably lead to
spurious noise in the analysis and work against identifying any relationship between warm glow and family transfers. However,
there is at least some reason to believe that preferences stated here are informative for non-pollution-related charitable activities.
The World Values Survey asks individuals if they are members of organizations which assist the handicapped, religious orga-
nizations, human rights organizations, and other community and voluntary groups. One can thus construct a dummy variable
that equals unity if an individual is a member of a local voluntary or community organization and regress this dummy on the
two questions used to construct the warm glow measure. These regressions show that greater willingness to pay income and
greater willingness to pay taxes to fight pollution are both statistically significantly associated with greater levels of voluntarism
in organizations. The coefficient on the donate income question is 0.022 [robust se = 0.005], so that a one-digit increase in an
individual’s willingness to donate income to fight pollution raises the likelihood of any community voluntarism by 2 percentage
points. The coefficient on the willingness to pay taxes is 0.011 [0.005].
  29 Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1998) note high tax evasion rates in the Philippines, consistent with the table here.
  30 The earlier analysis contrasted a case where all individuals hide some income to the case where no one hides while the

comparison here is between places with more hiding and less; but, as noted in section 3, the earlier analysis extends to a
more-hiding-versus-less-hiding comparison also.


                                                                 17
groups. Consistent with the standard model, countries with less hiding have a positive relationship between

average warm glow and published crowd-out estimates.31 In contrast, the “more hiding” group shows a

negative relationship: countries where individuals have stronger warm glow are countries were published

crowd out estimates tend to be further below zero.32

    These findings in Figure 2 should be regarded as suggestive, but they nonetheless clearly indicate that

the relationship between crowd out and warm glow may be very different in different settings. Moreover, in

situations where hidden income is a common occurrence the simple analysis here suggests that, in accordance

with the model, greater warm glow may in fact be associated with greater crowd out.



5. Conclusions

This paper presents a warm glow analysis in a setting where individuals can hide income from a government

or other central authority. Prior work has suggested that hiding income is a widespread phenomenon,

including in situations where public goods are jointly provided. The findings of this paper suggest that the

effects of warm glow and the efficacy of policy intervention may be quite different in these situations: when

individuals can make costly decisions to hide income, warm glow incentives can amplify one’s willingness

to undertake actions that undermine policy interventions. This paper thus highlights a need for continued

work on the joint provision of public goods in settings where income concealment may be common, as in

developing economies.

    One simplification in the present paper is that the cost of evading taxation is wholly captured in the

term θ. As discussed in Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1998) and Slemrod (2007), individuals may face

both intrinsic incentives that affect the decision to hide income (such as guilt, shame, and civic virtue) and

explicit incentives (such as the expected monetary cost of hiding income or the probability of audit); these

incentives could interact with each other in complex ways (see also Frey, 1997). An analysis of how different

types of incentives for hiding income interact when determining public-good provision is left for future work.
  31 The less-hiding group includes a coefficient of almost positive one, but removing this estimate does not change the positive

relationship. Indeed, the trends in this picture are not driven by any particular study.
  32 One might wonder whether the relationship between warm glow and crowd out is statistically significantly different for

the two groups. Using a simple OLS regression of crowd out on (a) a constant (b) warm glow (c) a dummy for being in the
more-hiding group, and (d) the interaction of (b) and (c), one can reject the hypothesis that the slopes of the two lines are
equal (the p-value from this test is 0.017 and is based on t-statistics constructed using robust standard errors). This result is
robust to dropping any one paper from the sample, or even (e.g.) dropping the Raut and Tran outlier and the two papers based
on Mexico. The results are also preserved if one collapses the data to country-level averages.




                                                               18
References

 [1] Albarran, Pedro, and Orazio Attanasio (2002) “Do Public Transfers Crowd out Private Transfers?”

    Discussion paper no. 2002-6 (World Institute for Development Economics, Helsinki, Finland).

 [2] Alexandrova, Lyudmila (2013) “Half of Russians are Employed in Shadow Economy,” Report from the

    Information Telegraph Agency of Russia (ITAR-TASS), April 4.

 [3] Alm, James and Mohammad Yunus (2009) “Spatiality and Persistence in U.S. Individual Income Tax

    Compliance,” National Tax Journal 62 (1), 101-124.

 [4] Alm, James, Roy Bahl, and Matthew N. Murray (1991) “Tax Base Erosion in Developing Countries,”

    Economic Development and Cultural Change 39 (4), 849-872

 [5] Alm, James, Roy Bahl, and Matthew N. Murray (1990) “Tax Structure and Tax Compliance,” Review

    of Economics and Statistics 72 (4), 603-613

 [6] Andreoni, James (1989) “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications for Charity and Ricardian Equiv-

    alence,” Journal of Political Economy 97, 1447-1458.

 [7] Andreoni, James (1990) “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A theory of Warm-Glow

    Giving,” Economic Journal 100 464-477.

 [8] Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein (1998) “Tax Compliance,” Journal of Economic

    Literature, 36, 818-860.

 [9] Banerjee, Biswajit (1983) “The Role of the Informal Sector in the Migration Process: A Test of Proba-

    bilistic Migration Models and Labour Market Segmentation for India,” Oxford Economic Papers 35(3),

    399-422.

[10] Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson (2013) “Taxation and Development,” in Alan J. Auerbach, Raj

    Chetty, Martin Feldstein and Emmanuel Saez (eds) Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 5, Amster-

    dam: New Holland.

[11] Bräutigam, Deborah and Stephen Knack (2004) “Foreign Aid, Institutions, and Governance in Sub-

    Saharan Africa,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 52(2), 255-285.

[12] Burgess, Robin and Nicholas Stern (1993) “Taxation and Development” Journal of Economic Literature

    31(2), 762-830.




                                                   19
[13] Cai, Fang, John Giles, and Xin Meng (2006) “How Well do Children Insure Parents Against Low

    Retirement Income? An Analysis Using Survey Data from Urban China,” Journal of Public Economics

    90, 2229-2255.

[14] Clotfelter, Charles (1983) “Tax Evasion and Tax Rates: An Analysis of Individual Returns,” The Review

    of Economics and Statistics 65 (3), 363-373.

[15] Cox, Donald, Bruce Hansen, and Emmanuel Jimenez (2004) “How Responsive are Private Transfers to

    Income? Evidence from a Laissez-faire Economy,” Journal of Public Economics 88, 2193-2219.

[16] Cox, Donald, and Marcel Fafchamps (2007) “Extended Family and Kinship Networks: Economic In-

    sights and Evolutionary Directions,” in T. Paul Schultz and John A. Strauss (eds.) Handbook of Devel-

    opment Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: New Holland.

[17] Cox, Donald, Emmanuel Jimenez, and Wlodek Okrasa (1997) “Family Safety Nets and Economic Tran-

    sition: A Study of Worker Households in Poland,” Review of Income and Wealth 43, 191-209.

[18] Cox, Donald, Zekeriya Eser, and Emmanuel Jimenez (1998) “Motives for Private Transfers over the

    Life Cycle: An Analytical Framework and Evidence from Peru,” Journal of Development Economics

    55, 57-80.

[19] Cox, Donald, and Emmanuel Jimenez (1992) “Social Security and Private Transfers in Developing

    Countries: the Case of Peru,” The World Bank Economic Review (6), 155-169.

[20] Cornes, Richard, and Todd Sandler (1994) “The Comparative Static Properties of the Impure Public

    Good Model,” Journal of Public Economics 54, 403-421.

[21] Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson (2011) “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Develop-

    ment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya,” Working paper.

[22] Fan, Elliott (2010) “Who Benefits from Public Old Age Pensions? Evidence from a Targeted Program,”

    Economic Development and Cultural Change (58), 297-322.

[23] Feldstein, Martin (1980) “A Contribution to the Theory of Tax Expenditures: The Case of Charitable

    Giving,” in Henry Aaron and Michael Boskin (eds.) The Economics of Taxation. Washington, D.C.:

    Brookings Institution.

[24] Foster, Cecil (1985) “Bypass Official Aid Channels, Peruvian Urges,” The Globe and Mail, April 25.

[25] Frey, Bruno S. (1997) “A Constitution for Knaves Crowds Out Civic Virtues,” Economic Journal 107,

    1043-1053.

                                                   20
[26] Gibson, John, Susan Olivia, and Scott Rozelle (2011) “How Widespread are Nonlinear Crowding Out

    Effects? The Response of Private Transfers to Income in Four Developing Countries,” Applied Economics

    43, 4053-4068.

[27] Goldberg, Jessica (2010) “The Lesser of Two Evils: The Roles of Social Pressure and Impatience in

    Consumption Decisions,” Working paper.

[28] Gordon, Roger, and Wei Li (2005) “Puzzling Tax Structures in Developing Countries: A Comparison

    of Two Alternative Explanations,” NBER Working Paper 11661.

[29] Hungerman, Daniel (2009) “Crowd out and Diversity,” Journal of Public Economics, 93, 729-740.

[30] Hungerman, Daniel (2007) “Diversity and Crowd-Out: A Theory of Cold-Glow Giving,” NBER working

    paper 13348.

[31] Jakiela, Pamela, and Owen Ozier (2011) “Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experimental

    Evidence from Village Economies,” Working paper.

[32] Jensen, Robert (2003) “Do Private Transfers ‘Displace’ the Benefits of Public Transfers? Evidence from

    South Africa,” Journal of Public Economics 88, 89-112.

[33] Juarez, Laura (2009) “Crowding out of Private Support to the Elderly: Evidence from a Demogrant in

    Mexico,” Journal of Public Economics (93), 454-463.

[34] Kazianga, Harounan (2006) “Motives for Household Private Transfers in Burkina Faso,” Journal of

    Development Economics 79, 73-117.

[35] Kaser, Greg (2000) “How to Help the Poor,” The Moscow Times, July 6.

[36] Khanna, Jyoti, and Todd Sandler, (2000) “Partners in Giving: The Crowding-In Effects of UK Govern-

    ment Grants,” European Economic Review 44, 1543-1556.

[37] Kingma, Bruce. (1989) “An Accurate Measurement of the Crowd-Out Effect, Income Effect, and Price

    Effect for Charitable Contributions,” Journal of Political Economy 97, 1197-1207.

[38] Kinnan, Cynthia (2012) “Distinguishing Barriers to Insurance in Thai Villages,” Working paper.

[39] Krause, Alan (2011) “On the Crowding-Out Effects of Tax-Financed Charitable Contributions by the

    Government,” Working paper.

[40] Lai, Mun Sim, and Meechai Orsuwan (2009) “Examining the Impact of Taiwan’s Cash Allowance

    Program on Private Households,” World Development (37), 1250-1260.

                                                    21
[41] Maitra, Pushkar, and Ranjan Ray (2003) “The Effect of Transfers on Household Expenditure Patterns

    and Poverty in South Africa,” Journal of Development Economics (71), 23-49.

[42] McKernan, Singe-Mary, Mark Pitt, and David Moskowitz (2005) “Use of the Formal and Informal

    Financial Sectors: Does Gender Matter? Empirical Evidence from Rural Bangladesh” Policy Research

    Working Paper 3491 (Worldbank, Washington, DC).

[43] Meng, Xin (2001) “The Informal Sector and Rural-Urban Migration–A Chinese Case Study,” Asian

    Economic Journal 15(1), 71-89.

[44] Merrick, Thomas (1976) “Employment and Earnings in the Informal Sector in Brazil: The Case of Belo

    Horizonte,” The Journal of Developing Areas 10(3), 337-354.

[45] Miller, Terry, Kim R. Holmes, Anthony B. Kim, James M. Roberts, and Caroline Walsh (2011) 2011

    Index of Economic Freedom, published by the Heritage Foundation and Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

[46] Monaco-Mancini (1999) “Why Can’t Volunteers Get a Break on Taxes?” The Gazette, Nov. 29.

[47] Olken, Benjamin, Monica Singhal (2011) “Informal Taxation,” American Economics Journal : Applied

    Economics.

[48] Payne, Abigail A. (2009) “Does Government Funding Change Behavior? An Empirical Analysis of

    Crowdout,” in Jeffrey R. Brown and James M. Poterba (eds.) Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 23.

    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[49] Payne, Abigail A. (1998). “Does the Government Crowd-out Private Donations? New Evidence from a

    Sample of Non-profit Firms,” Journal of Public Economics 69, 323-345.

[50] Poterba, James (1987) “Tax Evasion and Capital Gains Taxation,” The American Economic Review 77

    (2), 234-239.

[51] Raut, Lakshmi, and Lien Tran (2005) “Parental Human Capital Investment and Old-age Transfers from

    Children: Is it a Loan of Reciprocity for Indonesian Families?” Journal of Development Economics

    (77), 389-414.

[52] Ribar, David C. and Mark O. Wilhelm (2002) “Altruistic and Joy-of-Giving Motivations in Charitable

    Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 110, 425-457.

[53] Schneider, Friedrich, and Dominik H. Enste (2000) “Shadow Economies: Size, Causes, and Conse-

    quences,” Journal of Economic Literature 38, 77-114.


                                                  22
[54] Schneider, Friedrich, and Andreas Buehn (2007) “Shadow Economies and Corruption All Over the

    World: Revised Estimates for 120 Countries,” Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-

    Journal (2), October 27.

[55] Secondi, Giorgio (1997) “Private Monetary Transfers in Rural China: Are Families Altruistic?” Journal

    of Development Studies (33), 487-511.

[56] Schokkaert, Erik (2006) “The Empirical Analysis of Transfer Motives,” in Serge-Christophe Kolm and

    Jean Mercier Ythier (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism, and Reciprocity, Volume 1.

    Amsterdam: New Holland.

[57] Slemrod, Joel (2007) “Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion,” Journal of Economic

    Perspectives 21, 25-48.

[58] Straub, John and Sonia Manzoor (2005) “The Robustness of Kingma’s Crowd-out Estimate: Evidence

    from Contributions to Public Radio,” Public Choice 123, 463-476.

[59] Warr, Peter G. (1982) “Pareto Optimal Redistribution and Private Charity,” Journal of Public Eco-

    nomics 19, 131-138.




                                                   23
Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1

      Rewrite the budget constraint gi = wi (1 − τ ) + si (τ − θ) − ci and differentiate:

                                                           ∂gi    ∂si            ∂ci
                                                               =      (τ − θ) −                                                                  (12)
                                                          ∂Y−i   ∂Y−i           ∂Y−i

                        ∂ci                                                      ∂gi                                           ∂si
By assumption          ∂Y−i   is constant, so that an increase in               ∂Y−i   corresponds to an increase in          ∂Y−i .      The public

good can be expressed as Y = Y−i + (wi − si )τ + gi ; differentiating this with respect to Y−i and using (12)
            ∂Y ∗                     ∂s∗          ∂c∗              ∂ci                              ∂si
yields      ∂Y−i   = fYi −i = 1 −   ∂Y−i θ
                                       i
                                             −   ∂Y−i .
                                                    i
                                                          Since   ∂Y−i    is constant and          ∂Y−i   has increased, fYi −i has decreased.
                                              dY
It follows by equation (4) that              dτn+1   has decreased.

Extension to Non-linear Costs

      The above result assumes that the marginal cost of hiding income is constant; consider relaxing this

assumption. With nonlinearity, individuals who chose to hide different amounts of income (e.g., to consume

different levels of ci ) would face different marginal costs of converting Y to gi ; this could lead to differences

in crowd out behavior even absent differences in warm glow. To address this complication, consider for

simplicity an equilibrium outcome with a given level of hidden income s∗ . Suppose that the marginal cost

of hiding income was positive and less than τ (but not necessarily constant). Specifically, let the cost of
                                                                                                 ∂h
hiding income be given by the differentiable function h(s), 0 <                                  ∂s    < τ . Here, the budget constraint is
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                     ∂gi         ∂si         ∂h        ∂ci        ∂ci
gi = wi (1 − τ ) + si τ − h(si ) − ci . Differentiating yields:                     ∂Y−i    =   ∂Y−i     τ − ∂s i
                                                                                                                    − ∂Y −i
                                                                                                                            . If ∂Y −i
                                                                                                                                       is constant
       ∂h                                                                   ∂gi                                             ∂si
and    ∂si   is less than τ , then as before an increase in                ∂Y−i     corresponds to an increase in          ∂Y−i .    Following the
                               ∂Y ∗                            ∂s∗        ∂c∗                           ∂ci
above proof, we have           ∂Y−i    = fYi −i = 1 −      ∂h    i
                                                           ∂si ∂Y−i   −   ∂Y−i .
                                                                            i
                                                                                    For a given        ∂Y−i   and s∗ , and since    ∂h
                                                                                                                                    ∂si   is positive,
      ∂si                                                                            dY
if   ∂Y−i    has increased, fYi −i again has decreased and thus                     dτn+1   has decreased.
                dY              dY
Equating       dτn+1   and    dgN GO

                                             − sk )τ + gk for all i. As in section 3C, let y i = f i (•) − Y−i , and
                                             P
      In this case, Y−i = gN GO +                k6=i (wk
                                                                                                                 
dy i = fYi −i dY−i − dY−i . As before, dY−i = dY − dy i , using this for dY−i yields dy i = fYi −i dY − dy i −
                                                                                                        
 dY − dy i or dy i = dY fYi −i − 1 /fYi −i . Next, dY = dgN GO + i dy i =dgN GO + i dY fYi −i − 1 /fYi −i ,
                                                                      P                 P
              P                  
or dY 1 − i fYi −i − 1 /fYi −i = dgN GO . Dividing out and multiplying the negative one through gives
                                 −1
  dY
                  Pn        1
dg N GO =     1 +   i=1   fi
                               − 1      , which matches equation (4).
                                 Y−i

Proof of Proposition 2
                                                                      τ −θ i
      The proof begins by establishing that fYi −i =                 τ −τ θ fwi .   As discussed in section 2, the individual’s objective

function can be written U i (wi − si θ + Y−i − Y, Y, Y − Y−i − (wi − si )τ ). As noted in the text, one of the

first order conditions can be represented as θUYi = (τ − θ)Ugii ; differentiating this with respect to Y−i yields:



                                                                           24
                                                                        
             ∂si                                                       ∂si
 θUYi ci −θ ∂Y −i
                  + 1 − f i
                         Y−i    + θU i
                                        f i
                                     Y Y Y−i + θU i
                                                  Y gi   f i
                                                          Y−i − 1 + τ ∂Y−i
                                                                                                                  
                                        ∂si                                                                     ∂si
                  = (τ − θ) Ugi ci −θ ∂Y−i + 1 − fY−i + (τ − θ) Ugii Y fYi −i + (τ − θ) Ugii gi fYi −i − 1 + τ ∂Y
                               i                     i
                                                                                                                  −i


Gathering terms, this becomes:

     ∂si
                                                                                    
    ∂Y−i     −θ2 UYi ci + θτ UYi gi + θ (τ − θ) Ugii ci − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi
                                                                                                                                 
                               +fYi −i −θUYi ci + θUYi Y + θUYi gi + (τ − θ) Ugii ci − (τ − θ) Ugii Y − (τ − θ) Ugii gi

                               = (τ − θ) Ugii ci − (τ − θ) Ugii gi − θUYi ci + θUYi gi


Differentiating the first order condition, τ Ugii = θUcii , with respect to Y−i yields

                                                                                               
                         ∂si                                                                ∂si
           τ Ugii ci −θ ∂Y −i
                              + 1 − fYi −i + τ Ugii Y fYi −i + τ Ugii gi fYi −i − 1 + τ ∂Y   −i
                                                                                                                          
                                               ∂si                                                                      ∂si
                                = θUcii ci −θ ∂Y −i
                                                      +   1 − f i
                                                                Y −i
                                                                       + θU  i
                                                                             ci Y f i
                                                                                    Y −i
                                                                                         + θU i
                                                                                              c i g i
                                                                                                        fY
                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                            −i
                                                                                                               − 1 + τ ∂Y −i




This can be rewritten:

                   ∂si
                                                                                
                  ∂Y−i    −θτ Ugii ci + τ 2 Ugii gi + θ2 Ucii ci − θτ Ucii gi
                                                                                                                      
                                          +fYi −i −τ Ugii ci + τ Ugii Y + τ Ugii gi + θUcii ci − θUcii Y − θUcii gi

                                          = θUcii ci − θUcii gi − τ Ugii ci + τ Ugii gi


This suggests a system with two equations and two unknowns:

                                                                         
                                                                 ∂si
                                                 a1     α1   ∂Y  −i 
                                                                           b
                                                                          1 
                                                                    =    
                                                                  i
                                                  a2     α2     fY−i       b2


where
                    a1 = −θ2 UYi ci + θτ UYi gi + θ (τ − θ) Ugii ci − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi

                    α1 = −θUYi ci + θUYi Y + θUYi gi + (τ − θ) Ugii ci − (τ − θ) Ugii Y − (τ − θ) Ugii gi

                    b1 = (τ − θ) Ugii ci − (τ − θ) Ugii gi − θUYi ci + θUYi gi

                    a2 = −θτ Ugii ci + τ 2 Ugii gi + θ2 Ucii ci − θτ Ucii gi

                    α2 = −τ Ugii ci + τ Ugii Y + τ Ugii gi + θUcii ci − θUcii Y − θUcii gi

                    b2 = θUcii ci − θUcii gi − τ Ugii ci + τ Ugii gi

Solving using Cramer’s Rule (or basic algebra) yields:


                                             fYi −i = (a1 b2 − a2 b1 ) / (a1 α2 − a2 α1 ) .




                                                                    25
      Next, we find fwi i . Differentiating θUYi = (τ − θ)Ugii with respect to wi yields:

                                                                        
            ∂si                                                        ∂si
 θUYi ci −θ ∂w i
                 + 1 − fw
                         i
                           i
                               + θU i
                                    YY f i
                                         w i
                                             + θU i
                                                  Y gi   fw
                                                           i
                                                             i
                                                               − τ + τ ∂wi
                                                                                                                
                                             ∂si                                                              ∂si
                     = (τ − θ) Ugi ci −θ ∂wi + 1 − fwi + (τ − θ) Ugii Y fwi i + (τ − θ) Ugii gi fwi i − τ + τ ∂w
                                  i                        i
                                                                                                                 i




Gathering terms,

        ∂si
                                                                                    
        ∂wi    −θ2 UYi ci + θτ UYi gi + θ (τ − θ) Ugii ci − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi
                                                                                                                            
                               +fwi i −θUYi ci + θUYi Y + θUYi gi + (τ − θ) Ugii ci − (τ − θ) Ugii Y − (τ − θ) Ugii gi

                               = (τ − θ) Ugii ci − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi − θUYi ci + θτ UYi gi

      ∂si
Or,   ∂wi a1   + fwi i α1 = b3 . Finally, differentiating the first order condition, τ Ugii = θUcii , with respect to wi :

                                                                                          
                            ∂si                                                          ∂si
               τ Ugii ci −θ ∂w i
                                 + 1 − f i
                                        wi     + τ U i
                                                         f i
                                                     gi Y wi + τ U  i
                                                                   gi gi   f i
                                                                             wi  − τ + τ ∂wi
                                                                                                       
                                                     ∂si                                             ∂si
                                    = θUci ci −θ ∂wi + 1 − fwi + θUci Y fwi + θUcii gi fwi i − τ + τ ∂w
                                           i                      i             i    i
                                                                                                        i




This can be rewritten:

                    ∂si
                                                                                
                    ∂wi   −θτ Ugii ci + τ 2 Ugii gi + θ2 Ucii ci − θτ Ucii gi
                                                                                                                        
                                             +fwi i −τ Ugii ci + τ Ugii Y + τ Ugii gi + θUcii ci − θUcii Y − θUcii gi

                                             = θUcii ci − θτ Ucii gi − τ Ugii ci + τ 2 Ugii gi

      ∂si
Or,   ∂wi a2   + fwi i α2 = b4 . We again have two equations and two unknowns:

                                                                          
                                                                   ∂si
                                                     a1    α1   ∂w i 
                                                                            b
                                                                           3 
                                                                     =    
                                                                    i
                                                      a2    α2     fwi      b4


where
                                   b3 = (τ − θ) Ugii ci − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi − θUYi ci + θτ UYi gi

                                   b4 = θUcii ci − θτ Ucii gi − τ Ugii ci + τ 2 Ugii gi

and the other terms are defined as before. The solution is


                                                fwi i = (a1 b4 − a2 b3 ) / (a1 α2 − a2 α1 ) .

                                                                                 
                                            τ −θ                                −θ
      We will show that fYi −i =        fwi i , that is, that a1 b2 − a2 b1 = ττ−τ
                                           τ −τ θ                                  θ (a1 b4 − a2 b3 ) or equivalently
                                                         
                                                       −θ
that a1 (b2 − ςb4 ) = a2 (b1 − ςb3 ), where ς = ττ−τ     θ . Focusing on the left-hand side of the equation, we




                                                                      26
have
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                  τ −θ
                               θUcii ci                   τ ) Ucii gi       τ Ugii gi                         θUcii ci − (τ + θτ ) Ucii gi + τ 2 Ugii gi
                                                                                                                                                           
           b2 − ςb4 =                       − (θ +                      +               −
                                                                                                 τ − τθ

where we have exploited the fact that U`k = Uk` and alphabetized all cross-partial subscripts. Gathering

terms, this can be expressed as

                                                                                                                 
                                                         (θ+τ )(τ −θτ )−(τ −θ)(τ +θτ )                 τ −τ θ−τ 2 +θτ
           b2 − ςb4 = θUcii ci τ −τ θ−τ +θ
                                 τ (1−θ)      − Uc
                                                  i
                                                    g
                                                   i i              τ (1−θ)              + τ U i
                                                                                               g  g
                                                                                                 i i      τ (1−θ)
                             2                             
                      1−τ     θ   i         i            i
                    = 1−θ τ Uci ci + τ Ugi gi − 2θUci gi


And so


                              a1 (b2 − ςb4 ) = −θ2 Ucii Y + θτ Ugii Y + θ (τ − θ) Ucii gi − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi
                                                                                                                                           

                                               1 − τ θ2 i
                                                                                    
                                                                      i          i
                                             ×            U    + τ Ugi gi − 2θUci gi                                                                                  (13)
                                               1 − θ τ ci ci

   Consider next a2 (b1 − ςb3 ), starting with the terms b1 − ςb3 :

                                                                      
                                                                 τ −θ
b1 −ςb3 = (τ − θ) Ucii gi −(τ − θ) Ugii gi −θUcii Y +θUgii Y −           (τ − θ) Ucii gi − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi − θUcii Y + θτ Ugii Y
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                τ − τθ

where again subscripts have been alphabetized. Collecting terms, this becomes

                                                                                                                               
                                                               τ −θτ −τ 2 +θτ                                          τ −θτ −τ 2 +θτ
 b1 − ςb3 = (τ − θ) Ucii gi τ −θτ   −τ +θ
                                τ (1−θ)     − (τ − θ) U i
                                                        g g
                                                         i i      τ (1−θ)       − θU i
                                                                                     c i Y
                                                                                             τ −θτ −τ +θ
                                                                                               τ (1−θ)     + θU i
                                                                                                                gi Y      τ (1−θ)
                                                                       
           1−τ   (τ −θ)θ i                    i     θ2 i             i
        = 1−θ       τ    Uci gi − (τ − θ) Ugi gi − τ Uci Y + θUgi Y


And so,

                                                                                                                                     θ2
                                                                                                                                                                     
                              2
                                                                                  1−τ            (τ − θ) θ i
  a2 (b1 − ςb3 ) = τ              Ugii gi   +θ   2
                                                     Ucii ci   −   2θτ Ucii gi                             Uci gi − (τ − θ) Ugii gi − Ucii Y + θUgii Y
                                                                                   1−θ                τ                              τ

Multiplying the rightmost set of parentheses by τ and dividing the leftmost set of parentheses by τ yields

                                      θ2
                                                          
                                                             1−τ
                           τ Ugii gi + Ucii ci − 2θUcii gi       (τ − θ) θUcii gi − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi − θ2 Ucii Y + θτ Ugii Y
                                                                                                                              
  a2 (b1 − ςb3 ) =
                                      τ                      1−θ

which matches equation (13). Thus, a2 (b1 − ςb3 ) = a1 (b2 − ςb4 ), or a1 b2 − a 2 b1 = ς (a1 b4 − a2 b3 ), or

                                                                   a1 b2 − a 2 b1   ς (a1 b4 − a2 b3 )
                                                     fYi −i =                     =                    = ςfwi i                                                       (14)
                                                                   a1 α2 − a2 α1     a1 α2 − a2 α1
                                                                                                                                                                      
                  τ −θ                                                                                                                                           τ −τ θ
where ς =        τ −τ θ       . The difference fYi                      − fwi can then be expressed fYi                      (1 − 1/ς) = fYi            1−        τ −θ         .
                                                                   −i         i                                         −i                     −i




                                                                                            27
The expression is negative; an increase in this value corresponds to a decrease in fYi . As fYi                             decreases, it
                                                                                                           −i          −i

                                       dY
follows by equation (4) that          dτn+1   decreases, and the proposition is established.

    The intuition for this result stems not from any noteworthy restriction on preferences but instead from

the choice set available when income can be hidden. Figure A1 illustrates this choice set, which consists of

the trapezoid ABCD. Suppose an individual, taking Y−i as given, chooses to hide all income and spend all

resources on ci . This corner solution is located at point A in the picture. If an individual hiding all income

spends everything on warm glow, the individual would be at point C; the line AC represents consumption

choices when all income is hidden. The line BD represents consumption choices when no income is hidden;

BD is the budget line in the standard model with no hidden income. Points interior to ABCD represent

solutions where some income is hidden.

    Note that an exogenous increase in Y−i would move the budget plane to the “right”, shifting the points

A, B, C, and D, rightward along the Y axis. An increase in income wi would shift the budget plane outward

along all three axes at once (i.e., the point B would be further out on both the c and the Y axes than before,

and the point D would be further out on both the g and the Y axes than before). For individuals along the

edges of the plane, shifts in Y−i and wi will not be equivalent, but for individuals at interior solutions, which

are now possible because of hidden income, changes in income will be viewed as equivalent to appropriately

chosen increases in the endowment of the public good (or increases in the private good, for that matter).

This equivalency drives the proposition (and Proposition 1 as well).33
                                                       ∂gi                     ∂ci
   Finally, the proof of Proposition 1 shows that if ∂Y −i
                                                           increases, holding ∂Y −i
                                                                                    constant, then fYi −i de-
                                            
creases. Then fYi − fwi i = fYi    1 − ττ−τ
                                         −θ
                                            θ
                                                 must increase. An increase in the warm-glow concept used
                     −i                −i

in Proposition 1 thus implies increasing warm glow here.

Individuals who Hide All Income

    As mentioned in section 3, in a setting where there are type 1 individuals hiding nothing and type 2

individuals hiding some income, individuals who hide all income would solve the same optimization problem

as a certain type 1 hide-nothing individual facing a different endowment of income and Y−i . A “hide

everything” individual j with sj = wj solves max U j (wj (1 − θ) + Y−j − Y, Y, Y − Y−j ). A hide-nothing
                                                             Y
                                  i
individual i solves max U (wi + Y−i − Y, Y, Y − Y−i − wi τ ). These optimization problems are equivalent
                          Y
if Y−i + wi τ = Y−j and wi + Y−i = wj (1 − θ) + Y−j ; the latter can be rewritten wi = wj (1 − θ)/(1 − τ ). Also,

letting Yg
         −j = Y−i + wi τ be the choice of Y−j that makes these problems equivalent, and similarly for w
                                                                                                      fj , it
  33 This suggests an alternate proof. Consider an exogenous increase in Y
                                                                                      −i to Ŷ−i . Denote the level of the public good that
now solves the individual’s maximization problem Ŷ ∗ = f i (wi , Ŷ−i , τ, θ). One could identify a level of income, w̄i , that, for the
original value of Y−i , would yield Ŷ ∗ (and would also yield the associated optimal choices ĉ∗i and ĝi∗ ). That is, one could identify
a w̄i so that Ȳ ∗ = f i (w̄i , Y−i , τ,        ∗
                                        θ) = Ŷ , and
                                                              ∗     ∗       ∗     ∗
                                                     where c̄i = ĉi and ḡi = ĝi . Imposing these equalities using the expressions for c
and g in (1) yields w̄i − wi = ς Ŷ−i − Y−i , which then implies the result in (14). A third derivation of this result is discussed
below.



                                                                    28
                                                                                   ∂ Yg
follows that f i (wi , Y−i , τ, θ) = f j (w
                                          ej , Ye−j , τ ) and, since                  −j
                                                                                   δY−i    = 1, we further have that fYi −i (wi , Y−i , τ, θ) =
                      ∂ Yg
fYj −j (w                 −j
        ej , Ye−j , τ ) δY−i = fYj −j (w
                                       ej , Ye−j , τ ).

Deriving fθ and fτ

    The optimization problem in (1) is depicted as having two choice variables, Y and si . However, the

utility function has three components: ci , Y , and gi . Given a solution to the problem in (1), there exists a

corresponding three variable problem, optimized over ci , Y , and gi , with some income level Mi and some set

of prices pc , pY , and pg , that would produce the same solution. As discussed above, Figure A1 illustrates the

relevant choice set facing an individual. Extending the ABCD trapezoid to the axes creates a hypothetical

“budget plane” with corresponding hypothetical income and prices. Using points A, B, C, we have the

system of equations:

                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                               pc
                              wi (1 − θ)      Y−i              0     −1                                            
                                                                                                                     
                                                                          pY
                                                                                                                     
                              w (1 − τ )                             −1                                             =0                   (15)
                                                                                                                      
                              i            Y−i + τ wi          0        
                                                                          pg
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                      
                                    0     Y−i + wi (1 − θ) wi (1 − θ) −1                                             
                                                                             M


Where 0 is a 3 × 1 column of zeroes.34 The system is solved by pc = τ , pg = θ, pY = τ − θ, and

M = Y−i (τ − θ) + wi (1 − θ)τ ;35 Figure A2 presents these income and price parameters.36

    We could imagine an individual solving a three-variable problem facing these prices and income values:


                                       max        U i (ci , Y, gi ) + λ(Mi − pc ci − pY Y − pg gi ).                                        (16)
                                      ci ,Y, gi



Let the solutions to (16) be c̃∗i (Mi , pc , pY , pg ), Ỹ ∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ), and g̃i∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ), where the parameters

Mi , pc , pY , and pg are functions of wi , τ , θ, and Y−i . Given convex preferences, an individual at an interior

solution when solving the two-variable problem in (1) would reach the same solution when solving (16). Thus

before and after any changes in the parameters wi , τ , θ, and Y−i , it must true that Y ∗ = f i (wi , Y−i , τ, θ) =

Ỹ ∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ) and similarly for the best-response choices c∗i and gi∗ . Thus the partial derivative fθ can
                                                  ∂ Ỹ ∗ ∂M       ∂ Ỹ ∗ ∂pc       ∂ Ỹ ∗ ∂pY       ∂ Ỹ ∗ ∂pg
be expressed as: fθ (wi , Y−i , τ, θ) =           ∂M ∂θ       +   ∂pc ∂θ       +   ∂pY ∂θ       +   ∂pg ∂θ       (cf. equation (6) in Cornes and

Sandler, 1994). These partial derivatives with respect to θ can be easily evaluated using the expressions in
  34 Since the equations in (15) describe a plane in {c , Y, g } space, adding an additional equation (such as an equation for
                                                       i      i
point D) would be superfluous and would not change the rank of the leftmost matrix. As is standard in consumer optimization
problems, these income and price values are identified up to a constant (ie., the budget plane could be depicted by multiplying
income and prices by a constant); this is unimportant for the analysis here.
  35 Note that one could use the solution for the hypothetical income level M to re-derive equation (14), thus providing an

alternative proof to Proposition 2.
  36 Some of the values can be inferred from inspection of the figure directly, although note that line AC is not parallel to line

EG in the figure.




                                                                           29
Figure A2; this fact and noting that Y ∗ = Ỹ ∗ (Mi , pc , pY , pg ) yields equation (8). The derivation of fτ is

done similarly.

Proof of Part (a) of Proposition 3
                                            dR                 ∂si
                                                                                        −1
   As shown in section 3D,                dgN GO       = −τ n ∂Y −i
                                                                    1 − (n − 1) fY−i − 1     . By assumption, 0 < fY−i < 1, so
                                                                                                        dR                                ∂si
the term in parentheses is positive. Thus the entire expression for                                   dgN GO      is negative if         ∂Y−i   is positive. To
        ∂si                      ∂gi∗                                                                                             ∂gi∗                   ∂si
sign   ∂Y−i ,   we focus on      ∂Y−i .    As before we can write gi = Y − Y−i − (w − si )τ , so                                 ∂Y−i    = fY−i − 1 + τ ∂Y −i
                                                                                                                                                              .
                                         ∂gi∗                                       ∂si
Since we assume fY−i < 1,               ∂Y−i       can be positive only if         ∂Y−i    > 0.
                                                                                           ∂gi∗       ∂gi∗
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                  τ −θ
   Following the proof of Proposition 2, we will show that                                ∂Y−i    =   ∂wi        τ −τ θ       . The term in parentheses is
                                     ∂gi∗                                          ∂gi∗                                                        ∂si
positive and by normality            ∂wi       > 0; it then follows that           ∂Y−i    is positive, which implies that                    ∂Y−i   is positive,

establishing the result.
                        ∂gi∗            ∂gi∗
                                                                                       
                                                    τ −θ
                                                    ∂si                    ∂si         τ −θ
   We can rewrite      ∂Y−i      =      as fY−i +τ ∂Y
                                        ∂wi        τ −τ θ
                                                      −i
                                                         −1  =    f wi
                                                                       + τ ∂wi − τ    τ −τ θ , where we have again
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                             −θ
used the equation gi = Y − (w − si )τ − Y−i . The proof of Proposition 2 establishes that fY−i = fwi ττ−τ      θ ;
                                                               
                                 ∂si            ∂si          τ −θ
these terms drop out, leaving τ ∂Y −i
                                      − 1 = τ ∂w  i
                                                    −τ      τ −τ θ . Factoring out the τ on the right-hand side

and multiplying through by (1 − θ) leaves

                                                                         
                                                           ∂si       ∂si
                                                (1 − θ) τ      −1 =      − 1 (τ − θ) .                                                                      (17)
                                                          ∂Y−i       ∂wi

   Following the steps in the proof of Proposition 2, we can write


                                                                     ∂si   α2 b1 − α1 b2
                                                                         =
                                                                    ∂Y−i   a1 α2 − a2 α1


                                                                    ∂si   α2 b3 − α1 b4
                                                                        =
                                                                    ∂wi   a1 α2 − a2 α1

where these terms are defined as in the proof of Proposition 2. Plugging these into equation (17) produces

                                                                                                                                 
                               τ α2 b1 − τ α1 b2 − a1 α2 + a2 α1                       α2 b3 − α1 b4 − a1 α2 + a2 α1
                 (1 − θ)                                                       =                                                         (τ − θ) .          (18)
                                         a1 α2 − a2 α1                                         a1 α2 − a2 α1

The denominators are the same. Focusing first on the numerator of the left-hand side we can rewrite




                                                                            30
(1 − θ) (τ α2 b1 − τ α1 b2 − a1 α2 + a2 α1 ) as: (1 − θ) (α2 (τ b1 − a1 ) + α1 (a2 − τ b2 )) . This expands to


                  −(τ + θ)Ucii gi + τ Ugii Y + τ Ugii gi + θUcii ci − θUcii Y
                                                                               
(1 − θ)

× τ (τ − θ) Ucii gi − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi − τ θUcii Y + τ θUgii Y + θ2 Ucii Y − θτ Ugii Y − θ (τ − θ) Ucii gi + τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi
                                                                                                                                   


+ −θUcii Y + θUYi Y + θUgii Y + (τ − θ) Ucii gi − (τ − θ) Ugii Y − (τ − θ) Ugii gi
                                                                                           


× −2θτ Ucii gi + τ 2 Ugii gi + θ2 Ucii ci − τ θUcii ci + τ (τ + θ)Ucii gi − τ 2 Ugii gi
                                                                                        



were again we exploit that U`k = Uk` and alphabetize subscripts. The Ugii gi and Ugii Y terms cancel in the

second set of parentheses, and the Ugii gi terms cancel in the last set of parentheses. Gathering terms, we can

write this as


              (1 − θ) (τ − θ) −(τ + θ)Ucii gi + τ Ugii Y + τ Ugii gi + θUcii ci − θUcii Y (τ − θ) Ucii gi − θUcii Y
                                                                                                                  


              + −θUcii Y + θUYi Y + (2θ − τ )Ugii Y + (τ − θ) Ucii gi − (τ − θ) Ugii gi τ Ucii gi − θUcii ci
                                                                                                            



Multiplying out and canceling terms, the part in brackets becomes


                     θτ Ugi Y Uci gi − θτ Ugi Y Uci Y − θ(τ − θ)Uc2i gi + (2θ2 − θτ )Uci gi Uci Y − τ θUci Y Ugi gi

                      + θ2 Uc2i Y + τ θUY Y Uci gi − θ2 UY Y Uci ci − θ(2θ − τ )Ugi Y Uci ci + θ(τ − θ)Uci ci Ugi gi .    (19)


   The numerator on the right-hand side of (18) can be written (τ − θ) (α2 (b3 − a1 ) + α1 (a2 − b4 )) .This

expands to


                   −τ Ucii gi + τ Ugii Y + τ Ugii gi + θUcii ci − θUcii Y − θUcii gi
                                                                                      
 (τ − θ)

 × (τ − θ) Ucii gi − τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi − θUcii Y + θτ Ugii Y + θ2 Ucii Y − θτ Ugii Y − θ (τ − θ) Ucii gi + τ (τ − θ) Ugii gi
                                                                                                                               


 + −θUcii Y + θUYi Y + (2θ − τ )Ugii Y + (τ − θ) Ucii gi − (τ − θ) Ugii gi
                                                                                  


 × −2θτ Ucii gi + τ 2 Ugii gi + θ2 Ucii ci − θUcii ci + τ (1 + θ)Ucii gi − τ 2 Ugii gi .
                                                                                      



The Ugii gi and Ugii Y terms cancel in the second set of parentheses, and the Ugii gi terms again cancel in the

last set of parentheses. We can write this as


              (τ − θ) (1 − θ) −(τ + θ)Ucii gi + τ Ugii Y + τ Ugii gi + θUcii ci − θUcii Y (τ − θ) Ucii gi − θUcii Y
                                                                                                                  


              + −θUcii Y + θUYi Y + (2θ − τ )Ugii Y + (τ − θ) Ucii gi − (τ − θ) Ugii gi τ Ucii gi − θUcii ci .
                                                                                                           




                                                                       31
The terms outside of the brackets are the same as before. Multiplying out and canceling the terms in
                                               ∂gi∗   ∂g ∗              ∂gi∗
                                                                
                                                             −θ                  ∂si
brackets yields the expression in (19). Thus, ∂Y−i  = ∂wii ττ−τ                                          dR
                                                                θ , so ∂Y−i and ∂Y−i are positive, and dgN GO

is therefore negative.

Proof of Part (b) of Proposition 3
                                                   dR              ∂si
                                                                                            −1
   As in the proof for part (a), write           dgN GO    = −τ n ∂Y −i
                                                                        1 − (n − 1) fY−i − 1     ; call this term Rg .
                                                                   ∂si        ∂ci
Following the proof of Proposition 1, we can write fY−i = 1 − ∂Y     −i
                                                                        θ − ∂Y     . Plugging this in yields
                                                   −1                    −i                         −1
           ∂si                       ∂si      ∂ci                                                     ∂ci
Rg = −τ n ∂Y −i
                  1 − (n − 1)   1 − ∂Y−i θ − ∂Y−i − 1     or Rg = −τ ns Y−i  1 +  (n − 1)   sY−i θ + ∂Y−i
                             ∂si                           ∂ci                                                          ∂gi
where we let sY−i ≡         ∂Y−i .    By assumption       ∂Y−i   is constant, so by equation (12) an increase in       ∂Y−i

corresponds to an increase in sY−i . All other terms are constants in Rg , and so the proof involves signing
 ∂Rg
∂sY−       . Straightforward differentiation shows
       i

                                                                     
                                                                  ∂ci
                            ∂Rg        −τ n 1 + (n − 1) sY−i θ + ∂Y −i
                                                                          + τ nsY−i (n − 1) θ
                                     =                                        2             .
                           ∂sY−i
                                                             
                                                                          ∂ci
                                                   1 + (n − 1) sY−i θ + ∂Y −i

                                                                                  
                                                                              ∂ci                            ∂Rg
The denominator is positive and the numerator simplifies to −τ n 1 + (n − 1) ∂Y −i
                                                                                     < 0. Then              ∂sY−       <0
                                                                                                                   i
                           ∂gi                                                         dR
and larger values of      ∂Y−i   correspond to smaller (more negative) values of     dgN GO .




                                                                 32
                                   Figure 1:
               Public Good Provision and Strength of Warm Glow

                          Panel A: Interventions when Income is Hidden

    dY
               0.11
   d n 1

               0.10

               0.09


               0.08

               0.07


               0.06

               0.05                                                                               3
                                  0.15               0.20               0.25               0.30

                      Panel B: Interventions when Income cannot be Hidden
             0.994
   dY
  d n1

             0.992



             0.990



             0.988



             0.986
                                                                                                  3
                                   0.15               0.20                0.25              0.30
The figure shows the effect of an exogenous increase in the public good in two symmetric Nash
Equilibriums. In panel A, individuals hide some income in equilibrium; in panel B no income is allowed
to be hidden. Larger values of 3 correspond to stronger warm glow. Larger values of dY / d n1
correspond to less crowd out and more effective policy intervention.
                                                Figure 2:
                        Estimates of Crowd Out with More and Less Hidden Income



             1
                              Less Hiding         More Hiding



          0.5
Crowd
 Out


             0




         -0.5




            -1
                 -0.2          -0.15             -0.1             -0.05              0               0.05              0.1              0.15
                                                                       Warm Glow

   See Table 1 for the data used in this picture. The x-axis shows average warm glow in a country, and the y axis shows estimated crowd out of inter-
   family transfers (using the crowd out papers listed in Table 1). Countries with more than 30 percent of respondents stating it is sometimes
   justifiable to cheat on taxes are categorized in the “more hiding” group; although the picture is not critically sensitive to this cutoff.
                      Figure A1:
     The Optimization Problem with Hidden Income

                                                 gi




                                   wi (1   )



                                                                                  C
                                   wi (1   )




                                                                                      D
                                                      Y i

                     wi (1   )                                  Y i   wi

       wi (1   )
                                                                                      Y i  wi
                                                             Y i  wi (1   )


                A                           B
ci                                                                                                Y
                              Figure A2:
               Parameters in the Three-Variable Problem


                                     gi
                                                Mi
                                          E =
                                                pg
M i  Y i (   )  wi (1   )
 pg  
 pY    
 pc  


                                                         C
              p      
     slope =  c = 
              pg                                                          pY      
                                                               slope =       = 
                                                                           pg       




                                                                 D




          Mi
     G=
          pc                                                                      Mi
                                                                             F=
                                                                                  pY
                     A               B
                                                       pY      
ci                                         slope = 
                                                       pc
                                                          = 
                                                                                 Y
                                                      Table 1
                                                                         Cheating           Warm
  Paper                                             Country             Justifiable?        Glow          Crowd Out
  McKernan, Pitt, and Moskowitz (2005)              Bangladesh             0.026            -0.187           -0.31
  Gibson, Olivia, and Rozelle (2011)                Vietnam                 0.18             0.032           0.117
  Gibson, Olivia, and Rozelle (2011)                Vietnam                 0.18             0.032           0.055
  Raut and Tran (2005)                              Indonesia               0.21             0.056          0.9811
  Gibson, Olivia, and Rozelle (2011)                Indonesia               0.21             0.056          -0.004
  Gibson, Olivia, and Rozelle (2011)                Indonesia               0.21             0.056          -0.013
  Secondi (1997)                                    China                   0.26             -0.03           0.033
  Gibson, Olivia, and Rozelle (2011)                China                   0.26             -0.03          -0.037
  Cai, Giles, and Meng (2006)                       China                   0.26             -0.03          -0.065
  Cox, Eser, and Jimenez (1998)                     Peru                    0.36             0.067            0.14
  Cox and Jimenez (1992)                            Peru                    0.36             0.067           -0.12
  Cox, Eser, and Jimenez (1998)                     Peru                    0.36             0.067          -0.032
  Cox, Eser, and Jimenez (1998)                     Peru                    0.36             0.067          -0.013
  Fan (2010)                                        Taiwan                  0.37             0.127            -0.3
  Lai and Orsuwan (2009)                            Taiwan                  0.37             0.127           -0.29
  Jensen (2003)                                     South Africa             0.4            -0.132            -0.3
  Maitra, Ray (2003)                                South Africa             0.4            -0.132          -0.033
  Kazianga (2006)                                   Burkina Faso            0.45             -0.04          -0.055
  Cox, Jimenez, and Okrasa (1997)                   Poland                 0.47                0            -0.094
  Albarran and Attanasio (2002)                     Mexico                  0.47              0.12          -0.484
  Juarez (2009)                                     Mexico                  0.47              0.12           -0.86
  Cox, Hanson, Jimenez (2004)                       Philippines             0.60            -0.133          -0.022
Column 3 shows the fraction of individuals in the World Values Survey in each country who say that cheating on your
taxes is ever justifiable; the mean of this variable is 0.36. Column three shows the average warm glow in a country,
using the regression coefficients described in the text. Prior to the regression, the mean of this variable is 0.19, std dev
= 0.72 (the mean is zero following the regression; the reference country is Poland). All regressions and means use WVS
weights. The cheating question is taken from the 1981-1984, 1989-1993, 1994-1999, 1999-2004, and 2005-2007 waves
of the WVS with a sample of 46,464. The warm-glow measure excludes the 1981-1984 and 1994-1999 waves and has a
sample of 24,628. Restricting the cheating measure to waves where warm glow is available produces similar means.
The final column shows estimates of inter-family crowd out; the crowd-out estimates are from Table 15 & page 51 in
McKernan et al (2005); Table 4 in Gibson et al (2011); Table 7 (summing the direct and indirect effects) in Raut and
Tran (2005); Table 8 in Secondi (1997): Table 7 (using 3 times the poverty line, which is closest to average income) in
Cai et al (2006), Table 1 in Cox et al (1998), the discussion on pages 166-167 (from Tables 2 and 3) in Cox et al (1992),
Table 3 in Fan (2010), Table 4 in Lai and Orsuwan (2009), Table 4 (and discussion on page 105) in Jensen (2003),
Table 6 in Maitra (2003), Table 9 (94/98 combined, both types of income) in Kazianga (2006), unnumbered table on
page 204 of Cox, Jimenez, and Okrasa (1997), Table 7 (column 6, effect 1) from Alberran and Attanasio (2002), Table
4 and discussion on page 455 of Juarez (2009), and Table 3 of Cox et al (2004).
