                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE PRICE OF POLITICAL UNCERTAINTY:
                  THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE OPTION MARKET

                                             Bryan Kelly
                                             Lubos Pastor
                                            Pietro Veronesi

                                        Working Paper 19812
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19812


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




We are grateful for comments from participants at the 2015 AFA meetings, 2015 NBER Summer Institute,
2015 NYU/Penn Conference on Law and Finance, 2015 Queen Mary Conference on Recent Advances
in Finance, 2014 Asset Pricing Retreat at Tilburg, 2014 Duke/UNC Asset Pricing Conference, 2014
EFA meetings, 2014 ESSFM Gerzensee, 2014 Princeton conference on The Causes and Consequences
of Policy Uncertainty, 2014 Rising Stars Conference, 2014 SoFiE Conference, and seminars at Bocconi,
Chicago, EDHEC, Pennsylvania, Rochester, UCLA, Wisconsin, and the National Bank of Slovakia.
We also thank Jonathan Brogaard, Andrea Buraschi, Hui Chen, John Cochrane, George Con- stantinides,
Ian Dew-Becker, Michael Gofman, Brandon Julio, Juhani Linnainmaa, Rajnish Mehra, Toby Moskowitz,
Stavros Panageas, Jay Shanken, Ken Singleton, Raghu Sundaram, Eric Talley, Moto Yogo, and two
anonymous referees. Gerardo Manzo and Sarah Kervin provided excellent research assistance. This
research was funded in part by the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance and by the Center
for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Bryan Kelly, Lubos Pastor, and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence from the Option Market
Bryan Kelly, Lubos Pastor, and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 19812
January 2014, Revised July 2015
JEL No. G12,G15,G18

                                                ABSTRACT

We empirically analyze the pricing of political uncertainty, guided by a theoretical model of government
policy choice. To isolate political uncertainty, we exploit its variation around national elections and
global summits. We find that political uncertainty is priced in the equity option market as predicted
by theory. Options whose lives span political events tend to be more expensive. Such options provide
valuable protection against the price, variance, and tail risks associated with political events. This protection
is more valuable in a weaker economy and amid higher political uncertainty. The effects of political
uncertainty spill over across countries.


Bryan Kelly                                             Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago                                   University of Chicago
Booth School of Business                                Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                                 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                                       Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                and NBER
bryan.kelly@chicagobooth.edu                            pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu

Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
1.      Introduction

Political uncertainty has featured prominently in the economic landscape of recent years. In
the United States, much uncertainty surrounded the government bailouts during the finan-
cial crisis of 2008, the reforms of finance and health care, the Federal Reserve’s innovative
monetary policy, tax policy, as well as the political brinkmanship over the debt ceiling in 2011
and 2013. Standard & Poor’s named political uncertainty as a key reason for its first-ever
downgrade of the U.S. Treasury debt in 2011. In Europe, the sovereign debt crisis has wit-
nessed tremendous uncertainty about the actions of European politicians, central bankers,
and Greek voters. Alas, despite the salience of political uncertainty, our understanding of
its effects on the economy and financial markets is only beginning to emerge.

    Recent research suggests that uncertainty about government actions has negative real and
financial effects. For example, Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2013) find that this uncertainty,
measured by their index, increases unemployment and reduces investment. By using the same
index, Pástor and Veronesi (2013) find that this uncertainty commands a risk premium, and
that stocks are more volatile and more correlated in times of high uncertainty. Fernández-
Villaverde et al. (2012) find that uncertainty about fiscal policy, measured by time-varying
volatility of tax and spending processes, has negative effects on economic activity.

   A key obstacle in assessing the impact of political uncertainty is the difficulty in isolating
exogenous variation in this uncertainty. Political uncertainty likely depends on a host of
factors, such as macroeconomic uncertainty. The time-series measures of Baker et al. and
Fernández-Villaverde et al. might potentially reflect not only government-related uncertainty
but also broader uncertainty about economic fundamentals.

     In this paper, we isolate political uncertainty by exploiting its variation around major
political events, namely, national elections and global summits. We investigate whether and
how the uncertainty associated with these events is priced in the option market. Options
are uniquely well suited for this analysis, for two reasons. First, they have relatively short
maturities, which we can choose to cover the dates of political events. An option whose
life spans a political event provides protection against the risk associated with that event.
Since the political event is often the main event that occurs during the option’s short life,
the option’s price is informative about the value of protection against political risk. Second,
options come with different strike prices, which allow us to examine various types of risk
associated with political events, such as tail risk. Elections and summits are also well suited
for our analysis because they can result in major policy shifts. Moreover, the dates of
elections and summits are determined sufficiently far in advance so that they are publicly

                                               1
known on the dates at which we calculate the prices of the options spanning the events.
These events thus provide a source of exogenous variation in political uncertainty.

       Our analysis is guided by the theoretical model of Pástor and Veronesi (2013; hereafter
PV). In this model, the government decides which policy to adopt and investors are uncertain
about the future policy choice. We use this model directly when analyzing global summits.
When we analyze national elections, we reinterpret the PV model so that voters decide
whom to elect and investors face uncertainty about the election outcome. Under the election
interpretation, political uncertainty is uncertainty about who will be elected; in the original
version of the model, it is uncertainty about which government policy will be chosen.1

    We derive the option pricing implications of the PV model, obtaining a closed-form
solution for the prices of put options whose lives span a political event. We calculate three
option-market variables: the implied volatility of an at-the-money option, the slope of the
function relating implied volatility to moneyness, and the variance risk premium. These
variables capture the value of option protection against three aspects of risk associated with
political events: price risk, tail risk, and variance risk, respectively. In response to a political
event, stock prices might drop (price risk), the price drop might be large (tail risk), and
return volatility might rise (variance risk). These risks are correlated inside the PV model;
for example, the adoption of a risky policy can raise volatility while depressing stock prices.
The model implies that all three option-market variables should be larger, on average, than
the same variables calculated for options whose lives do not span a political event.

       The model also predicts a negative relation between all three option-market variables
and economic conditions. This prediction follows from a key result in the PV model: when
the economy is weaker, the current government policy is less likely to be retained, creating
uncertainty about which new policy will be adopted instead. Similarly, in the election version
of the model, the incumbent government is less likely to be reelected in a weaker economy,
creating uncertainty about the new government. Options provide protection against an
unfavorable policy decision or an undesirable election outcome. Since the probability of such
an outcome is higher in a weaker economy, so is the value of the option protection.

       Finally, the model predicts that all three option-market variables should be larger amid
higher political uncertainty. When there is no such uncertainty, option prices are governed
by the Black-Scholes formula, so that implied volatility equals expected volatility and both
   1
    Both interpretations of political uncertainty are mentioned in the following recent quote: “When
economists talk of political risk, they usually mean. . . national elections. . . But there is another kind of
political risk: the temptation for governments of all political colours to change the rules, whether they relate
to tax, the way that companies operate or how markets behave. And that risk has increased significantly
since the 2008 crisis.” (The Economist, Buttonwood, November 9, 2013)


                                                       2
the implied volatility slope and the variance risk premium are zero. When the uncertainty
is present, the option protection against all three aspects of political risk is valuable.

       In our empirical analysis, we test the model’s predictions on option data from 20 countries.
We analyze two types of political events: national elections and global summits. Each summit
counts as a separate event for all countries participating in the summit, while elections count
only for the country in which they are held. For each political event, we calculate the three
option-market variables based on options whose lives span the event, adjusting each variable
for its mean calculated for neighboring options whose lives do not span the event.

       We find strong empirical support for the model’s predictions. First, the unconditional
means of all three variables are significantly positive, for both elections and summits. The
average (mean-adjusted) implied volatility is 1.43% per year, which implies that one-month
at-the-money put options whose lives span political events tend to be more expensive by
about 5.1% compared to neighboring options.2 Implied volatilities are especially high before
pivotal events such as the 2008 U.S. presidential election and the 2012 Greek election, both
of which took place during financial crises. The positive average slope means that investors
value the protection provided by deep-out-of-the-money puts against the tail risk inherent
in political events. For example, among one-month puts that are 5% out-of-the-money,
options whose lives span political events are more expensive by 9.6% compared to neighboring
options, on average. Among options that are 10% out-of-the-money, they are more expensive
by 16.0%. The average variance risk premium is also positive, 0.0107 per year, implying that
insurance against variance risk costs significantly more before political events.

       Second, we find that all three option-market variables tend to take larger values in weaker
economic conditions. These findings hold across four different country-level measures of
economic conditions, they apply to both elections and summits, and they emerge from both
regressions and mean comparisons. Option protection against the three aspects of political
risk is thus more valuable when the economy is weaker. For example, one-month at-the-
money options providing protection against political events are about 8% more expensive
when the economy is weak but only 1% more expensive when the economy is strong.

       Finally, the option-market variables tend to be larger when the election outcome is more
uncertain, as measured by a lower electoral poll spread. The relation to uncertainty is
significant for both implied volatility and the variance risk premium but insignificant for the
   2
    The 5.1% price premium is economically large. For example, if one were to purchase enough one-month
at-the-money put options to insure the total market value of the S&P 500 index in March 2014, the additional
cost for options that span political events would be over $15 billion. To obtain this number on the back of
the envelope, we multiply 0.051 by the $17 trillion market value of S&P 500 and by the ratio of the price of
a one-month at-the-money S&P 500 put option to the level of the same index, which is about 0.018.


                                                     3
slope. These results suggest that higher uncertainty increases the value of option protection
against the price and variance risks associated with the election outcome.

       We also extend the PV model to settings with two countries and asymmetric informa-
tion. The two-country extension predicts spillovers of political uncertainty across coun-
tries. These spillovers should be stronger in weaker conditions and positively correlated
with foreign exchange option effects. We find empirical support for these predictions. The
asymmetric-information extension makes different predictions for elections and summits, but
those predictions are not supported in the data. There does not seem to be much information
asymmetry between governments and investors in our sample of political events.

    To summarize our empirical results, we find that political uncertainty is priced in the op-
tion market. Option protection against three types of risk associated with political events—
price risk, tail risk, and variance risk—is more valuable when the economy is weaker as well
as when the uncertainty is higher, consistent with theory. Our results survive many robust-
ness tests, including placebo tests designed to detect any relations between option prices and
economic conditions that are unrelated to political uncertainty. We also find spillovers of
political uncertainty across countries, especially in weaker economic conditions.

   Our paper is related to empirical studies of the risk premium associated with political
uncertainty, such as Erb, Harvey, and Viskanta (1996), Brogaard and Detzel (2013), and PV.
The former study measures political risk based on the International Country Risk Guide,
while the latter studies use the policy uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2013).
Bittlingmayer (1998) and Voth (2002) find a positive relation between political uncertainty
and stock volatility by using data from the interwar period. Belo, Gala, and Li (2013) link
the cross-section of stock returns to firms’ exposures to the government sector. All of these
studies focus on stocks; none of them analyze options. While these studies share our focus
on the financial effects of political uncertainty, others have analyzed its real effects.3

       This paper is also related to studies that analyze the financial effects of electoral uncer-
tainty. Pantzalis, Stangeland, and Turtle (2000) examine 33 countries and find abnormally
high stock returns in the two weeks preceding national elections. Li and Born (2006) find a
similar result for U.S. presidential elections. Gao and Qi (2013) show that municipal bond
   3
    Two prominent examples are Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2013) and Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2012),
mentioned earlier. Gulen and Ion (2013) find that the negative effect of the Baker-Bloom-Davis policy
uncertainty index on investment is stronger for firms with a higher degree of investment irreversibility and
firms that are more financially constrained. The literature on the real effects of electoral uncertainty includes
Julio and Yook (2012), who find that firms reduce their investment before national elections, Jens (2013),
who finds that firms reduce their investment before U.S. gubernatorial elections, Julio and Yook (2013), who
find that U.S. firms cut FDI flows to foreign affiliates before elections in recipient countries, and Durnev
(2012), who finds that corporate investment is less sensitive to stock prices during election years.


                                                       4
yields rise around U.S. gubernatorial elections. These results are suggestive of a risk pre-
mium for electoral uncertainty, though Bialkowski, Gottschalk, and Wisniewski (2008) find
an insignificant premium in their sample of 27 countries. Bialkowski et al. also find that
stock market returns tend to be more volatile around national elections. Boutchkova et al.
(2012) find that industries sensitive to politics have more volatile returns around national
elections. Two studies analyze option-implied volatilities around elections. Gemmill (1992)
finds that the implied volatility of the FTSE 100 index rose in the last two weeks before the
British parliamentary election of 1987. Goodell and Vahamaa (2013) find that the implied
volatility of the S&P 500 index is related to the outcome of a U.S. presidential election.
While Gemmill has a sample of one, Goodell and Vahamaa’s sample includes five elections.
Our sample is much larger; in addition, we analyze not only implied volatility but also its
slope and the variance risk premium. Snowberg, Wolfers, and Zitzewitz (2007) examine the
ex-post effects of election outcomes on equity markets, whereas we analyze how markets re-
spond to the ex-ante uncertainty about those outcomes. Most important, unlike all studies
mentioned in this paragraph, our empirical analysis has clear theoretical guidance.

      Our theoretical contribution builds on PV, who in turn extend the simpler model of Pástor
and Veronesi (2012). The remaining theoretical literature on the effects of government-
induced uncertainty on asset prices is fairly small, quite different, and mostly focused on
fiscal uncertainty. Sialm (2006) analyzes the effect of stochastic changes in taxes on asset
prices. Tax uncertainty also features in Croce, Kung, Nguyen, and Schmid (2012), who
explore its asset pricing implications in a production economy with recursive preferences.
Croce, Nguyen, and Schmid (2012) examine the effects of fiscal uncertainty on long-term
growth when agents facing model uncertainty care about the worst-case scenario. Finally,
Ulrich (2013) analyzes the bond market implications of Knightian uncertainty about the
effectiveness of government policies. Our paper is the first, to our knowledge, to derive
theoretical predictions for the effects of political uncertainty on option prices.

   We derive those predictions in a rich model that features economic and political shocks,
endogenous uncertainty about the government’s policy choice, and a potential jump in the
government’s impact on profitability. The model generates state-dependent risk premia,
stochastic volatility, and a jump in stock prices at the time of the policy decision. Others
recently derived option prices in different settings with jumps in the fundamentals, such
as models of rare disasters (Backus, Chernov, and Martin, 2011; Seo and Wachter, 2013),
habit formation (Du, 2011), and long-run risk (Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein,
2011; Drechsler and Yaron, 2011).4 Unlike those models, our model features jumps that
  4
   Studies that analyze jump risk in equity index options include Bates (1991, 2000), Bakshi, Cao, and
Chen (1997), Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000), Pan (2002), Eraker, Johannes, and Polson (2003), Eraker


                                                  5
are caused by the resolution of political uncertainty at the time of the political event. The
endogeneity of the jumps in our setting generates new testable predictions, such as those
relating option prices to the state of the economy. Other related papers include empirical
studies of option price behavior around non-political events, such as the announcements of
macroeconomic news (e.g., Ederington and Lee, 1996, and Beber and Brandt, 2006) and
corporate earnings (e.g., Patell and Wolfson, 1979, and Dubinsky and Johannes, 2006).

     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2. describes our data and the design of our
empirical analysis. Section 3. reports the empirical results. Section 4. derives theoretical
implications for option prices before political events. Section 5. extends the theoretical
model to allow for multiple countries and asymmetric information. Section 6. concludes.


2.      Empirical Design

We construct an international dataset of political events, option prices, and macroeconomic
variables. In this section, we describe our dataset and introduce the variables used in our
empirical analysis. These variables include three option-market quantities—differences in
implied volatility, variance risk premium, and implied volatility slope—designed to capture
the price risk, variance risk, and tail risk associated with political events. All three quantities
represent differences between variables computed from “treatment-group” options, whose
lives span political events, and neighboring “control-group” options, whose lives do not span
those events. In addition to the option-market variables, we construct four measures of
economic conditions and a proxy for uncertainty about the election outcome.


2.1.     Options

The main source of our option data is OptionMetrics. We use daily data on implied volatil-
ities, deltas, and open interest for 20 countries. For 15 of these countries, OptionMetrics
provides data on options on the country’s premier stock market index. For five additional
countries, for which such data are unavailable, we use data on U.S.-traded options on the
iShares exchange-traded fund (ETF) for the country’s MSCI index.5 Table 1 lists the 20
countries along with the indices underlying the country options and the corresponding sam-
(2004), Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes (2007, 2009), Todorov (2010), Bollerslev and Todorov (2011), etc.
   5
     The only other countries for which we have found option data in OptionMetrics are Hong Kong, India,
Peru, and Malaysia. We exclude Hong Kong because it is technically not an independent country but rather
a special administrative region of the People’s Republic of China. We exclude India and Peru as they do
not appear in the database until 2011. We exclude Malaysia due to insufficient option data for the only
Malaysian election that took place during the country’s option sample period.



                                                   6
ple periods. For most countries, the option data begin between 2002 and 2006; for all
countries, the data end in 2012. The longest sample, beginning in 1990, is available for the
U.S. S&P 500 index. OptionMetrics provides S&P 500 index option data back to 1996. Our
pre-1996 S&P 500 data are from Market Data Express (MDR).

2.1.1.    Implied Volatility

Let IVt,m denote the implied volatility at time t of an at-the-money option maturing at time
m > t. For each option in our sample, this implied volatility is calculated by OptionMetrics.6
Our main interest is in options whose lives span the dates of political events. Denoting the
date of any such event by τ , our interest is in IVt,m for t < τ < m.

    For all countries in our sample, equity options expire on a regular monthly grid.7 We
find the location of each political event τ relative to this grid. We label the expiration dates
that straddle τ as a and b, so that a < τ < b. Our choice of a and b depends on the distance
from τ to the nearest expiration date. If this distance is more than five days, we choose
a and b that are one month apart (i.e., b = a + 1 month). But if τ is within five days of
the nearest expiration date, we choose a and b that are two months apart so that neither of
them is within five days of τ . By imposing this minimum-distance requirement, we avoid two
potential problems. First, some of the uncertainty about the outcome of a political event
could be resolved a few days before or after the event. Second, we avoid using ultra-short-
maturity options. Given our five-day requirement, our procedure outlined below never uses
options that have six or fewer days to maturity.8 After choosing a and b, we define c as the
expiration date immediately following b, so that b and c are always one month apart. See
Figure 1 for the timeline. Our interest is in IVb−s,b , where b − s < τ < b.

    We modify IVb−s,b in two ways to create a more robust measure. First, we subtract the
average IV of the same country’s options with neighboring expiration dates, by computing
    6
      For European options, OptionMetrics first calculates the theoretical option price as the midpoint of the
best closing bid and offer prices, and then computes the implied volatility by inverting the Black-Scholes
formula. This calculation applies to the 15 countries in our sample for which we have options on the
country’s premier stock index. For American options, OptionMetrics obtains implied volatilies by applying
a proprietary pricing algorithm based on the Cox-Ross-Rubinstein binomial tree model. This calculation
applies to the five countries for which we use ETF options on the MSCI country indices. We discard options
with implied volatilities exceeding 100% per year. This filter affects only one political event in our sample,
which appears to be a data error for Australia, judging by other Australian options at the time.
    7
      In the U.S., the expiration date is the Saturday that follows the third Friday of each month. All countries
in our sample have the same option expiration schedule as the U.S., except for Australia, where the expiration
date is the third Thursday, and Japan and Korea, where it is the second Friday.
    8
      Ultra-short-maturity options have very small time premiums. Their implied volatilities tend to be
inaccurate due to high sensitivity to price nonsynchronicity and other measurement errors. Beber and
Brandt (2006), among many others, exclude options with less than a week to maturity.


                                                       7
IVb−s,b − 21 (IVa−s,a + IVc−s,c ). By subtracting the average of IV values for the same country,
this modification adjusts for cross-country differences in volatility, similar in spirit to using
country fixed effects. By subtracting IV values from nearby dates, the modification accounts
for slow-moving time variation in volatility, which would be unaccounted for in a country-
fixed-effect approach. Second, we replace IVb−s,b , IVa−s,a , and IVc−s,c for any given s by
averages of IV ’s across multiple values of s, to reduce noise in the estimation.

   For each political event τ , we define the implied volatility difference, IV Dτ , as
                                             1
                               IV Dτ = IV b − (IV a + IV c ) ,                               (1)
                                             2
where IV a , IV b , and IV c are square roots of averages of implied variances computed across
all acceptable put and call options expiring at times a, b, and c, respectively. Acceptable
options satisfy three criteria. First, they are at-the-money (ATM) options, which we define
as options whose deltas satisfy 0.4 < |∆| < 0.5. We choose this definition to obtain a liquid
set of ATM options since it is well known that options that are slightly out-of-the-money
(OTM) tend to be more liquid than options that are in-the-money (ITM). If multiple options
satisfy this ATM definition, they are all used in the average. Second, acceptable options have
positive open interest. The only exception is U.S. data prior to 1996, for which we require
positive volume instead because the pre-1996 data come from a different source (MDR) that
does not report open interest. Third, acceptable options have s days until expiration, where
s belongs to a given time window. Specifically, we define IV b as follows:

                       IV b = Mean {IVb−s,b : b − s ∈ [τ − 20, τ − 1]} ,                     (2)

which is the equal-weighted average of IVb−s,b across the values of s for which b − s is in
the 20-trading-day window preceding time τ . We choose this window of 20 trading days, or
about one month, to smooth out the noisy day-to-day fluctuations in international option
prices. In short, IV b is the average implied volatility across all ATM options with open
interest that expire at time b and whose values are computed in the month before τ . IV a
and IV c are defined analogously. For those variables, we choose 20-day windows that end
b − τ + 1 trading days before a and c, respectively, to ensure that the times to maturity for
options entering into IV a , IV b , and IV c are fully comparable. A positive value of IV Dτ in
equation (1) indicates that options whose lives span time τ are more expensive, on average,
than the neighboring options whose lives do not span τ .

2.1.2.   Variance Risk Premium

Empirical studies typically calculate the variance risk premium as the difference between the
implied and realized variances (e.g., Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou, 2009). Following that

                                               8
approach, we construct a daily panel of variance risk premia for each country as
                                                     2       2
                                        V RPt,m = IVt,m − RVt,m ,                                           (3)
         2
where IVt,m is the implied variance at time t of an ATM option that matures at time m > t
         2
and RVt,m    is the average realized variance of the same underlying country stock index over
the life of the option (i.e., between times t and m). The average realized variance provides
an unbiased estimate of the expected variance over the option’s life.9

   Our realized variance data come from two sources. Our first choice is the Oxford-Man
Institute’s Realized Library (http://realized.oxford-man.ox.ac.uk/), which estimates
daily realized variance from intraday returns. From this source, we obtain data for Brazil,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, Singapore, Spain,
Switzerland, UK, and U.S. For the remaining six countries, the Oxford-Man data are un-
available, so we estimate their variance by exponential smoothing.10

       For each political event τ , we determine the option expiration dates a, b, and c as in the
previous subsection. We define the variance risk premium difference, V RP Dτ , as
                                                 1
                               V RP Dτ = V RP b − (V RP a + V RP c ) ,                                      (4)
                                                 2
where V RP a, V RP b , and V RP c are averages of variance risk premia calculated in the same
way as their implied volatility counterparts. That is, analogous to equation (2), we define

                        V RP b = Mean {V RPb−s,b : b − s ∈ [τ − 20, τ − 1]} ,                               (5)

where the mean is calculated across all acceptable options expiring at time b, and the set of
acceptable options is identical to the set used previously for IV b . The averages V RP a and
V RP c are also calculated analogously. A positive value of V RP Dτ indicates that option-
market investors pay more for insurance against variance risk over intervals that include time
τ , on average, than over neighboring intervals that do not include τ .

       In the data, V RP in equation (3) is positively correlated with IV over time (e.g., Boller-
slev, Tauchen, and Zhou, 2009), suggesting that our empirical analyses based on IV and
   9
      We obtain similar empirical results if we construct V RPt,m in equation (3) in three alternative ways:
                     2                                                               2
(i) by replacing RVt,m   with the variance realized on day t, (ii) by replacing RVt,m   with a variance forecast
                                                  2
from an AR(1) model, and (iii) by replacing IVt,m , which is model-based (see footnote 6), with a model-free
implied variance. In all three cases, the results are slightly noisier, which makes sense: approach (i) uses a
single-day variance, approach (ii) relies heavily on the AR model, and approach (iii) requires a wide range
of strike prices, which shrinks the sample size. Yet all three sets of results lead to the same conclusions.
   10
      See, for example, Andersen et al. (2006). The exponential smoothing method estimates the current
variance by an exponentially-weighted moving average of past squared returns. We use the smoothing
parameter of 0.2, which maximizes the correlation between the smoothed series and the realized variance
series for the countries that have realized variance data in the Oxford-Man database.


                                                       9
V RP are not entirely independent. However, the two analyses are different conceptually.
While the IV analysis is informative about the extent to which political uncertainty affects
the level of option prices, the V RP analysis aims to determine whether this uncertainty
is priced in the sense of affecting the state price density (since V RP is an estimate of the
difference between the objective and risk-neutral expectations of future variance).

2.1.3.    Implied Volatility Slope

The implied volatility slope measures the steepness of the function that relates implied
volatility to moneyness, as measured by the option’s Black-Scholes delta. Delta is a natural
measure of moneyness because it takes into account option contract features such as time to
maturity, volatility, and the risk-free rate, all of which affect the probability that an option
with a given strike price expires in the money. For each country, we construct a daily panel
of slopes, Slopet,m , similar to the panels of IVt,m and V RPt,m described earlier. We define
OTM put options as those whose deltas satisfy −0.5 < ∆ < −0.1.11 At any time t, we
consider all OTM put options that mature at time m and have positive open interest. If
there exist at least three such options, we calculate Slopet,m as the slope coefficient from the
regression of these options’ implied volatilities on the same options’ deltas. (If there are at
most two such options, we treat Slopet,m as missing.) A positive slope indicates that options
that are deeper OTM are relatively more expensive (since ∆ < 0 for puts).

    For each political event τ , we define the implied volatility slope difference as
                                               1
                             SlopeDτ = Slopeb − (Slopea + Slopec ) ,                                     (6)
                                               2
where Slopea , Slopeb , and Slopec are averages of Slopet,m values calculated in the same
manner as the averages of implied volatilities and variance risk premia in the previous two
subsections. A positive value of SlopeDτ indicates that deep-OTM put options are par-
ticularly expensive shortly before time τ , suggesting that investors are willing to pay for
protection against the downside tail risk associated with political events.

2.1.4.    Alternative Designs

One alternative to our empirical design would compare, at a given time t < τ , the prices of
two options with different expiration dates, one before τ and one after τ . A similar approach
is followed by Dubinsky and Johannes (2006) in their firm-level analysis of implied volatilities
around earnings announcements. One complication is that the maturities of the two options
  11
    We avoid the deepest OTM put options, those with ∆ ≈ 0, because their implied volatilities are extremely
sensitive to small measurement errors in option prices (e.g., Hentschel, 2003, Beber and Brandt, 2006, etc.).


                                                     10
are different (by at least a month, since options expire on a monthly grid); as a result, it
is essential to control for the term structure of implied volatility. This is easier said than
done because the term structure varies stochastically over time. Moreover, its variation is
related to economic conditions: when the conditions are poor, the term structure is more
likely to be downward-sloping. These facts would dramatically complicate our analysis since
economic conditions play a key role in our tests. For example, if this approach led us to
find a significant effect of economic conditions on the price of political uncertainty, it would
be difficult to dismiss the concern that our results could be driven by changes in the term
structure of volatility. For this reason, we find our empirical design more suitable for our
needs. In our design, the term structure of volatility plays no role because our treatment-
group options have exactly the same maturities as the control-group options.

   Another alternative would analyze the time series of option prices around time τ . Similar
event studies have been used since Patell and Wolfson (1979) to analyze changes in implied
volatility around earnings announcements. One complication of this approach is that a given
option’s maturity shrinks as time passes around the event date. Another complication is that
the change in implied volatility at time τ reflects not only the resolution of uncertainty but
also the option price response to the outcome of the event. Instead of measuring the ex-post
price reaction to such outcomes, we measure the ex-ante uncertainty about them. Yet we
supplement our analysis by reporting event-study-based correlations in Section 4.4.


2.2.    Economic Conditions

Our data on economic conditions come from the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD), International Monetary Fund (IMF), and Datastream. We con-
struct four country-level variables. The first variable, GDP , is seasonally adjusted real GDP
growth in the current quarter, obtained from OECD. These data are available throughout
our sample. The second variable, F ST , is the most recent real GDP growth forecast for
the following year, obtained from the IMF World Economic Outlook. The data begin in
1999. The third variable, CLI, is the Composite Leading Indicator in the current month.
OECD constructs this series by aggregating various component indicators that comove with
the business cycle and tend to turn before it. OECD does not calculate CLI for Taiwan
and Singapore, but it does for the remaining 18 countries in our sample. Finally, MKT is
the stock market index return over the previous three months, obtained from Datastream.
A high value of any of the four variables indicates strong economic conditions.

   In subsequent analysis, we sometimes separate strong from weak economic conditions by
comparing a given measure of these conditions to zero. Since the three real variables (GDP ,

                                              11
F ST , and CLI) tend to take positive values, we standardize each of them to have zero mean
and unit variance within each country. We perform this standardization by using data from
1990 through 2012, which is the longest available sample period in Table 1 (only for F ST ,
we go back to 1999 when its data begin). We do not standardize MKT because positive
and negative stock returns occur with nearly equal frequency in our sample.


2.3.     Political Events

We hand-collect data on two types of political events: national elections and global summits.
For election data, our starting point is the advanced search feature of the Election Guide
website provided by the International Foundation for Electoral Systems.12 Our data include
the date and type of the election, the election outcome, the percentage shares of votes cast
for both the winner and the runner-up, and the opinion poll data for the top contenders.
In addition, we investigate each parliamentary election for potential ex-ante coalitions of
multiple parties. If we find such coalitions, we view them as stand-alone entities for the
purpose of calculating votes cast as well as opinion poll spreads. In other words, both the
winner and the runner-up could be a single party or a coalition of multiple parties, depending
on the election. Whenever possible, we cross-check data across multiple databases.

   For each country listed in Table 1, we collect data on all national elections that took
place between the starting and ending dates of our option dataset. For all countries, we
collect data on national parliamentary elections. In addition, we collect data on presidential
elections for countries in which the president has executive power, such as the United States,
Brazil, and France, but not for countries whose presidents’ roles are largely ceremonial, such
as Germany and Greece. If an election has two rounds, we consider both rounds as separate
elections. We provide the full list of elections in Table A.1 of the Appendix.

   In addition to elections for countries listed in Table 1, we add two extraordinary elections
to our sample—the May and June 2012 Greek parliamentary elections.13 While Greece is
not in Table 1 due to the lack of option data, its 2012 elections seem particularly relevant
given their critical importance in the development of the eurozone debt crisis. At the time,
the elections were widely viewed as a de facto referendum on Greece’s membership in the
eurozone.14 With one of the leading political parties proposing renegotiating Greece’s treaty
  12
    See http://www.electionguide.org. We also use other online sources, such as Psephos, Parline
Database on National Parliaments, Election Resources on the Internet, European Election Database,
Wikipedia, World Bank Database of Political Institutions, Gallup, and Angus Reid Public Opinion.
 13
    The May 6, 2012 election ended inconclusively since none of the three largest parties (ND, SYRIZA, and
PASOK) managed to form a new government, necessitating a follow-up election on June 17, 2012.
 14
    For example, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said: “What’s at stake isn’t just the next



                                                   12
with Europe, a plausible election outcome would have involved a Greek exit from the eu-
rozone, with uncertain consequences for other vulnerable members such as Italy and Spain.
While the inclusion of the Greek elections strengthens our conclusions in Section 3., those
conclusions remain unchanged if we exclude these elections from our sample.

    In subsequent analysis, we examine how the prices of options on a country’s stock market
index behave around that country’s elections. For example, we study how German options
behave around German elections, but not around French elections.15 Only for Greece, we
are unable to examine the effect of elections on Greek option data because we do not have
such data. Given the importance of the 2012 Greek elections for the future of the eurozone
as a whole, we treat those elections as relevant for all European countries.

    Our measure of uncertainty about the election outcome, UNC, is the negative of the
poll spread. The poll spread is the most recent opinion poll spread before the election; if
it is unavailable, we use the ex-post election margin instead. We calculate the opinion poll
spread as the difference between the percentage shares of the poll leader and the runner-up.
For example, if the leader is favored by 44% of the voters while the runner-up is favored by
38%, the spread is 6%. Similarly, we calculate the election margin as the difference between
the percentage shares of votes cast for the winner and the runner-up.

    In addition to national elections, we analyze global summits that took place between
January 2007 and December 2011. We consider three types of summits: G8 summits, G20
summits, and European summits. The European summits include both EU summits held
by the European Council, which comprise leaders of all EU member states, and eurozone
summits, which include only those EU states that have adopted the euro. While the G8
summits are annual, the G20 summits take place once or twice per year, and the European
summits occur roughly every couple of months.

    Given our focus on financial effects of political uncertainty, we are interested in those
summits that could plausibly result in major changes in economic policy. To pick such a set,
we adopt two screens. First, we consider only summits from 2007 through 2011. This period
is dominated by two economic crises, the financial crisis of 2007–2008 and the eurozone debt
crisis, which have been accompanied by extensive government interventions. Prior to 2007,
few summits dealt with such pressing economic issues, and government interventions were
less pervasive. Second, after reading through the summit agendas, we identify the subset of
Greek government. What’s at stake is the Greek people’s commitment to Europe and the euro.” (Bloomberg,
“Greek Vote Escalates Crisis as Schaeuble Raises Euro-Exit”, May 15, 2012) The media were awash with
headlines such as “The Greek election will determine the future of the eurozone.”
  15
     In Section 5.1., we examine spillover effects of elections in one country on options in other countries.



                                                     13
summits whose primary focus is on economic issues. All G20 summits fit that description.
This makes sense since the Group of Twenty was formed in 1999 as a forum for cooperation on
matters pertaining to the international financial system. In contrast, most G8 summits focus
on non-economic issues: for example, the 2007 summit focused on global warming, struggle
against poverty, and missile defense, while the 2008 summit focused on African development,
climate change, and intellectual property rights. Such summits are unlikely to keep option
market participants in suspense. We include only one G8 summit in our sample, the 2010
summit, which focused on economic recovery from global recession, financial reform, and the
European debt crisis. Following the same description-based procedure, we include about two
thirds of all European summits (including all summits since the breakout of the eurozone
debt crisis in late 2009 but none before the Lehman Brothers collapse in 2008). In Table A.2,
we provide the list of all summits in 2007 through 2011, along with their brief descriptions
and indicators of economic relevance. All summits whose primary focus is on economic issues
are included in our sample. While identifying the subset of economically relevant summits
requires some judgmental choices, those choices do not affect our conclusions because our
results are very similar if we include all summits in the analysis.16

   Table 2 reports the number of political events in our sample by event type and country.
These are events for which option data are available so we can calculate IV D in equation
(1).17 The table shows 64 election observations and 216 summit observations. The number
of summit observations is larger because we view each summit as pertaining to all coun-
tries participating in the summit: we include G20 summits as observations relevant for all
G20 countries, G8 summits for all G8 countries, and European summits for all European
countries. In contrast, national elections pertain only to the country in which they are held.
As noted earlier, only the 2012 Greek elections are included as observations relevant for all
European countries, effectively treating those critical elections as European summits.

    The numbers of events in Table 2 do not “add up”: for example, we count 57 parlia-
mentary elections and 14 presidential elections but only 64 elections total. The reason is
that if parliamentary and presidential elections take place on the same date (as they do
every four years in the U.S.), we count them as one election in the total. In addition, we
combine into a single observation all country events that are so close in calendar time that
they are followed by the same option expiration date (i.e., they share the same date b in
  16
     In our robustness analysis in Section 3.4., we extend our sample to include all summits, regardless of
their economic relevance. While the results get a bit weaker, as one would expect as a result of adding noise
to the estimation, all of our main conclusions remain unchanged (see Table B1 in the Internet Appendix,
which is available on the authors’ websites).
  17
     Whenever IV D is available, so is V RP D in equation (4) because both variables have the same data
requirements. SlopeD in equation (6) requires more data as it needs at least three OTM options.


                                                     14
Figure 1). For example, for Germany, we combine its parliamentary election on September
27, 2009 with the G20 summit on September 24-25, 2009. As a result, our count for Germany
includes five elections and 21 summits, but only 25 events total. We combine summits in
the same way, such as the G8 summit on June 25-26, 2010 and the G20 summit on June
26-27, 2010. By combining events, we avoid double counting since many of the same options
would otherwise enter the calculations of our option-market variables for both events. The
combinations reduce the number of events by 44, bringing their total to 271.

   Whenever we combine events, we calculate the option-market variables (IV D, V RP D
and SlopeD) for the combined event by averaging the corresponding values for the individual
events. If the combined events occur in the same calendar month, the values of their macroe-
conomic variables (GDP , F ST , and CLI) are the same; if they occur in adjacent months,
we choose the value corresponding to the earlier month. If we combine two elections, we
calculate UNC for the combined event by taking the larger of the two uncertainty values.
Finally, if we combine an election and a summit, we use the combined observation in both
the “elections only” and “summits only” subsample tests.


2.4.    Hypotheses

To guide our empirical analysis, we formulate three hypotheses in terms of the variables
defined earlier. These hypotheses relate to the value of option protection against the price
risk (IV D), tail risk (SlopeD), and variance risk (V RP D) associated with political events.

Hypothesis 1: Political uncertainty is priced in the option market.
              That is, IV D, V RP D, and SlopeD are all positive, on average.
Hypothesis 2: The effects of political uncertainty are larger when the economy is weaker.
               That is, IV D, V RP D, and SlopeD are larger when the economy is weaker.
Hypothesis 3: The effects of political uncertainty are larger when the uncertainty is higher.
               That is, IV D, V RP D, and SlopeD are larger when UNC is higher.

   All of these hypotheses are directly motivated by the PV model, as discussed in the
introduction as well as in more detail in Section 4. Since each of the three hypotheses consists
of three different predictions, we have a total of nine testable predictions.




                                              15
3.      Empirical Results

In this section, we test the hypotheses outlined above. To preview our results, we find
empirical support for all three hypotheses, with significant results for eight of the nine
predictions. Only the evidence for SlopeD in Hypothesis 3 is not statistically significant.


3.1.     The Average Price of Political Uncertainty

We begin with Hypothesis 1. Table 3 shows that the average IV D across all 271 political
events is 1.43% per year (t = 4.43). The averages for the election and summit subsamples are
similar in magnitude and also significant. The positivity of IV D means that options whose
lives span political events—the treatment-group options—are more expensive, on average,
than their chronological neighbors whose lives do not span the same events—the control-
group options. This effect is not only statistically but also economically significant. The
mean of IV D, 1.43%, implies that investors are willing to pay 5.1% extra for put options
that provide protection against the price risk embedded in political events. To obtain the
5.1% price premium, note that the average implied volatility across all control-group options
is 27.8% per year. Therefore, the implied volatilities of treatment-group options are 5.1%
(= 1.43/27.8) higher, on average, than the control group’s implied volatilities. For ATM put
options, a given percentage increase in implied volatility is approximately equal to the same
percentage increase in the option’s price.18 Therefore, the IV D mean of 1.43% implies that
spanning a political event makes ATM put options 5.1% more expensive, on average.

     The full-sample mean of IV D, 1.43%, is smaller than the weighted average of the two
subsample means, 1.63% and 1.42%. The reason is that the election/summit combination
observations, which appear in both subsamples, have higher values of IV D on average:
2.61%. One prominent example is the U.S. presidential election on November 4, 2008 (Obama
vs. McCain), which is combined with the G20 summit on November 14-15, 2008 since both
events share the same first post-event option expiration date (November 22). The value of
IV D for this observation is 12.2%! It makes sense for such “combo” observations to have
higher IV D: options expiring after multiple political events should be more valuable as they
provide protection against the political risk associated with all of those events.

     Another interesting example is the June 2012 Greek election. This election was perceived
as crucial for the future of the eurozone, as noted earlier. Our results support that view.
  18
    Consider a forward ATM put option, whose strike price is equal to the current stock price compounded
forward at the risk-free rate. It is easy to show that the elasticity of this option’s price P to changes in
implied volatility σ is approximately equal to one; i.e., (dP/P ) / (dσ/σ) ≈ 1.


                                                    16
The average value of IV D across all European countries for this election is 6.7%, almost
five times the full-sample mean. The countries that were the most affected by this election
are Spain (IV D = 10.3%) and Italy (7.7%), which were arguably “next in line” to exit the
eurozone after Greece. The effects on Germany and France, the key eurozone players, are
also large (7.4% and 7.2%, respectively). The least affected European countries are Sweden
and Switzerland, neither of which is a eurozone member. Similarly, in the May 2012 Greek
election, the largest values of IV D are observed for Italy, France, and Spain, while the
smallest values belong to the eurozone non-members U.K. and Switzerland.

   Table 3 shows that the average V RP D across all events is 0.0107 (t = 2.61), in annualized
variance terms. The averages for the election and summit subsamples are similar in mag-
nitude and also significant. The positive mean of V RP D indicates that the variance risk
premia of treatment-group options exceed those of the control-group options, on average.
This result shows that options provide valuable protection against the variance risk asso-
ciated with political events. In addition, it shows that political uncertainty is truly priced
in the sense of affecting the state price density and having a risk premium attached to it,
rather than just in the sense of being reflected in option prices.

    To judge the economic significance of V RP D, we convert variance risk premia from units
of variance into option price premia. The mean of 0.0107 is equal to the difference between
0.0465, which is the average VRP of treatment-group options, and 0.0358, the average VRP
of control-group options. The VRP of 0.0465 translates into a 48.1% price premium for a
one-month forward ATM put option with realized volatility equal to the average volatility
observed in the treatment group. The VRP of 0.0358 translates into a 36.5% price premium
for the same option given the average volatility of the control group. That is, treatment-
group options are 48.1% more expensive relative to the Black-Scholes model, on average,
whereas control-group options are 36.5% more expensive. Investors are thus willing to pay
a lot for option protection against variance risk in our international sample. Moreover, this
protection is proportionally more valuable for treatment-group options.

   Table 3 also shows that the average SlopeD across all events is 0.0173 (t = 3.59). The
average SlopeD is also positive and significant in both election and summit subsamples.
This result indicates that the relative expensiveness of deep-OTM put options tends to be
higher for treatment-group options, suggesting that such options provide valuable protection
against the tail risk associated with political events.

   To assess the economic value of this protection, we compute the price premium for OTM
options in the treatment group relative to the control group. For both groups, we use their


                                              17
mean slope estimates to compute the implied volatilities of options that are 5% and 10%
OTM, and then convert those implied volatilities into option prices for one-month puts.
We find that treatment-group options that are 5% OTM are 9.6% more expensive than the
control-group options with the same moneyness, on average, while treatment-group options
that are 10% OTM are 16.0% more expensive. (Recall that treatment-group ATM options
are 5.1% more expensive.) The price premium thus increases as the put options become
progressively deeper OTM. These results show that investors are willing to pay substantially
more for options that provide insurance against the tail risk linked to political events.


3.2.     The Role of Economic Conditions

Columns 2 through 5 of Table 3 report differences between the average values of IV D in
weak versus strong economic conditions, as defined in Section 2.2. Specifically, we report the
slope coefficient from the regression of IV D on an indicator variable that takes the value of
one if the event occurs during weak conditions and zero otherwise. The estimated value of
this coefficient is positive in all 12 specifications (four measures of economic conditions times
three sets of events), and it is statistically significant in 11 of them.19 IV D is clearly higher
when the economy is weaker, on average. In other words, the value of option protection
against political risk is larger in a weaker economy, as predicted by the model.

    To assess the economic significance of this result, we again calculate the average per-
centage difference between the prices of treatment- and control-group options, but now we
do so separately for weak and strong conditions. We find that the option price mark-up
for protection against political risk is large in weak conditions but relatively small in strong
conditions. Across the four measures of economic conditions, the price mark-up in weak
conditions ranges from 7.1% for GDP to 9.0% for CLI, whereas in strong conditions, it
ranges from 0.1% for F ST to 1.2% for MKT . Put differently, when the economy is weak,
options providing protection against political risk are more expensive by about 8%, but they
are only slightly more expensive, by about 1%, when the economy is strong.

   Table 3 shows that the averages of V RP D and SlopeD are also higher in weak economic
conditions. For both variables, the weak-minus-strong average difference across all events is
positive and statistically significant for all four measures of economic conditions. The same
difference is also positive in both election and summit subsamples, and it is statistically
significant in most of the subsample specifications. The results clearly show that the op-
tion protection against both variance and tail risks associated with political events is more
  19
     To calculate standard errors, both here and in our subsequent regressions, we allow for two-way clustering
of the residuals by month and country, following the procedure of Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011).


                                                      18
valuable when the economy is weaker.

   Table 3 analyzes the role of economic conditions simply by comparing the average values
of IV D, V RP D, and SlopeD in weak versus strong conditions. In Tables 4, 5, and 6,
we perform additional analysis by regressing each of the three option-market variables on
economic conditions. Let ECON denote any of the four measures of economic conditions
defined in Section 2.2.: MKT , GDP , F ST , and CLI. We scale all four ECON variables to
unit variance within each regression so that we can interpret the regression slope coefficient as
a response of the dependent variable to a one-standard-deviation change in the independent
variable. We regress each of the three option variables on ECON. We also run regressions on
both ECON and ECON multiplied by an indicator for ECON > 0. This piecewise linear
regression is motivated by the PV model, which implies that IV D, V RP D, and SlopeD
should all be zero, and thus unrelated to ECON, when the economy is strong.

  Table 4 shows a strong negative relation between IV D and ECON, for all four ECON
measures. The slope coefficient on ECON is estimated to be negative in all 24 specifica-
tions (four measures of ECON times three sets of events times two regressions), and it is
statistically significant in 21 of them. The relation is economically significant as well: for
example, a one-standard-deviation increase in GDP decreases IV D by 2.01% per year across
all events. For both GDP and MKT , we also find a convex kink that flattens the relation
between IV D and ECON for ECON > 0, as predicted by the PV model.

   Tables 5 and 6 show that both V RP D and SlopeD are negatively related to ECON.
For V RP D, the slope coefficient on ECON is negative in all 24 specifications, and it is
statistically significant in 19 of them. For SlopeD, the slope coefficient on ECON is negative
in all 24 specifications, and it is statistically significant in 14 of them (at the 95% confidence
level; in five additional specifications, it is significant at the 90% level). In both tables, the
estimated kink in the piecewise linear regression is mostly positive but often insignificant.
Tables 4 through 6 thus provide strong support for Hypothesis 2.

    Figures 2, 3, and 4 plot the individual data points from the regressions in Tables 4,
5, and 6, respectively. The figures plot the three option-market variables against ECON,
with the four panels corresponding to the four ECON measures. They also plot the lines
of best fit from the simple linear and piecewise linear regressions estimated on all events.
The figures complement the evidence from the tables with three additional observations.
First, the negative relations between the option-market variables and ECON are not driven
by outliers. Second, there is more dispersion in the option-market variables for summit
observations (marked as circles) than for election observations (marked as squares), but


                                               19
there is a fair amount of dispersion for both. Finally, there is more dispersion in the option-
market variables in weak conditions than in strong conditions.


3.3.    The Role of Political Uncertainty

Table 7 relates our three option-market variables to UNC, uncertainty about the election
outcome, which is defined in Section 2.3. Our sample includes only elections because the
poll spread data used in the construction of UNC are obviously unavailable for summits.
We scale UNC to unit variance within each regression to facilitate the interpretation of the
regression slope coefficients, analogous to the scaling of ECON in Tables 4 through 7.

   Column 1 of Table 7 reports the slope coefficients from the simple regressions of IV D,
V RP D, and SlopeD on UNC. The point estimates are positive for all three variables, but
they are significant only for IV D and V RP D. A one-standard-deviation increase in UNC
increases IV D by 1.87% per year (t = 5.39), a magnitude that exceeds the unconditional
mean of IV D from Table 3. The same increase in UNC increases V RP D by 0.0106 (t =
3.48), which is also substantial and close to the mean of V RP D from Table 3. In contrast,
the effect of UNC on SlopeD is small and indistinguishable from zero.

   The rest of Table 7 reports results from multiple regressions that control for economic
conditions. The ECON controls enter with negative signs throughout, consistent with our
earlier results. The results for IV D and V RP D are essentially unaffected by the ECON
controls: the slopes on UNC remain positive, large, and statistically significant. In contrast,
the results for SlopeD are weak: the point estimate of the slope on UNC is positive for three
of the four ECON measures, but it is never statistically significant. This insignificance might
be related to the sample size, which can be as low as 50. Recall that we have 64 election
observations, but we lose some of them due to unavailable macro data and especially due to
the tighter option data requirements in the construction of SlopeD.

   Figure 5 plots the individual data points underlying the simple regressions in Table 7.
The three panels plot IV D, V RP D, and SlopeD against UNC across all election events,
along with the lines of best fit. All three of these lines are upward-sloping, reflecting the
positive slope estimates in Column 1 of Table 7. There are no obvious outliers. Finally, the
dispersion in the option-market variables is generally higher when UNC is higher.

   Overall, we find strong positive relations between UNC and both IV D and V RP D,
consistent with Hypothesis 3. These results suggest that higher uncertainty about the elec-
tion outcome increases the value of option protection against both price and variance risks


                                              20
associated with elections. The relation between UNC and SlopeD is weak—while the point
estimates are mostly positive, they are statistically insignificant.


3.4.       Robustness

We conduct six sets of tests to assess the robustness of our results. In this subsection, we
describe those tests and summarize their results, without tabulating them to save space. All
the tables are shown in the robustness section of the Internet Appendix.

   First, we repeat our regressions without combining political events that are close in
calendar time. Recall from Section 2.3. that we combine into a single observation all country
events that share the same expiration date b in Figure 1. When we uncombine these events
and include them separately, we find very similar results.

   Second, we repeat our tests on all summit observations listed in Table A.2, instead of just
the economically relevant subset. The total number of summit observations thus increases
from 216 to 310 for IV D and V RP D, and from 191 to 273 for SlopeD. As before, we
regress IV D, V RP D and SlopeD on ECON. The point estimates of the slope coefficient
are negative for all three option variables in all 24 specifications, and they are statistically
significant in 22 of them. Therefore, our conclusions about the role of economic conditions
hold also for the broader set of summits. The magnitudes of the slope coefficients on ECON
are smaller compared to the corresponding regressions based on the subset of economically
relevant summits, almost without exception (23 out of 24 times; cf. Table B1 in the Internet
Appendix with Panels C in Tables 4, 5, and 6). This is exactly what we should expect to see
a priori: option prices should be less affected by summits that are less economically relevant.
Overall, this evidence based on all summits strengthens our conclusions.

   Third, we repeat our tests on the subset of events for which there is no doubt about the
exogeneity of the event’s timing. This is a large subset because elections and summits are
usually scheduled many months in advance. We find that all elections in our sample, as well
as most summits, had been scheduled more than four weeks in advance. Their timing is
therefore known to investors at the time we calculate the prices of treatment-group options,
which is at most 20 trading days before the event. Any political uncertainty associated with
those events is exogenous from the investors’ perspective. For only five events in our sample,
we cannot rule out the possibility that they had been scheduled less than four weeks in
advance.20 When we exclude those five events, we find very similar results.
 20
      All five events are European summits: 20081107, 20090301, 20100507, 20110721, and 20111026.




                                                   21
   Fourth, we repeat our tests after redefining IV D in equation (1) to be a percentage
difference rather than an arithmetic difference between the IV s of treatment- and control-
group options. This test aims to check whether our results could somehow be driven by
different levels of volatility across strong and weak economic conditions. They are not.

   Fifth, we recompute our standard errors by bootstrapping. To allow for residual correla-
tion across both countries and months, we implement a two-way resampling procedure. We
draw political events randomly, with replacement, from our sample of events. For each ran-
domly drawn event, we add to the sample all other events for the same country (regardless
of the month) as well as all other events from the same month (regardless of the country).
We continue resampling until we reach the same number of observations as in our sample.
The standard errors increase somewhat but none of our conclusions change.

   Finally, we conduct a placebo test to alleviate the potential concern that our results
might be caused by interactions between option prices and economic conditions rather than
by political events. For example, market volatility is well known to be higher during economic
crises. If elections or summits are more likely to occur during crises, our finding of higher
implied volatility before political events could in principle be caused by crises rather than
political events. We do not expect this concern to be valid given the differencing applied
in the construction of our option-market variables (see equations (1), (4), and (6)). The
adjacent option expiration dates are likely to occur during the same crisis if one is taking
place. Nonetheless, we conduct a placebo test to provide additional evidence.

   The idea behind our placebo test is to construct many random samples of “pseudo-event”
dates in which the treatment effect—the political event—is absent. For each placebo sample,
we rerun our regressions and retain the estimated coefficients. By comparing the actual
coefficient estimates to their distribution in the placebo samples, we infer the likelihood of
the hypothesis that our empirical results have nothing to do with political events.

   We construct 10,000 placebo samples of 271 pseudo-events each, the same number as in
our actual sample. We allocate these pseudo-events to countries based on the frequency of
actual events in the data (see Table 2). For each country, we draw its pseudo-event dates
randomly from the set of all dates satisfying two conditions: the date must not occur within
30 days of any actual political event for that country, and option data must be available
to calculate IV D for that date and country. We calculate IV D, V RP D and SlopeD for
each pseudo-event, record their means, and regress them on the actual economic conditions
at the time of the pseudo-event. Finally, we use the 10,000 samples to calculate one-sided
p-values as the fractions of placebo estimates that exceed the actual estimate in the direction


                                              22
predicted by theory. For example, since the theory predicts a negative relation between IV D
and ECON, the p-value for the slope from the regression of IV D on ECON is the fraction
of placebo estimates that are more negative than the actual estimate.

     Table 8 shows the placebo test results corresponding to Table 3.21 Most p-values in
Table 8 are smaller than 0.001, and all of them are smaller than 0.02. The only nontrivial
p-value, 0.017, obtains for the difference in average IV D in weak versus strong conditions as
measured by MKT . Even placebo samples can thus generate a positive weak-minus-strong
difference in average IV D, perhaps due to the volatility feedback effect, but they are very
unlikely to generate a difference as large as that observed in the data. Overall, our placebo
tests show that it is extremely unlikely that our results could arise spuriously.

     Colleagues have suggested drawing the pseudo-event dates from the set of dates on which
macroeconomic news is announced. Such a test could allow us to compare the relative impor-
tance of macro news and political news for option prices. However, our empirical methodol-
ogy is not well suited for macro announcements because such announcements typically occur
every month (e.g., U.S. payroll data are released on the first Friday of each month). Since
the option expiration grid is monthly as well, for every treatment-group option spanning a
macro announcement, the control-group options would span the macro announcements one
month earlier and one month later, effacing the difference between the treatment and the
control. Our empirical results clearly reflect political uncertainty, not macro uncertainty, be-
cause we pick τ as the dates of political events. Moreover, our theory makes predictions that
seem unique to political uncertainty, such as the asymmetric impact of economic conditions,
which is due to the endogeneity of the government’s policy choice. It is not clear why the
same asymmetry would apply to macro uncertainty in general.22


4.      Theory

In this section, we discuss theoretical predictions for option prices around political events.
Let St denote a vector of state variables, which follow a generic stochastic process

                                   dSt = µS (St) dt + σS (St ) dWS,t ,                                    (7)
  21
     In the Internet Appendix, we show placebo test results corresponding to Tables 4, 5, and 6. Those
results lead to the same conclusions as Table 8. There is no placebo test for Table 7 because U N C cannot
be calculated for pseudo-event dates due to non-existent poll spread data.
  22
     We also run two modified versions of the placebo test. First, we draw the pseudo-event dates from the
subset of available dates that exhibit high market volatility; specifically, dates on which volatility exceeds
the full-sample median volatility for the given country. Second, we require that the pseudo-event dates must
not occur within 60 (instead of 30) days of any actual political event. Both versions of the placebo test
produce results very similar to those reported in Table 8. See the Internet Appendix for details.


                                                     23
where dWS,t is a vector of independent Brownian motions. The stock market value, Mt , and
the stochastic discount factor, πt, follow generic processes with jumps at a given time τ :
                         dMt
                              = µM (St) dt + σM (St ) dWM,t + JM,τ 1t=τ                                 (8)
                          Mt
                          dπt
                              = σπ (St ) dWπ,t + Jπ,τ 1t=τ ,                                            (9)
                          πt
where dWM,t and dWπ,t are Brownian motions possibly correlated with each other and with
dWS,t , 1t=τ is an indicator function that is equal to one when t = τ and zero otherwise, JM,τ
and Jπ,τ are random jumps with generic probability distributions

                                          JM,τ ∼ FM (Sτ )                                              (10)
                                           Jπ,τ ∼ Fπ (Sτ ) ,                                           (11)

and Eτ − (Jπ,τ ) = 0.23 We assume that the risk-free rate is zero, for simplicity, and that all
the regularity conditions are met so that the stochastic processes above are well defined.
The price of a put option on the stock market index at time t is then given by
                                                                  
                                          πm
                     P ut(St, m, K) = E      max (K − Mm , 0) | St ,                                   (12)
                                          πt

where m is the option’s maturity and K is its strike price. In the rest of this section, we
show that the PV model imposes a rich set of restrictions on the general dynamics of stock
and option prices in equations (7) through (12), where τ is the date of a political event.


4.1.     The PV Model

We begin by providing a verbal overview of the PV model. In this general equilibrium model,
firm profitability follows a process whose mean depends on the current government policy.
The policy’s impact on the mean is uncertain. Both the government and investors learn
about it in a Bayesian fashion by observing realized profitability. There is no asymmetric
information (we relax this assumption in Section 5.2.). At a given point in time, denoted by
τ , the government decides whether to change its policy and if so, which new policy to adopt.
   23
      The jump terms in equations (8) and (9) can also be rewritten more formally as JM,τ dNt and Jπ,τ dNt ,
respectively, where Nt is a right-continuous step function such that Nt = 0 for t < τ and Nt = 1 for t ≥ τ .
This assumption of jumps at a single point in time, t = τ , maps directly into the PV model. As an example
of an alternative approach, Piazzesi (2005) estimates a reduced-form model with jumps in the target federal
funds rate whose intensity during pre-scheduled FOMC meetings is higher than outside those meetings.
Piazzesi’s framework also differs from ours in that her jumps are of nonrandom magnitude (25 basis points),
she does not allow for jumps in πt , and her focus is on the prices of bonds, not options. Another approach
is pursued by Chernov, Gallant, Ghysels, and Tauchen (2003) who consider various models of stock price
dynamics with jumps at random times, along with their implications for option pricing.


                                                    24
If a policy change occurs, the agents’ beliefs are reset: the posterior beliefs about the old
policy’s impact are replaced by the prior beliefs about the new policy’s impact.

   When making its policy decision, the “quasi-benevolent” government has both economic
and non-economic motives: it cares about its citizens’ economic welfare but also takes into
account the political costs associated with adopting any given policy. These costs are un-
certain until time τ , so that investors cannot fully anticipate which policy will be chosen by
the government. Uncertainty about political costs is a key source of political uncertainty,
or uncertainty about the government’s future actions. Agents learn about political costs by
observing political signals that represent the flow of news about upcoming political events.
For technical details of the model, see its formal exposition in the Appendix.

4.1.1.   Election Interpretation

The PV model of government policy choice can be naturally reinterpreted as a model of
democratic elections. Let the original PV model be known as “version A” and its alternative
election interpretation as “version B.” In both versions, a structural change can potentially
take place at time τ . In version A, τ is the time of the policy decision; in version B, it is
the time of the election. In version A, the government decides whether to change its current
policy and if so, which new policy to adopt. In version B, voters decide whether to replace
the incumbent government and if so, which new government to elect. In version A, political
uncertainty is uncertainty about which policy will be chosen; in version B, it is uncertainty
about who will be elected. In version A, the government cares not only about economic well-
being but also about the political costs of the various policy choices. In version B, voters
care not only about economic well-being but also about non-economic aspects of the electoral
choices, such as the candidates’ charisma and their attitudes toward religion, abortion, etc.
In version A, agents learn about the impact of the current policy on profitability; in version
B, they learn about the impact of the incumbent government. Both versions share the same
analytical framework—all equations are identical, only their interpretations differ.

   In our empirical analysis, we analyze two types of political events: national elections and
global summits. When we study elections, we rely on the model’s election interpretation
(version B). For summits, we appeal to the original version of the model (version A).


4.2.     Restrictions on General Dynamics

In the PV model, before time τ , the state variables from equation (7) are
                                                               0
                                  St = b      c1t , ..., b
                                         gt , b          cN
                                                          t ,t    ,                       (13)

                                              25
where b                                                               cnt is the logarithm of
      gt is the perceived impact of the current government policy and b
the perceived political cost of implementing a potential new policy n, for n = 1, . . . , N. The
variable b
         gt , which is the only economic state variable in the model, is a natural measure of
the state of the economy: a high b                                                   cnt are
                                 gt denotes strong economic conditions. In contrast, b
driven by political shocks. The state variables are driven by Bayesian learning; they follow
independent martingale processes given in equations (A6) and (A13) in the Appendix.

Proposition 1: The PV model implies that µS (St), µM (St), σS (St ), σM (St ), σπ (St ), JM,τ ,
Jπ,τ , dWS,t , dWM,t, and dWπ,t in equations (7) through (11) are given in equations (A16)
through (A25) in the Appendix.

   The PV model imposes tight restrictions on the parameters and Brownian motions from
equations (7) through (11). To explore those restrictions, we simplify the above setting to
N = 2. There are two potential new policies, H and L. The impact of policy H is more
uncertain but also higher in expectation so that both policies provide the same level of utility
a priori. This two-policy setting is identical to the one used by PV to analyze different impli-
cations of their model. We use the same parameter values as PV (see their Table 1). For the
parameters {σg , σc , µ, σ, σ1, T, τ, γ, h, σg,L, σg,H , µg,L , µg,H }, which we define in the Appendix,
we choose the values {2%, 10%, 10%, 5%, 10%, 20, 10, 5, 5%, 1%, 3%, −0.8%, 0.8%}. There are
                                                                                            1 2
                                        cH
three stochastic state variables: gbt , b        cLt . We set b
                                         t , and b            cH
                                                               t equal to its prior mean, − 2 σc ,
and vary b      cLt , thus varying both economic conditions and political uncertainty.
         gt and b

    Figure 6 plots the policy adoption probabilities p0t , pLt , and pH
                                                                      t against b       cLt at time
                                                                                 gt and b
t immediately preceding time τ , so t ≈ τ . We scale both b             cLτ by their volatilities to
                                                                 gτ and b
convert them into “z-scores.” We see that the policy decision is influenced by political costs:
pLτ is low if policy L imposes a political cost on the government, while it is high if L brings
a political benefit. The policy decision also strongly depends on economic conditions. Panel
A highlights a key implication of the PV model: the government is more likely to replace its
                                                   gτ is low, p0τ ≈ 0. A low b
current policy in weaker economic conditions. When b                         gτ indicates
that the current policy is “not working” so the government is likely to replace it. In contrast,
when bgτ is high, the current policy is likely to be retained.

   This result can be easily reinterpreted in the election version (version B) of the PV model:
the incumbent government is more likely to be reelected when the economy is doing well, and
more likely to be removed from power when the economy is doing poorly. Consistent with
this theoretical prediction, after surveying the empirical literature, Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier
(2000) conclude that economic conditions are an important determinant of election outcomes:
“Good times keep parties in office, bad times cast them out.” (p. 183).


                                                  26
   Figure 6 also plots the jumps in stock prices resulting from the three possible policy an-
nouncements at time τ . These jumps, JM,τ , exhibit strong dependence on the state variables.
When bgτ is high, the retention of the current policy elicits no stock price reaction because it
is widely expected, whereas the adoption of either H or L is bad news because it is driven
by political considerations. When b
                                  gτ is low, the retention of the current (poorly-performing)
policy is bad news while the adoption of the low-risk policy L is good news. For intermediate
values of b                                                                    cLt is high because
          gτ , the retention of the current policy is good news, especially if b
investors then expect the high-risk policy H and they are relieved to learn that there is
no policy change. Policy H is bad for stockholders because the high uncertainty about its
impact increases discount rates. The adoption of H thus results in a negative jump unless
cLt is so high that the adoption is already priced in before time τ . We see that the PV model
b
imposes tight restrictions on jumps in stock prices in equation (8).

    Panel A of Figure 7 shows the restrictions on the diffusive volatility σM (St ) from equation
(8) as of time t = τ − 1/2. The volatility is highest when b    gt ≈ 0 and b cLt is high because
investors are then uncertain between the current policy and policy H so that any new signal
                                                          gt is low and cbLt ≈ 0 because of
carries a lot of weight. The volatility is also high when b
uncertainty between H and L. In contrast, σM (St ) is low when there is no policy uncertainty,
such as when gbt is high (so that p0t ≈ 1) or when b             cLt is either high or low (pH
                                                   gt is low and b                           t ≈ 1
                                                                                           1
or pLt ≈ 1). Panel B plots the expected volatility of stock returns between times τ −      2
                                                                                               and
    1
τ + as of time t = τ − 1/2. This volatility differs from σM (St ) plotted in Panel A because
    2
      ,
it reflects not only diffusive volatility before τ but also expectations of the stock price jump
at τ and diffusive volatility after τ . The biggest difference occurs when b             cLt
                                                                           gt is low and b
is high; we then expect policy H, which raises expected σM (St ) after τ , thus elevating the
expected volatility in Panel B above the diffusive pre-τ volatility in Panel A.


4.3.      Implications for Option Prices

The restrictions from Proposition 1 imply restrictions on put option prices in equation (12).
Our main interest is in equity index options whose lives span time τ when the political event
occurs. We derive a closed-form expression for the price of such options.

Proposition 2: At time t < τ , the price of a European put option expiring at time m > τ ,
P ut(St, m, K), is given by equation (A26) in the Appendix.

   At time τ , the government can either retain its current policy or adopt one of N potential
new policies. At any time t < τ , investors assign a probability to each of those N + 1 policy
choices. If one of those probabilities is equal to one, the option price is given by the standard


                                               27
Black-Scholes formula, with implied volatility equal to the average stock return volatility
during the remaining life of the option (see Corollary A.1). In general, the probabilities
of the N + 1 policies depend on St . The option price in Proposition 2 is essentially a
probability-weighted average of N + 1 quantities, each of which is the expected present value
of a Black-Scholes option price conditional on the corresponding policy choice.

   In addition to option prices, we solve in closed form for the jump risk premium associated
with political events. When the government announces its policy decision at time τ , stock
prices jump because this decision is not fully predictable, due to uncertainty about political
costs. The expected value of the stock price jump at time τ represents the risk premium
that compensates investors for the risk associated with holding stocks at time τ .

Proposition 3: Immediately before time τ , the jump risk premium associated with the
political event at time τ is given by equation (A28) in the Appendix.

   Figure 8 examines the restrictions imposed by the PV model on option prices and the
jump risk premium in the context of the N = 2 setting analyzed earlier. At time τ − 21 , we
consider one-period European put options that expire at time τ + 21 . We calculate model-
implied values of three option-market variables that correspond to the variables examined
in our empirical work: implied volatility (IV ), the variance risk premium (V RP ), and the
implied volatility slope (Slope).24 To calculate IV , we first use Proposition 2 to calculate the
model-implied price of an at-the-money put option, or option OATM, and then convert this
price to a Black-Scholes implied volatility value. To calculate V RP , we subtract from the
squared value of IV the expected variance of stock returns between times τ − 21 and τ + 21 .
Finally, we calculate Slope as the difference between the implied volatilities of options that
are 5% out-of-the-money (OOTM) and 5% in-the-money (OITM).

    Panel A of Figure 8 shows that IV is generally higher in weaker economic conditions. A
significant part of option OATM ’s value derives from the protection against the drop in stock
prices that would result from an unfavorable policy decision at time τ . In good economic
conditions, such a drop is unlikely because the current policy is likely to be retained, and
that decision is priced in before time τ .25 In bad conditions, though, a policy change is
likely, and prices jump when it becomes clear whether H or L is adopted. Option OATM
provides protection against the price risk associated with this resolution of uncertainty. In
                                                 cLt is high, which is when H is likely so the
bad conditions, we also see that IV is high when b
  24
     In our empirical analysis, we analyze IV D, V RP D and SlopeD. When we construct such differences
within the PV model, we find predictions identical to those for IV , V RP and Slope. We therefore do not
difference these variables here, for simplicity. The purpose of the differencing in the empirical analysis is to
account for realistic departures from our simple theoretical model, as explained earlier.
  25
        gt → ∞, p0t → 1, OATM is priced by the Black-Scholes formula, and IV equals expected volatility.
     As b


                                                      28
                                                               cLt ≈ 0, which is when the
expected post-τ volatility is high. But IV is even higher when b
uncertainty about H versus L is highest. In short, IV is higher when the economy is weaker
and when there is more uncertainty about the government’s policy choice.

    Panel B of Figure 8 shows that V RP also tends to be higher when the economy is weaker
and when there is more political uncertainty. In general, V RP is high if investors are willing
to pay a lot for insurance against variance risk. This risk stems from two sources: stochastic
fluctuations in return variance and the jump in stock prices at time τ .26 Variance fluctuates
before time τ as a result of political shocks. The resolution of political uncertainty at time τ
makes both variance and stock prices jump: if H is adopted, variance jumps up and prices
down; if L is adopted, variance jumps down and prices up. In good economic conditions,
V RP ≈ 0 because p0t ≈ 1 so that political shocks do not matter much and there is little
risk of a jump at time τ . In bad conditions, though, political shocks do matter and the risk
of a jump is higher, and so is V RP . This is especially true when cbLt ≈ 0, which is when
the uncertainty about H versus L is highest. The importance of political uncertainty is
clear from comparing the two components of V RP : IV in Panel A of Figure 8 and expected
                                                                                            cLt ,
volatility in Panel B of Figure 7. Whereas the latter quantity varies smoothly with gbt and b
the former quantity—and hence also V RP —is elevated when political uncertainty is high,
such as when b          cLt is high or when b
             gt ≈ 0 and b                                 cLt ≈ 0.
                                            gt is low and b

    Panel C of Figure 8 shows that Slope exhibits a pattern similar to that of V RP . Recall
that Slope is high whenever OOTM is expensive relative to OITM . The key difference between
the two options is that OOTM provides better protection against catastrophic events, namely,
the adoption of policy H. Since that is more likely when the economy is weaker, Slope is
generally higher when b
                      gt is low. Also note that Slope ≈ 0 whenever investors assign a high
probability to one of the three policies. If pnt ≈ 1 for any n ∈ {0, H, L}, both OOTM and
OITM are priced according to the Black-Scholes formula, so their implied volatilities are equal
and Slope ≈ 0. When there is uncertainty about policy choice, though, Slope is typically
positive due to negative skewness in stock returns around time τ .27 One reason behind the
negative skewness is the interaction between the price jump at time τ and the post-τ return
volatility. If H is adopted, prices drop and the volatility rises; if L is adopted, prices rise and
the volatility declines. Returns thus become more volatile after a drop in prices, resulting in
negative skewness over periods extending beyond time τ .
  26
      Todorov (2010) separates the jump component of V RP from the stochastic variance component in a
semiparametric empirical framework. He finds that jumps play an important role in explaining V RP .
   27
      Across many samples simulated from the model, the correlation between Slope and expected skewness
from τ − 21 to τ + 21 is -0.95. Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan (2003) find empirically that the implied volatility
curve is steeper when the risk-neutral distribution of stock returns is more negatively skewed.




                                                     29
    Panel D of Figure 8 shows that the jump risk premium from Proposition 3, J RP , is
generally larger when the economy is weaker and when political uncertainty is higher. When
there is little doubt about what will happen at time τ , J RP ≈ 0. But in weak conditions
and when uncertainty is high, investors demand compensation for holding stocks at time τ .
Since the jump in stock prices at time τ is a part of the stock return variance between τ − 12
and τ + 21 , the patterns of J RP and V RP are similar, suggesting that jumps induced by
political events account for a substantial part of V RP .28 The patterns in all four panels of
Figure 8 look similar for a wide range of parameter values (see the Internet Appendix).

    Finally, the model implies that all three variables, IV , V RP , and Slope, take larger
values, on average, than than they would if we were to remove the political event from time
τ . The absence of a political event is a special case of our setting in which the probability
of a policy change at time τ is zero (i.e., p0t = 1). In that case, the Black-Scholes formula
applies, and the three variables take the same values as in Figure 8 when b
                                                                          gt → ∞: IV = 0.08
and Slope = V RP = 0. These values are lower, on average, than the unconditional means
of these variables in the presence of political risk.

    To provide additional insight, we simulate many paths from the PV model and plot
the realized values of the three option-market variables against b
                                                                 gt and political uncertainty,
measured by the entropy of the policy probabilities. The results provide further support for
the conclusions from Figure 8. In addition, they motivate the piecewise linear regression
specifications estimated in Section 3. See the Internet Appendix for details.


4.4.     Model-Implied Correlations

The three option-market variables are negatively correlated with economic conditions and
positively correlated with political uncertainty, as discussed earlier. How large are the model-
implied correlations and how do they compare to the correlations observed in the data?

    To answer these questions, we simulate many samples from the PV model. For each
sample, we calculate the three option-market variables at time t = τ − 1/2. We compute
the correlations of these variables with bgt and entropy across the simulated samples. Table
9 shows that the correlations with bgt range from -0.32 to -0.46 and those with entropy range
from 0.58 to 0.74.29 These correlations have the same signs as those observed in the data.
  28
    Across many samples simulated from the model, the correlation between JRP and V RP is 0.70.
  29
    We obtain similar correlations, ranging from 0.59 to 0.77, when we replace entropy by a different measure
of political uncertainty: the theoretical poll spread, which we compute as the difference between the first and
second largest policy probabilities. Also note that we compute model-implied IV D, V RP D and SlopeD for
direct comparisons with the data but the correlations for IV , V RP and Slope are very similar.



                                                      30
The empirical correlations are slightly smaller, ranging from -0.10 to -0.46 across the four
measures of ECON and from 0.06 to 0.44 for UNC, but the overall fit between the model
and the data is very good. Moreover, the model-implied correlations are similar for a wide
range of parameter changes, as we show in Table B23 of the Internet Appendix.

   We submit the PV model to one more hurdle. We conduct an event study to analyze
the correlations between stock returns and changes in the option-market variables around
political events. To obtain theoretical predictions, we simulate many samples from the PV
model. For each sample, we solve for the optimal policy choice at time τ and calculate
stock returns (Ret) as well as changes in the option-market variables (∆IV , ∆Slope, and
∆V RP ) over the two-week period from time τ − 1 week to τ + 1 week. We then calculate
the correlation matrix of the four variables across the simulated samples. We find three
correlations whose magnitudes exceed 0.1: Corr(∆IV, Ret) = −0.34, Corr(∆IV, ∆Slope) =
0.27, and Corr(∆IV, ∆V RP ) = 0.80. We show the full correlation matrix in the Internet
Appendix, along with the discussion of the sources of these correlations.

   We conduct analogous calculations in the data. For each election in our sample, we
calculate the stock index return as well as changes in the option-market variables over the
two-week period around the election date for the country in which the election is held. For
summits, we calculate averages across all countries participating in the summit. The results
are remarkably similar to those produced by the model. Only three of the six correlations are
statistically significant, and they are the same correlations that we highlighted in the previous
paragraph: Corr(∆IV, Ret) = −0.16 (t = −2.11), Corr(∆IV, ∆Slope) = 0.28 (t = 3.66), and
Corr(∆IV, ∆V RP ) = 0.69 (t = 14.19). The remaining correlations are not only insignificant
but also much smaller, no larger than 0.08. The similarity between the two correlation
matrices is striking, providing additional support for the model.

   To conclude, Section 4. shows that the PV model makes various predictions that help
explain our empirical findings. Those predictions are not obvious. For example, while it is
intuitive for IV D to be positive, it is not clear why V RP D or SlopeD should be positive,
or why any of these variables should be negatively correlated with economic conditions. To
emphasize this point, in the Internet Appendix, we consider a simple reduced-form model
in which there are no state variables, all drifts and volatilities in equations (8) and (9) are
constant, and the jumps in equations (10) and (11) are log-normally distributed. While this
model does generate IV D > 0 (because IV D in this model is equal to jump variance), that
IV D is not state-dependent, and the model also implies V RP D = SlopeD = 0 despite the
presence of priced jump risk. The restrictions on option prices implied by the PV model are
thus nontrivial and economically meaningful.


                                               31
5.       Model Extensions

In this section, we discuss two extensions of the PV model and their empirical implications.


5.1.       Extension: Two Countries

We extend the single-country PV model to two countries. The extension allows us to analyze
spillovers of political uncertainty across countries and its implications for foreign exchange
(FX) options. We only summarize the model here; its formal presentation including propo-
sitions, proofs, and numerical examples is in the Internet Appendix.

     We assume that aggregate profitability in country i, for i = 1, 2, follows the process
                                                   
                                  dΠit = µ + β i gt dt + σdZt + σ1 dZti ,                     (14)

which is identical to the process in the PV model (see equation (A1)) except that policy
impact is now measured by β i gt . We set β 1 = 1 so that gt is the impact of the current
policy on country 1’s profitability. We vary β 2; for example, β 2 = 1 implies that the policy
affects both countries equally while β 2 = 0.5 implies that its impact on country 2 is only half
as large as that on country 1. Agents learn about gt by observing realized profits in both
countries. At time τ , a policy decision is made to maximize the social welfare function
                                                      1−γ           
                                            1 α   2 1−α
                                      (BT ) (BT )                     
                       max C n Eτ                           | policy n ,               (15)
                    n∈[0,1,...,N ]              1−γ

which is the PV objective function in equation (A9) except for the Cobb-Douglas structure
with α ∈ [0, 1]. When α = 1, the policy decision is made by country 1 (e.g., an election
in country 1); when α = 0.5, it can be thought of as a summit that treats the interests of
both countries equally. We assume complete markets and full consumption home bias so
that consumers in both countries derive utility from their home-country good only. We solve
for the posterior distribution of gt , optimal policy choice, exchange rates, stock and option
prices, and the responses of stocks and FX to the policy announcement at time τ .

   Figure 9 plots the key model predictions for the baseline calibration, with α = 1 and four
values of β 2 (0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1).30 It plots the three option-market variables, IV , V RP ,
and Slope, against economic conditions, measured by b
                                                    gt . The variables are computed as of
time t = τ − 1/2 for options expiring at time τ + 1/2. Each panel plots the regression line
of best fit estimated across many samples simulated from the two-country model.
 30
      The results for α = 0.5 are very similar. See the Internet Appendix.


                                                      32
   The top three panels of Figure 9 show spillover effects, which we define as the effects
of political uncertainty in country 1 on equity option prices in country 2. Those effects are
strong when β 2 = 1 but they weaken as β 2 decreases. The spillover effects are stronger in
weaker economic conditions, for the same reason as in the PV model.

   The bottom panels show the effects of political uncertainty on the prices of FX options,
or options on the exchange rate between the two countries. When β 2 = 1, the policy decision
at time τ affects both countries equally, and there is no FX effect. But when β 2 decreases,
FX effects become more important. The relative importance of spillovers and FX effects is
thus parameter-dependent in a complementary way: if the parameter values (β 2) are such
that spillovers are large then FX effects are small, and vice versa.

   Finally, for a given set of parameter values, the model predicts a positive relation between
spillovers and FX effects across political events. The reason is that both effects tend to be
larger for political events that are more important and whose outcomes are harder to predict.
Similarly, if the event is unimportant or predictable, both spillovers and FX effects are small.
When analyzing a sample of political events for a given pair of countries, we implicitly hold
the parameter values fixed since the parameters are country-specific. We should therefore
look for a positive relation between spillover effects and FX effects in the data.

   In our empirical analysis, we split the world into two “countries,” the U.S. and the
Eurozone. These are the two largest global economic powers so this choice comes closest to
our theoretical framework in which the two countries add up to the whole world. Moreover,
the EUR/USD FX options are easily available and fairly liquid. We analyze two types of
political events: U.S. elections and European summits.31

   First, we analyze spillovers from U.S. elections to European equity options and from
European summits to U.S. equity options. We regress IV D on indicators of whether the event
occurred in the home country (1(OwnEvent)) or the other country (1(SpillEvent)), with and
without controls for economic conditions (ECON) and with and without interaction terms.
The European IV D is an equal-weighted average of IV D’s across all Eurozone countries.
The results are reported in Panel A of Table 10. The slope on 1(OwnEvent) is positive
and the slopes on both ECON and 1(OwnEvent) × ECON are negative; these results
confirm that our main prior conclusions hold also for this subset of political events. More
interesting, the slope on 1(SpillEvent) is significantly positive, indicating significant spillover
effects, whether or not we control for 1(OwnEvent) and ECON. Moreover, the slope on
1(SpillEvent)×ECON is negative, indicating that spillovers are stronger in weaker economic
  31
   We treat the Eurozone as a single country because of the common currency. Political events in the
Eurozone are thus European summits, not national elections.


                                                33
conditions. This latter result is significant for only two of the four ECON measures, but
the point estimate has a negative sign for all four measures. Both results are consistent with
the two-country model. When we replace IV D by V RP D and SlopeD (see Panels B and
C), all slopes on 1(SpillEvent) and 1(SpillEvent) × ECON have the model-predicted sign
(that is 28 out of 28 slopes!) but only one of them is statistically significant. These results
are weaker than those in Panel A but they are broadly consistent with the model.

   Second, we analyze the effects of political uncertainty on FX option prices. We obtain
the EUR/USD FX option data for puts and calls from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
These data are available from January 1999 (when the euro was created), which reduces
our sample to 30 political events. For each event, we calculate the FX implied volatility
difference, F XIV D, analogous to IV D. The results are underwhelming. The relevant
coefficient estimates do have model-predicted signs, suggesting that FX options are more
expensive when they span political events, especially in weaker economic conditions. But
the magnitudes are small and none of them are statistically significant. The results are
tabulated in the Internet Appendix. This combination of weak FX effects but stronger
spillovers is consistent with the two-country model in which β 2 is close to one.

   Finally, we regress spillover IV D, or SpillIV D, on F XIV D across political events. For
each event, SpillIV D is the equity option IV D for the country not experiencing the event:
for European summits, SpillIV D is the U.S. IV D, and for U.S. elections, it is the European
IV D. Table 11 shows that SpillIV D is positively related to F XIV D whether or not we
control for economic conditions in the country experiencing the event, consistent with the
two-country model. The results are similar when we replace IV D by V RP D (see Panel
B). We do not report results for SlopeD because we have only six observations (calculating
SlopeD requires FX option deltas which are available only since November 2010).

   To summarize, we find weak FX results but stronger spillover results: political uncertainty
in one country affects equity option prices in the other country. These spillover effects are
larger in weaker economic conditions. They are also positively correlated with FX effects
across political events. These findings are consistent with the two-country model.


5.2.    Extension: Asymmetric Information

We extend the symmetric-information PV model by adding asymmetric information, allowing
the government to know more than investors about the true state of the economy. Again,
we only summarize the model here; the details are in the Internet Appendix.



                                              34
   As in the PV model, both investors and the government observe realized profitability,
which follows the process in equation (A1). We add the assumption that the government
observes one more signal about g, the unknown impact of the government’s policy on the
economy, resulting in information asymmetry. This signal follows the process

                                   dsG
                                     t = gdt + σG dZG,t ,                                (16)

where dZG,t is an independent Brownian motion. The degree of information asymmetry
is summarized by σG . When σG → 0, the information asymmetry is at its peak because
the government has perfect information about g. When σG → ∞, the additional signal is
worthless and we are back in the symmetric-information setting.

   After solving the government’s and investors’ learning problems, we derive the govern-
ment’s optimal policy rule. This rule is the same as in PV, except that it is based on an
information set enlarged by the additional signal. But asset prices depend on the investors’
information set, not the government’s, and the investors’ perception of the policy rule is
                                        gτ includes an additional random term ητ = gbτG − b
different. Specifically, the cutoff for b                                                 gτ ,
where gbτG and b
               gτ are the government’s and investors’ posterior means of g, respectively. The
variance of ητ is decreasing in σG . Therefore, when there is more information asymmetry
(i.e., when σG is smaller), ητ is more uncertain from the investors’ perspective.

   The presence of the additional random term ητ in the perceived policy rule has two
asset pricing implications. First, information asymmetry increases the investors’ uncertainty
about the policy decision. Stock prices thus jump more at time τ and the implied volatility of
options spanning τ is higher. Second, the presence of ητ adds noise to the relation between
gτ and the policy decision, thereby flattening the dependence of asset prices on b
b                                                                                gτ . The
model thus predicts that for political events marked by information asymmetry, IV D should
be higher and the relations between the option-market variables and economic conditions
should be weaker. We confirm both of these new predictions by simulating from the model.
The simulations also confirm that the nine central predictions of the PV model, listed in
Section 2.4., generalize to the asymmetric-information setting.

   To test the new predictions, we rely on our existing empirical evidence by comparing
the results for elections and summits. Our premise is that asymmetric information might
be present for summits but not for elections. Summits are run by policy makers who could
potentially know more than investors about the state of the economy. Elections, however, are
decided by voters who are very unlikely to have superior information. Given our premise,
the model predicts that for summits, we should observe higher average IV D and weaker
relations between the option-market variables and economic conditions.

                                             35
     We do not find such results in the data. The average IV D for summits is slightly lower
than for elections (1.42 vs. 1.63 in Table 3), though the difference is well within one standard
error. The relations to economic conditions are also similar; if anything, they are stronger
for summits. These results suggest that asymmetric information does not play a big role in
our sample of political events. In other words, when policy makers meet at global summits,
they do not seem to know more than the investors who set prices in financial markets.


6.      Conclusions

We find that political uncertainty is priced in the option market. Options provide valuable
protection against the risk associated with major political events. Option protection against
price, variance, and tail risks is more expensive before a political event. This protection is
more valuable when the economy is weaker and when political uncertainty is higher.

     These empirical findings are consistent with the predictions of the PV model in which
political uncertainty carries a risk premium. This premium is larger when the economy is
weaker because that is when policy changes and election upsets are more likely to occur. Our
results indeed suggest a sizable risk premium for political uncertainty, especially in a weak
economy. We establish a close link between the variance and jump risk premia associated
with political events. Due to this link, the elevated variance risk premium around political
events suggests that the equity risk premium contains a jump component driven by such
events. By raising the cost of financing, political uncertainty can thus have real effects.
Another implication of our results is that empirical models of option price behavior would
benefit from including jumps at deterministic times that correspond to political events.

     We extend the PV model to settings with two countries and asymmetric information, gen-
erating additional testable predictions. Consistent with those predictions, we find spillovers
of political uncertainty across countries, especially in weak economic conditions. We do not
find any sign of asymmetric information during global summits.

     We analyze two types of political events: elections and summits. Since these events
capture only a subset of the political uncertainty faced by investors, our findings represent a
lower bound on the importance of political risk for asset prices. Future research can analyze
other political events, such as regulatory reforms and government shutdowns, as well as other
assets, such as sovereign debt. More work is needed to improve our understanding of the
role of political risk, and government more broadly, in the pricing of financial assets.




                                              36
                                              Table 1
                                           Option sample

The table gives an overview of our option sample. For each country listed in the first column, the second
column reports the index underlying the country’s options that are used in our analysis. The third and
fourth columns report the beginning and ending dates for the available option data. All data come from
OptionMetrics, except for pre-1996 U.S. data, which come from Market Data Express.

                                                               Start       End
                     Country         Index                     Date        Date
                     Australia       ASX 200                 20040102    20120604
                     Belgium         BEL20                   20020102    20120831
                     Brazil          MSCI Brazil             20060525    20120131
                     Canada          MSCI Canada             20060302    20120131
                     Finland         OMXH25                  20020102    20120831
                     France          CAC 40                  20030414    20120831
                     Germany         DAX                     20020102    20120831
                     Italy           FTSE MIB                20061011    20120831
                     Japan           NIKKEI 225              20040506    20120604
                     Korea           Kospi                   20040503    20120131
                     Mexico          MSCI Mexico             20071129    20120131
                     Netherlands     AEX                     20020102    20120831
                     Singapore       MSCI Singapore          20091118    20120131
                     South Africa    MSCI South Africa       20070524    20120131
                     Spain           IBEX 35                 20070514    20120831
                     Sweden          OMXS30                  20070126    20120831
                     Switzerland     SMI                     20020102    20120831
                     Taiwan          TAIEX                   20040102    20120131
                     UK              FTSE 100                20020102    20120831
                     USA             S&P 500                 19900101    20120131




                                                   37
                                              Table 2
                                      Number of political events

The table reports the number of political events in our sample by event type and country. These are events
for which option data are available so that it is possible to calculate IV D in equation (1). Totals represent
the size of a set union, so they may be smaller than the sum of the subset sizes. For example, parliamentary
and presidential elections may take place on the same date, in which case they are counted only once in
the total. In addition, we combine into a single observation all country events that are so close together
in calendar time that they are followed by the same first option expiration date (i.e., the same date b in
Figure 1). Euro summits are included as observations for all European countries; G8 summits for all G8
countries, and G20 summits for all G20 countries. The 2012 Greek elections are included as observations for
all European countries.

                                               Elections                    Summits
                              Total       Total Parl. Pres.           Total Euro G8/G20
             All               271         64     57     14            216   170    74
             Australia          6           1      1      0             5     0     5
             Belgium           13           2      2      0            11    11     0
             Brazil             9           4      2      4             6     0     6
             Canada             7           2      2      0             6     0     6
             Finland            1           0      0      0             1     1     0
             France            27           6      4      2            21    21     7
             Germany           25           5      5      0            21    21     7
             Italy             24           3      3      0            21    21     7
             Japan             10           4      4      0             6     0     6
             Korea              8           2      1      1             6     0     6
             Mexico             7           1      1      0             6     0     6
             Netherlands       22           3      3      0            19    19     0
             Singapore          2           2      1      1             0     0     0
             South Africa       6           1      1      0             5     0     5
             Spain             20           4      4      0            17    17     0
             Sweden            19           2      2      0            18    18     0
             Switzerland       24           5      5      0            20    20     0
             Taiwan             2           2      1      1             0     0     0
             UK                24           4      4      0            21    21     7
             USA               15          11     11      5             6     0     6




                                                     38
                                                                      Table 3
                                     Implied volatility, variance risk premium, and slope: Mean differences

     Column 1 reports the average value of IV D, the implied volatility difference from equation (1), across all political events. Columns 2 through 5 report
     differences between the average values of IV D in weak economic conditions (ECON < 0) and strong economic conditions (ECON ≥ 0). The remaining
     columns report analogous results for V RP D, the variance risk premium difference from equation (4), and SlopeD, the implied volatility slope difference
     from equation (6). We use four measures of economic conditions: the country’s stock market index return (M KT ), real GDP growth (GDP ), the IMF’s
     GDP growth forecast (F ST ), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI). We standardize GDP , F ST , and CLI to zero mean within each
     country by using data from 1990 through 2012. IV D is in percent per year. V RP D is in decimals per year. Both V RP D and SlopeD are multiplied by
     100. The t-statistics, reported in parentheses, use standard errors with two-way clustering at the month and country levels. Panel A uses all observations
     while Panels B and C report results for election and summit events separately.


                        Implied volatility (IV D)                   Variance risk premium (V RP D)                  Implied volatility slope (SlopeD)
                          Weak minus strong economy                       Weak minus strong economy                       Weak minus strong economy
                All      M KT GDP F ST            CLI             All    M KT GDP F ST           CLI               All   M KT GDP F ST             CLI

                                                                        Panel A: All political events
39




      Mean      1.43     2.57      1.94     2.22     3.00        1.07       3.02     2.07     2.55     3.05        1.73     3.26      2.11     2.66     3.02
               (4.43)   (3.79)    (3.34)   (3.78)   (4.61)      (2.61)     (3.51)   (2.80)   (3.54)   (3.63)      (3.59)   (3.11)    (2.52)   (3.08)   (2.97)
      Obs.      271       271      271      266       267         271       271      271      266       267        238       238      238      233       236
                                                                          Panel B: Elections only
      Mean      1.63     2.63      1.73     2.51     2.36        1.30       2.46     1.07     2.45     1.26        1.14     3.56      1.14     1.96     1.38
               (3.13)   (2.73)    (1.78)   (2.34)   (2.39)      (2.59)     (2.62)   (1.11)   (2.20)   (1.25)      (2.08)   (3.69)    (1.08)   (1.71)   (1.28)
      Obs.       64       64        64       59       60          64        64       64       59        60          55       55        55       50       53
                                                                          Panel C: Summits only
      Mean      1.42     2.68      2.13     2.40     3.25        1.07       3.39     2.58     2.97     3.75        1.84     3.43      2.53     2.87     3.46
               (3.76)   (3.27)    (3.17)   (3.56)   (4.30)      (2.15)     (3.15)   (2.92)   (3.49)   (3.74)      (3.16)   (2.58)    (2.54)   (2.83)   (2.80)
      Obs.      216       216      216      216       216         216       216      216      216       216        191       191      191      191       191
                                             Table 4
                    Implied volatility difference and economic conditions

The table reports the slope coefficients from the regressions of IV D, the implied volatility difference from
equation (1), on four different measures of economic conditions (ECON ). For each of the four measures,
we estimate a simple regression of IV D on ECON as well as a piecewise linear regression of IV D on both
ECON and ECON times an indicator for ECON being positive. The four measures of economic conditions
are the country’s stock market index return (M KT ), real GDP growth (GDP ), the IMF’s GDP growth
forecast (F ST ), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI). We standardize GDP , F ST , and
CLI to zero mean within each country by using data from 1990 through 2012. We then scale all four ECON
variables to unit variance within each regression. IV D is in percent per year. The t-statistics, reported in
parentheses, use standard errors with two-way clustering at the month and country levels. Panel A uses all
observations while Panels B and C report results for election and summit events separately.


                                                   Measure of economic conditions
                               M KT                  GDP                 F ST                          CLI

                                                     Panel A: All political events
 ECON                      -2.42     -3.58        -2.01      -2.71       -0.83     -0.63        -1.39     -1.47
                          (-5.34)   (-5.10)      (-4.82)    (-5.01)     (-2.55)   (-1.37)      (-3.85)   (-2.74)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                   3.77                    4.02                  -0.96                  0.26
                                    (3.33)                  (3.85)                (-0.87)                (0.28)
 R2                        0.21      0.25         0.14       0.18        0.02       0.03        0.07         0.07
 Obs.                      271       271          271        271         266        266         267          267
                                                          Panel B: Elections only
 ECON                      -1.72     -2.60        -1.56      -2.39       -1.69     -2.01        -1.34     -1.10
                          (-3.49)   (-3.51)      (-3.03)    (-4.63)     (-3.00)   (-2.09)      (-2.15)   (-0.86)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                   2.69                    3.26                    1.18                 -0.57
                                    (1.62)                  (2.75)                  (0.61)               (-0.34)
 R2                        0.17      0.20         0.14       0.18        0.15       0.16        0.12         0.13
 Obs.                       64        64           64         64          59         59          60           60
                                                          Panel C: Summits only
 ECON                      -2.68     -3.93        -2.27      -3.02       -0.77     -0.54        -1.53     -1.88
                          (-5.04)   (-4.86)      (-4.84)    (-5.08)     (-2.10)   (-1.10)      (-3.91)   (-3.18)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                   4.16                    4.61                  -1.26                  1.23
                                    (3.24)                  (3.89)                (-0.95)                (1.04)
 R2                        0.23      0.28         0.17       0.20        0.02       0.02        0.08         0.08
 Obs.                      216       216          216        216         216        216         216          216




                                                     40
                                         Table 5
                 Variance risk premium difference and economic conditions

The table reports the slope coefficients from the regressions of V RP D, the variance risk premium difference
from equation (4), on four different measures of economic conditions (ECON ). For each of the four measures,
we estimate a simple regression of V RP D on ECON as well as a piecewise linear regression of V RP D on
both ECON and ECON times an indicator for ECON being positive. The four measures of economic
conditions are the country’s stock market index return (M KT ), real GDP growth (GDP ), the IMF’s GDP
growth forecast (F ST ), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI). We standardize GDP , F ST ,
and CLI to zero mean within each country by using data from 1990 through 2012. We then scale all four
ECON variables to unit variance within each regression. V RP D is annualized and multiplied by 100. The
t-statistics, reported in parentheses, use standard errors with two-way clustering at the month and country
levels. Panel A uses all observations while Panels B and C report results for election and summit events
separately.


                                                   Measure of economic conditions
                               M KT                  GDP                 F ST                          CLI

                                                     Panel A: All political events
 ECON                      -2.98     -4.55        -1.97      -2.43       -1.32     -1.40        -1.72     -2.23
                          (-4.56)   (-4.45)      (-3.52)    (-3.40)     (-3.42)   (-2.50)      (-3.38)   (-2.88)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                   5.10                    2.62                    0.35                 1.75
                                    (3.41)                  (1.67)                  (0.27)               (1.44)
 R2                        0.19      0.24         0.08       0.09        0.04       0.04        0.06         0.07
 Obs.                      271       271          271        271         266        266         267          267
                                                          Panel B: Elections only
 ECON                      -1.62     -2.22        -1.32      -2.79       -1.78     -1.76        -1.18     -1.79
                          (-2.34)   (-1.90)      (-1.78)    (-3.80)     (-2.69)   (-1.70)      (-1.51)   (-1.18)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                   1.86                    5.79                  -0.09                  1.40
                                    (0.92)                  (3.73)                (-0.05)                (0.70)
 R2                        0.16      0.18         0.11       0.25        0.18       0.18        0.09         0.10
 Obs.                       64        64           64         64          59         59          60           60
                                                          Panel C: Summits only
 ECON                      -3.45     -5.27        -2.32      -2.67       -1.40     -1.53        -2.01     -2.69
                          (-4.52)   (-4.53)      (-3.67)    (-3.39)     (-3.13)   (-2.48)      (-3.56)   (-3.08)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                   6.07                    2.17                    0.71                 2.37
                                    (3.59)                  (1.18)                  (0.46)               (1.56)
 R2                        0.22      0.28         0.10       0.10        0.04       0.04        0.07         0.08
 Obs.                      216       216          216        216         216        216         216          216




                                                     41
                                            Table 6
                 Implied volatility slope difference and economic conditions

The table reports the slope coefficients from the regressions of SlopeD, the implied volatility slope difference
from equation (6), on four different measures of economic conditions (ECON ). For each of the four measures,
we estimate a simple regression of SlopeD on ECON as well as a piecewise linear regression of SlopeD on
both ECON and ECON times an indicator for ECON being positive. The four measures of economic
conditions are the country’s stock market index return (M KT ), real GDP growth (GDP ), the IMF’s GDP
growth forecast (F ST ), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI). We standardize GDP , F ST ,
and CLI to zero mean within each country by using data from 1990 through 2012. We then scale all four
ECON variables to unit variance within each regression. SlopeD is multiplied by 100. The t-statistics,
reported in parentheses, use standard errors with two-way clustering at the month and country levels. Panel
A uses all observations while Panels B and C report results for election and summit events separately.


                                                     Measure of economic conditions
                                M KT                   GDP                 F ST                           CLI

                                                      Panel A: All political events
 ECON                      -3.19      -5.37        -2.20      -2.77        -0.78     -0.32        -1.62      -1.96
                          (-3.82)    (-4.21)      (-3.02)    (-2.87)      (-1.66)   (-0.48)      (-2.47)    (-1.89)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                    6.86                    3.11                   -2.15                   1.08
                                     (3.62)                  (1.83)                 (-1.34)                 (0.66)
 R2                         0.19      0.26          0.09      0.10         0.01       0.02         0.05         0.05
 Obs.                       238       238           238       238          233        233          236          236
                                                           Panel B: Elections only
 ECON                      -2.11      -1.70        -1.21      -2.34        -0.31     -0.18        -0.98      -1.05
                          (-5.26)    (-2.13)      (-2.22)    (-3.50)      (-0.42)   (-0.16)      (-1.70)    (-0.81)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                    -1.17                   3.38                   -0.48                   0.12
                                     (-0.77)                 (2.13)                 (-0.19)                 (0.07)
 R2                         0.27      0.28          0.09      0.15         0.01       0.01         0.06         0.06
 Obs.                        55        55            55        55           50         50           53           53
                                                           Panel C: Summits only
 ECON                      -3.54      -6.15        -2.49      -3.01        -0.88     -0.28        -1.78      -2.20
                          (-3.58)    (-4.28)      (-3.01)    (-2.86)      (-1.66)   (-0.38)      (-2.41)    (-1.88)
 ECON · 1(ECON >0)                    8.42                    3.13                   -3.10                   1.41
                                     (3.95)                  (1.63)                 (-1.68)                 (0.69)
 R2                         0.19      0.28          0.10      0.10         0.01       0.02         0.05         0.05
 Obs.                       191       191           191       191          191        191          191          191




                                                      42
                                              Table 7
                                  The role of election uncertainty

Panel A reports the slope coefficients from the regressions of IV D, the implied volatility difference from
equation (1), on our measure of political uncertainty (U N C). Panel B replaces IV D with V RP D, the
variance risk premium difference from equation (4), while Panel C replaces it with SlopeD, the slope difference
from equation (6). The uncertainty measure U N C, which is defined as the negative of the election poll spread,
proxies for uncertainty about the election outcome. We estimate a simple regression on U N C as well as
multiple regressions that include controls for four different measures of economic conditions (ECON ), in
both linear and piecewise linear specifications. The four measures are the country’s stock market index return
(M KT ), real GDP growth (GDP ), the IMF’s GDP growth forecast (F ST ), and the OECD’s Composite
Leading Indicator (CLI). Both IV D and V RP D are annualized and multiplied by 100. SlopeD is also
multiplied by 100. We scale U N C to unit variance within each regression. The t-statistics, reported in
parentheses, use standard errors with two-way clustering at the month and country levels.


                                                             Measure of economic conditions
                                         M KT                   GDP               F ST                    CLI
                                                  Panel A: Implied volatility (IV D)
 UNC                      1.87        1.64     1.58       1.80       1.82      1.68      1.69      1.44      1.45
                         (5.39)      (4.52)   (4.43)     (4.93)     (4.49)    (4.11)    (4.28)    (3.21)    (3.14)
 ECON                                -1.46     -2.17      -1.47      -2.34     -1.36     -1.72     -1.52     -1.61
                                    (-2.98)   (-2.85)    (-3.27)    (-5.57)   (-2.45)   (-1.89)   (-3.26)   (-1.77)
 ECON · 1(ECON>0)                              2.14                  3.41                1.34                0.22
                                              (1.39)                (2.65)              (0.80)              (0.17)
 R2                      0.20         0.31     0.34          0.32    0.37      0.29      0.30      0.26         0.26
 Obs.                     64           64       64            64      64        59        59        60           60
                                              Panel B: Variance risk premium (V RP D)
 UNC                      1.06        0.82     0.78       0.99       1.03      0.74      0.74      0.89      1.00
                         (3.48)      (2.39)   (2.32)     (2.54)     (2.31)    (1.91)    (1.89)    (1.75)    (1.76)
 ECON                                -1.49     -2.01      -1.27      -2.76     -1.64     -1.63     -1.29     -2.15
                                    (-2.10)   (-1.66)    (-1.75)    (-3.90)   (-2.38)   (-1.58)   (-1.80)   (-1.66)
 ECON · 1(ECON>0)                              1.59                  5.87                -0.02               1.95
                                              (0.79)                (3.69)              (-0.01)             (1.09)
 R2                      0.07         0.20     0.21          0.17    0.32      0.21      0.21      0.14         0.17
 Obs.                     64           64       64            64      64        59        59        60           60
                                              Panel C: Implied volatility slope (SlopeD)
 UNC                      0.25       -0.11     -0.14      0.07       0.11      0.25      0.24      0.23      0.24
                         (0.59)     (-0.33)   (-0.39)    (0.17)     (0.27)    (0.50)    (0.47)    (0.56)    (0.57)
 ECON                                -2.13     -1.71      -1.20      -2.33     -0.28     -0.17     -0.98     -1.07
                                    (-5.08)   (-2.12)    (-2.16)    (-3.39)   (-0.36)   (-0.15)   (-1.67)   (-0.82)
 ECON · 1(ECON>0)                              -1.20                 3.40                -0.39               0.18
                                              (-0.78)               (2.13)              (-0.16)             (0.10)
 R2                      0.00         0.27     0.28          0.09    0.15      0.01      0.01      0.06         0.06
 Obs.                     55           55       55            55      55        50        50        53           53




                                                        43
                                             Table 8
                               Placebo events and mean differences

The first column in each panel compares the average values of IV D (Panel A), V RP D (Panel B), and
SlopeD (Panel C) from two samples: our actual data sample and a sample of placebo events. We generate
10,000 placebo samples, each including 271 placebo event dates that are randomly selected from the option
samples listed in Table 1. We impose that the frequency of draws from each country’s sample matches
the frequency of events in column 1 of Table 2 and that placebo events do not occur within 30 days of an
actual political event in our sample. The first column reports averages of IV D, V RP D, and SlopeD across
all placebo events while the remaining columns report differences between the averages in weak economic
conditions (ECON < 0) and strong economic conditions (ECON ≥ 0). We use four measures of economic
conditions: the country’s stock market index return (M KT ), real GDP growth (GDP ), the IMF’s GDP
growth forecast (F ST ), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI). We standardize GDP , F ST ,
and CLI to zero mean within each country by using data from 1990 through 2012. IV D is in percent per
year, V RP D is in decimals per year, and both V RP D and SlopeD are multiplied by 100. The reported
p-values are the fractions of placebo estimates that exceed the actual estimate in the direction predicted by
theory.

                                                        Weak minus strong economy
                                             All      M KT   GDP       F ST    CLI

                                                              Panel A: IV D
               Mean (data)                   1.43      2.57        1.94     2.22      3.00
               Mean (pseudo-events)         -0.32      1.35       -0.63    -1.63      -1.03
               Difference                   1.75      1.22        2.57     3.85       4.03
               p-value                     <0.001     0.017      <0.001   <0.001     <0.001
               Obs.                          271       271        271         266      267
                                                          Panel B: V RP D
               Mean (data)                   1.07      3.02        2.07     2.55      3.05
               Mean (pseudo-events)         -0.26      0.21       -0.11    -0.44      -0.61
               Difference                   1.33      2.81        2.18     2.99       3.66
               p-value                     <0.001    <0.001      <0.001   <0.001     <0.001
               Obs.                          271       271        271         266      267
                                                          Panel C: SlopeD
               Mean (data)                   1.73      3.26        2.11       2.66    3.02
               Mean (pseudo-events)         -0.31      0.41       -0.65       0.59    -0.46
               Difference                   2.04      2.85        2.75     2.06       3.48
               p-value                     <0.001     0.005      <0.001   <0.001     <0.001
               Obs.                          238       238        238         233      236




                                                     44
                                                                            Table 9
                                                 Correlations with economic conditions and political uncertainty

          This table reports the correlations between the three option-market variables (IV D, V RP D and SlopeD) and measures of economic conditions and
     political uncertainty. The correlations are computed from the data as well as from the PV model. In the data, we consider the same four measures
     of economic conditions (M KT , GDP , F ST , or CLI) and the same measure of uncertainty (U N C) as in the rest of the paper. In the PV model, we
     measure economic conditions by the state variable b gτ and uncertainty by the entropy of the three policy probabilities. We consider the two-policy version
     of the PV model with baseline parameter values. For results corresponding to other parameter values, see Table B23 in the Internet Appendix. In the
     first row, we report correlations estimated from the data, computed across all political events in our sample. The second row reports the corresponding
     t-statistics. The third row reports the correlations from the PV model, computed across many simulated samples.


                     Corr with ECON : M KT            Corr with ECON : GDP          Corr with ECON : F ST         Corr with ECON : CLI                Corr with U N C

                    IV D      V RP D    SlopeD        IV D     V RP D    SlopeD    IV D      V RP D    SlopeD    IV D      V RP D    SlopeD    IV D      V RP D    SlopeD

      Data           -0.46     -0.44     -0.43        -0.38     -0.29     -0.30     -0.16     -0.19     -0.10     -0.26     -0.25     -0.22     0.44       0.26     0.06
      t-statistic   (-5.34)   (-4.56)   (-3.82)      (-4.82)   (-3.52)   (-3.02)   (-2.55)   (-3.42)   (-1.66)   (-3.85)   (-3.38)   (-2.47)   (5.39)     (3.48)   (0.59)

      PV model      -0.32      -0.41     -0.46        -0.32     -0.41     -0.46    -0.32      -0.41     -0.46    -0.32      -0.41     -0.46    0.58       0.74      0.68
45
                                                      Table 10
                                                  Spillover effects
    This table quantifies the spillovers of political uncertainty from U.S. elections to European equity options
and from European summits to U.S. equity options. Each column of Panel A reports slope coefficient
estimates from a regression of the implied volatility difference, IV D, on the variables described in the row
labels. Those variables are: 1OwnEvent, an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the political
event happens in the home country (i.e., if a U.S. IV D is paired with a U.S. election or a European IV D is
paired with a European summit); 1SpillEvent , an indicator variable for whether the political event happens
in the other country (i.e., if a European IV D is paired with a U.S. election or a U.S. IV D is paired with
a European summit); ECON , a demeaned value of one of four measures of economic conditions (M KT ,
GDP , F ST , or CLI), and their interactions. For example, the regression in column 3 is IV Dreg,i =
bown 1OwnEvent + bspill 1SpillEvent + ereg,i , where for each event i, we include the IV D of both countries
reg ∈ {U.S., Eurozone} on the left-hand side. The regressions contain no intercept because all observations
correspond to either an own event or a spillover event so there is no independent information to estimate
the intercept. The European IV D is an equal-weighted average of IV D’s for all Eurozone countries. The
R2 is the fraction of the total variation in IV D around its baseline value of zero that is explained by
the occurrence of a political event. Panels B and C contain analogous results for V RP D and SlopeD,
respectively. t-statistics are in parentheses.

                         1        2        3         4          5          6        7         8        9         10         11
                                                   M KT        GDP       F ST      CLI      M KT      GDP       F ST       CLI
                                                        Panel A: IV D
 1OwnEvent              1.79              1.59      1.65       1.73       1.64      1.68      1.64      1.57      1.62      1.60
                       (2.33)            (2.12)    (2.46)    (2.58)     (1.96)    (2.36)    (2.51)    (2.37)    (1.87)    (2.21)
 1SpillEvent                     1.98     1.80      1.73      1.48        1.57      1.57      1.75      1.43      1.59      1.51
                                (2.56)   (2.37)    (2.55)    (2.16)     (1.89)    (2.16)    (2.64)    (2.12)    (1.88)    (2.05)
 ECON                                              -16.14     -1.20      -1.30     -1.04     10.66     0.97      -1.11     0.33
                                                   (-4.06) (-4.03)      (-1.86)   (-2.82)   (0.80)    (0.90)    (-0.46)   (0.22)
 1OwnEvent × ECON                                                                           -17.96     -1.75      0.14     -1.29
                                                                                            (-1.55)   (-1.81)   (0.07)    (-0.93)
 1SpillEvent × ECON                                                                         -27.85     -2.13     -0.40     -1.24
                                                                                            (-2.31)   (-2.14)   (-0.18)   (-0.88)
 R2                    0.078    0.093    0.153     0.331       0.329     0.193    0.250      0.386     0.377     0.194     0.261
 Obs.                   65       65       65        65          65        57       65          65        65        57        65
                                                       Panel   B: V RP D
 1OwnEvent              1.22              1.07      1.14         1.18      1.11     1.16      1.13      0.99      1.05      1.03
                       (1.12)            (0.98)    (1.08)      (1.09)    (0.90)   (1.08)    (1.07)    (0.91)    (0.83)    (0.94)
 1SpillEvent                     1.40     1.27      1.21         1.04      0.87     1.05      1.22      0.95      0.92      0.97
                                (1.27)   (1.14)    (1.13)      (0.95)    (0.71)   (0.96)    (1.14)    (0.87)    (0.74)    (0.87)
 ECON                                              -15.80       -0.86     -2.06    -0.98     5.55      1.94      -1.66     1.26
                                                   (-2.53)     (-1.80) (-2.00)    (-1.75)   (0.26)    (1.11)    (-0.47)   (0.55)
 1OwnEvent × ECON                                                                           -14.28     -2.49      0.30     -2.05
                                                                                            (-0.76)   (-1.58)   (0.10)    (-0.98)
 1SpillEvent × ECON                                                                         -22.21     -2.54     -0.84     -2.07
                                                                                            (-1.14)   (-1.57)   (-0.26)   (-0.97)
 R2                    0.019    0.024    0.039     0.129       0.087     0.098    0.085      0.148     0.127     0.102     0.100
 Obs.                   65       65       65        65          65        57       65          65        65        57        65
                                                       Panel   C: SlopeD
 1OwnEvent              1.44              1.42      1.49         1.50     1.53      1.47      1.52      1.36      1.49      1.34
                       (1.87)            (1.81)    (1.93)      (1.94)   (1.67)    (1.87)    (1.97)    (1.87)    (1.59)    (1.73)
 1SpillEvent                     0.48     0.33      0.31         0.20     0.29      0.24      0.40      0.10      0.29      0.13
                                (0.56)   (0.40)    (0.37)      (0.24)   (0.30)    (0.28)    (0.48)    (0.13)    (0.29)    (0.15)
 ECON                                               -7.78       -0.57    -0.16     -0.40     15.79     4.47      0.81      3.00
                                                   (-1.64)     (-1.58) (-0.20)    (-0.94)   (0.87)    (2.62)    (0.25)    (1.54)
 1OwnEvent × ECON                                                                           -23.00     -4.91     -0.65     -3.38
                                                                                            (-1.38)   (-3.01)   (-0.22)   (-1.83)
 1SpillEvent × ECON                                                                         -20.14     -4.71     -1.08     -3.02
                                                                                            (-1.19)   (-2.87)   (-0.36)   (-1.64)
 R2                    0.056    0.005    0.059     0.101       0.098     0.058    0.073      0.131     0.227     0.061     0.126
 Obs.                   60       60       60        60          60        52       60          60        60        52        60




                                                           46
                                          Table 11
                         Relations between spillovers and FX options

    Panel A reports slope coefficients from regressions of spillover IV D, denoted by SpillIV D, on FX IV D,
denoted by F XIV D, across political events. For each political event (U.S. election or European summit),
SpillIV D is the equity option IV D for the country not experiencing the event. That is, for each European
summit, SpillIV D is the U.S. IV D, and for each U.S. election, SpillIV D is the average IV D across all
Eurozone countries. F XIV D for each event is IV D for at-the-money EUR/USD FX put and call options.
ECON denotes controls for four measures of economic conditions in the country experiencing the event. The
numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. The sample begins in January 1999 when FX option data become
available. Panels B contains analogous results for V RP D. We do not report results for SlopeD because its
construction requires data on FX option deltas. That data become available only in November 2010, as a
result of which the regression analysis would be based on only six observations and thus unreliable.

                                                 M KT      GDP       F ST       CLI

                                                Panel A: IV D
                       F XIV D         1.05       0.97      0.99      1.09      1.07
                                      (2.71)     (2.69)    (2.70)    (2.91)    (2.82)
                       ECON                      -14.97     -1.11     -1.69     -0.89
                                                 (-2.32)   (-2.11)   (-1.69)   (-1.47)
                       R2             0.227      0.369     0.348     0.309     0.291
                       Obs.            27         27        27        27        27
                                               Panel B: V RP D
                       F XV RP D       4.19       4.16      4.21      4.66      4.41
                                      (2.69)     (2.74)    (2.70)    (3.14)    (2.84)
                       ECON                      -16.85     -0.86     -3.30     -1.21
                                                 (-1.51)   (-0.94)   (-2.04)   (-1.19)
                       R2             0.224      0.292     0.252     0.339     0.268
                       Obs.            27         27        27        27        27




                                                     47
           control                           treatment                              control


     a−s             a                   b−s             b                    c−s             c

                                               τ

Figure 1. Timeline. Time τ is the date of the political event. Times a, b, and c are option expiration
dates. For both treatment and control options, we use prices from multiple dates that are s days prior to
expiration.




                                                   48
                     Panel A: Stock Market Return                                                        Panel B: GDP Growth
           0.30                                                                             0.30


           0.25                                                                             0.25


           0.20                                                                             0.20


           0.15                                                                             0.15




                                                                                     IVD
    IVD




           0.10                                                                             0.10


           0.05                                                                             0.05


           0.00                                                                             0.00


          −0.05                                                                            −0.05


              −0.5    −0.4   −0.3   −0.2    −0.1    0     0.1       0.2   0.3                       −5   −4   −3       −2        −1       0   1   2
                                    Economic Conditions                                                            Economic Conditions

                     Panel C: GDP Growth Forecast                                              Panel D: Composite Leading Indicator
           0.30                                                                             0.30


           0.25                                                                             0.25


           0.20                                                                             0.20


           0.15                                                                             0.15
    IVD




                                                                                     IVD




           0.10                                                                             0.10


           0.05                                                                             0.05


           0.00                                                                             0.00


          −0.05                                                                            −0.05


                      −3       −2          −1        0          1         2                        −4    −3    −2           −1        0       1       2
                                    Economic Conditions                                                            Economic Conditions




Figure 2. Implied volatility difference vs. economic conditions: Data. The figure plots IV D,
the annualized implied volatility difference from equation (1), against four measures of economic conditions:
the country’s stock market index return (M KT ; Panel A), real GDP growth (GDP ; Panel B), the IMF’s
GDP growth forecast (F ST ; Panel C), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI; Panel D). We
standardize GDP , F ST , and CLI to zero mean and unit variance within each country by using data from
1990 through 2012. Election observations are marked as squares; summit observations as circles. The solid
line is the line of best fit from a simple linear regression; the dashed line is from the piecewise linear regression
with a kink at zero.




                                                                                49
                      Panel A: Stock Market Return                                                         Panel B: GDP Growth


            0.30                                                                              0.30



            0.20                                                                              0.20



            0.10                                                                              0.10




                                                                                      VRPD
    VRPD




            0.00                                                                              0.00



           −0.10                                                                             −0.10



           −0.20                                                                             −0.20


               −0.5    −0.4   −0.3   −0.2    −0.1    0     0.1       0.2   0.3                        −5   −4   −3       −2        −1       0   1   2
                                     Economic Conditions                                                             Economic Conditions

                      Panel C: GDP Growth Forecast                                               Panel D: Composite Leading Indicator


            0.30                                                                              0.30


            0.20                                                                              0.20


            0.10                                                                              0.10
    VRPD




                                                                                      VRPD




            0.00                                                                              0.00


           −0.10                                                                             −0.10


           −0.20                                                                             −0.20


                       −3       −2          −1        0          1         2                         −4    −3    −2           −1        0       1       2
                                     Economic Conditions                                                             Economic Conditions




Figure 3. Variance risk premium difference vs. economic conditions: Data. The figure plots
V RP D, the annualized variance risk premium difference from equation (4), against four measures of economic
conditions: the country’s stock market index return (M KT ; Panel A), real GDP growth (GDP ; Panel B),
the IMF’s GDP growth forecast (F ST ; Panel C), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI; Panel
D). We standardize GDP , F ST , and CLI to zero mean and unit variance within each country by using data
from 1990 through 2012. Election observations are marked as squares; summit observations as circles. The
solid line is the line of best fit from a simple linear regression; the dashed line is from the piecewise linear
regression with a kink at zero.




                                                                                 50
                           Panel A: Stock Market Return                                                      Panel B: GDP Growth
                0.40                                                                            0.40

                0.35                                                                            0.35

                0.30                                                                            0.30

                0.25                                                                            0.25

                0.20                                                                            0.20




                                                                                      SlopeD
      SlopeD




                0.15                                                                            0.15

                0.10                                                                            0.10

                0.05                                                                            0.05

                0.00                                                                            0.00

               −0.05                                                                           −0.05

               −0.10                                                                           −0.10
                    −0.5    −0.4   −0.3   −0.2    −0.1    0     0.1       0.2   0.3                     −5   −4   −3       −2        −1       0   1   2
                                          Economic Conditions                                                          Economic Conditions

                           Panel C: GDP Growth Forecast                                            Panel D: Composite Leading Indicator
                0.40                                                                            0.40

                0.35                                                                            0.35

                0.30                                                                            0.30

                0.25                                                                            0.25

                0.20                                                                            0.20
      SlopeD




                                                                                      SlopeD




                0.15                                                                            0.15

                0.10                                                                            0.10

                0.05                                                                            0.05

                0.00                                                                            0.00

               −0.05                                                                           −0.05

               −0.10                                                                           −0.10
                            −3       −2          −1        0          1         2                      −4    −3    −2           −1        0       1       2
                                          Economic Conditions                                                          Economic Conditions



Figure 4. Implied volatility slope difference vs. economic conditions: Data. The figure plots
SlopeD, the implied volatility slope difference from equation (6), against four measures of economic condi-
tions: the country’s stock market index return (M KT ; Panel A), real GDP growth (GDP ; Panel B), the
IMF’s GDP growth forecast (F ST ; Panel C), and the OECD’s Composite Leading Indicator (CLI; Panel
D). We standardize GDP , F ST , and CLI to zero mean and unit variance within each country by using data
from 1990 through 2012. Election observations are marked as squares; summit observations as circles. The
solid line is the line of best fit from a simple linear regression; the dashed line is from the piecewise linear
regression with a kink at zero.




                                                                                51
                                                        0.16
        0.12
                                                                                                          0.10
                                                        0.14
        0.10
                                                                                                          0.08
        0.08                                            0.12
                                                                                                          0.06
        0.06                                            0.10
                                                                                                          0.04
        0.04                                            0.08
                                                                                                          0.02




                                                                                                SlopeD
                                                VRPD
 IVD




        0.02                                            0.06
                                                                                                          0.00
        0.00                                            0.04
                                                                                                         −0.02
       −0.02                                            0.02
                                                                                                         −0.04
       −0.04                                            0.00
                                                                                                         −0.06
       −0.06                                           −0.02
                                                                                                         −0.08
       −0.08                                           −0.04
                                                                                                         −0.10
               −0.4   −0.3    −0.2   −0.1   0                  −0.4   −0.3    −0.2   −0.1   0                    −0.25 −0.2 −0.15 −0.1 −0.05   0
                             UNC                                             UNC                                             UNC




Figure 5. The role of political uncertainty: Data. The figure plots three option-market quantities
against uncertainty about election outcome (U N C) for all election observations in our sample. U N C is
the negative of the election poll spread. The three quantities are: IV D, the annualized implied volatility
difference from equation (1), V RP D, the annualized variance risk premium difference from equation (4),
and SlopeD, the implied volatility slope difference from equation (6). We also show the line of best fit from
a simple linear regression.




                                                                      52
              A. Probability at τ of old policy                        B. Jump at τ if old policy chosen

      1
                                                             0.2
                                                               0
    0.5
                                                            −0.2
                                                            −0.4
      0
          2                                                        2
               0                                  2                     0                                  2
                       −2                   0                                   −2                   0
                                −2                                                       −2
                ĉLτ                  ĝτ                                ĉLτ                  ĝτ
               C. Probability at τ of policy L                         D. Jump at τ if policy L chosen

      1
                                                             0.2
    0.5                                                        0
                                                            −0.2
                                                            −0.4
      0
          2                                                        2
               0                                  2                     0                                  2
                       −2                   0                                   −2                   0
                                −2                                                       −2
                ĉLτ                  ĝτ                                ĉLτ                  ĝτ
               E. Probability at τ of policy H                         F. Jump at τ if policy H chosen

      1
                                                             0.2
                                                               0
    0.5
                                                            −0.2
                                                            −0.4
      0
          2                                                        2
               0                                  2                     0                                  2
                       −2                   0                                   −2                   0
                                −2                                                       −2
                ĉLτ                  ĝτ                                ĉLτ                  ĝτ


Figure 6. Model-implied policy probabilities and jumps in stock prices. The left-hand-side panels
of this figure plot the adoption probabilities of the three government policies (the current or “old” policy
and two potential new policies, L and H) immediately before the policy decision is made at time τ . The
right-hand-side panels plot the instantaneous stock market returns conditional on the three potential policy
announcements. All quantities are plotted against two state variables, ĝt (the state of the economy) and ĉL   τ
(the perceived political cost of policy L), while holding the third stochastic variable, ĉH
                                                                                           τ , equal to its prior
mean. The values of ĝt and ĉLτ are scaled by their posterior standard deviations (and thus converted into
“z-scores”). All quantities are computed within the PV model for baseline parameter values.




                                                       53
                                            A. Diffusive volatility σM (S) at t


    0.2



    0.1



      0
      3
             2                                                                                               3
                    1                                                                               2
                           0                                                                 1
                                      −1                                      −1         0
                                           −2                     −2
                                                 −3     −3
                               ĉLt                                                ĝt

                                                B. Expected volatility at t


    0.2



    0.1



      0
      3
             2                                                                                               3
                    1                                                                               2
                           0                                                                 1
                                      −1                                      −1         0
                                           −2                     −2
                                                 −3     −3
                               ĉLt                                                ĝt


Figure 7. Model-implied stock return volatility. Panel A plots the diffusive volatility of the stock
price process, σM (St ), as a function of the state variables b
                                                              gt (the state of the economy) and bcL
                                                                                                  t (the perceived
political cost of policy L) as of time t = τ − 1/2. Panel B plots the expected volatility of log stock returns
between times τ − 21 and τ + 21 , evaluated as of time t = τ − 1/2. The values of b          cL
                                                                                      gt and bτ are scaled by their
posterior standard deviations (and thus converted into “z-scores”). The third stochastic variable, b     cH
                                                                                                          τ , is set
equal to its prior mean. All quantities are computed within the PV model for baseline parameter values.




                                                           54
                       A. Implied Volatility                                     B. Variance Risk Premium
                                                                        −3
                                                                    x 10

     0.2                                                      15

                                                              10

     0.1                                                       5

                                                               0

       0                                                      −5
           2                                                        2
                0                                  2                         0                                2
                                               0                                                          0
                       −2          −2                                               −2         −2
                ĉLt                     ĝt                                 ĉLt                   ĝt


                             C. Slope                                         D. Jump Risk Premium at τ


    0.04                                                     0.01


    0.02
                                                            0.005

       0
                                                               0
           2                                                        2
                0                                  2                         0                                2
                                               0                                                          0
                       −2          −2                                               −2         −2
                ĉLt                     ĝt                                 ĉLτ                   ĝτ


Figure 8. Option pricing implications of the PV model. This figure plots the three option-market
variables, implied volatility (Panel A), variance risk premium (Panel B), and slope (Panel C), as a function
of the state variables b
                       gt (the state of the economy) and b    cL
                                                               t (the perceived political cost of policy L). The
variables are computed as of time t = τ − 1/2 for options expiring at time τ + 1/2, where τ is the date of the
political event. The values of b      cL
                               gt and bτ are scaled by their posterior standard deviations (and thus converted
into “z-scores”). The third stochastic variable, bcH
                                                   τ , is set equal to its prior mean. Panel D reports the jump
risk premium, or the expected instantaneous stock market return, computed immediately before time τ . All
quantities are computed within the PV model for baseline parameter values.




                                                       55
                               IV                                      −3    VRP                                             Slope
                                                                    x 10
                 13                                             4                                             1.2

                 12                                                                                             1
                                                                3
                 11                                                                                           0.8
     Spillover




                                                   Spillover




                                                                                                 Spillover
                 10                                             2                                             0.6

                  9                                             1                                             0.4

                  8                                                                                           0.2
                                                                0
                  7                                                                                             0

                  6                                            −1                                            −0.2
                 −0.02         0         0.02                  −0.02         0         0.02                   −0.02         0         0.02
                     Econom ic conditions (ĝt )                   Econom ic conditions (ĝt )                    Econom ic conditions (ĝt )

                               IV                                      −3    VRP                                             Slope
                                                                    x 10
                 45                                            10                                             0.8

                 40                                             8                                             0.6
                                                                6
                 35                                                                                           0.4
     FX




                                                   FX




                                                                                                 FX
                                                                4
                 30                                                                                           0.2
                                                                2
                 25                                             0                                               0

                 20                                            −2                                            −0.2
                 −0.02         0         0.02                  −0.02         0         0.02                   −0.02         0         0.02
                     Econom ic conditions (ĝt )                   Econom ic conditions (ĝt )                    Econom ic conditions (ĝt )
                                          β2 = 0.25                    β2 = 0.5       β2 = 0.75                     β2 = 1


Figure 9. The effects of political uncertainty in a two-country model. This figure plots the three
option-market variables, implied volatility (IV ), variance risk premium (V RP ), and slope (Slope), against
economic conditions, measured by the state variable gbt . The variables are computed as of time t = τ −1/2 for
options expiring at time τ + 1/2, where τ is the date of the political event. Each panel plots the regression
line of best fit estimated across a large number of samples simulated from the two-country extension of
the PV model with α = 1. The top three panels show spillover effects, defined as the effects of political
uncertainty in the home country on equity option prices in the foreign country. The bottom three panels
show the effects of political uncertainty in the home country on the prices of foreign exchange options.




                                                                            56
                                                 Appendix

    In Section A.1, we briefly review the Pástor and Veronesi (2013) model. In Section A.2, we list the
model-implied restrictions on the general dynamics in equations (7) through (11). In Section A.3, we show
the option pricing formula from Proposition 2. In Section A.4, we give the jump risk premium formula from
Proposition 3. In Section A.5, we list all of our political events.

A.1. The Pástor and Veronesi (2013) model (PV)

     Consider an economy with a finite horizon [0, T ] and a continuum of all-equity firms i ∈ [0, 1]. Let Bti
denote firm i’s capital at time t. At time 0, all firms employ an equal amount of capital, B0i = 1. Firm i’s
capital is invested in a linear technology whose rate of return, or profitability, is denoted by dΠit . All profits
are reinvested, so that firm i’s capital evolves according to dBti = Bti dΠit . For all t ∈ [0, T ], profitability
follows the process
                                       dΠit = (µ + gt ) dt + σdZt + σ1 dZti ,                                 (A1)
where (µ, σ, σ1) are observable constants, Zt is a Brownian motion, and Zti is an independent Brownian
motion that is specific to firm i. The variable gt denotes the impact of the prevailing government policy on
the mean of the profitability process of each firm.

    The government policy’s impact, gt , is constant while the same policy is in effect. The value of gt can
change only at a given time τ , 0 < τ < T , when the government makes an irreversible policy decision:
whether to replace the current policy and, if so, which of N potential new policies to adopt. That is, the
government chooses one of N + 1 policies, where policies n = {1, . . . , N } are the potential new policies and
policy 0 is the “old” policy prevailing since time 0. Let g0 denote the impact of the old policy and gn denote
the impact of the n-th new policy, for n = {1, . . . , N }. The value of gt is a simple step function of time:
                       0
                       g     for t ≤ τ
                 gt =    g0 for t > τ if the old policy is retained (i.e., no policy change)                (A2)
                       n
                         g    for t > τ if the new policy n is chosen, n ∈ {1, . . . , N } .

A policy change replaces g0 by gn , thereby inducing a permanent shift in average profitability.

    The value of gt is unknown to all agents for all t ∈ [0, T ]. As of time 0, the prior distributions of all
policy impacts are normal:
                                               
                             g0 ∼ N 0, σg2                                                              (A3)
                               n           n   2
                                                  
                             g    ∼ N µg , σg,n         for n = {1, . . . , N } .                       (A4)

Between times 0 and τ , agents learn about g0 in a Bayesian fashion by observing realized firm profitabilities.
The posterior distribution of g0 at any time t ≤ τ is given by
                                                               
                                              gt ∼ N b      bt2 ,
                                                       gt , σ                                            (A5)

where the posterior mean and variance evolve as

                                               db
                                                gt       =   bt2 σ −1 dZ
                                                             σ          bt                                    (A6)
                                                                   1
                                               bt2
                                               σ         =    1       1
                                                                           ,                                  (A7)
                                                             σ2 + σ2 t
                                                               g


                                                     N
Before time τ , there is no learning about {gn }n=1 , so agents’ beliefs about those values at any time t ≤ τ
are given by the prior distributions in equation (A4). If there is no policy change at time τ , then agents
continue to learn about g0 after time τ , and the processes (A6) and (A7) continue to hold also for t > τ . If
a new policy n is adopted at time τ , agents stop learning about g0 and begin                      n
                                                                                  learning about g n. As a result,
                                                                               2                        2
a policy change resets agents’ beliefs about gt from the posterior N b  gτ , σ
                                                                             bτ to the prior N µg , σg,n    .


                                                             57
    Firms are owned by a continuum of identical investors who maximize expected utility derived from
terminal wealth. For all j ∈ [0, 1], investor j’s utility function is given by
                                                                         1−γ
                                                                  WTj
                                             u WTj          =                    ,                             (A8)
                                                                    1−γ

where WTj is investor j’s wealth at time T and γ > 1 is relative risk aversion. At time 0, all investors are
equally endowed with firm stock. Stocks pay liquidating dividends at time T .

     The government’s preferences over policies n = 0, . . . , N are represented by a utility function that
is identical to that of investors, except that the government also faces a nonpecuniary cost (or benefit)
associated with any policy change. Specifically, at time τ , the government chooses the policy that maximizes
                                               ( "                        #)
                                                    C n WT1−γ
                                     max        Eτ             | policy n    ,                          (A9)
                                   n∈{0,...,N}        1−γ
                     R1
where WT = BT = 0 BTi di is the final value of aggregate capital and C n is the “political cost” incurred
by the government if policy n is adopted. Values of C n > 1 represent a cost whereas C n < 1 represents a
benefit. We normalize C 0 = 1, so that retaining the old policy is known with certainty to present no political
                                                                                         N
costs or benefits to the government. The political costs of the new policies, {C n }n=1 , are revealed to all
                                             n
agents at time τ . Immediately after the C values are revealed, the government makes its policy decision.
As of time 0, the prior distribution of each C n is lognormal and centered at C n = 1:
                                                          
                                                  1
                           cn ≡ log (C n ) ∼ N − σc2 , σc2     for n = {1, . . . , N } ,                (A10)
                                                  2

where the cn values are uncorrelated across policies and independent of the Brownian motions in equation
                                N
(A1). Uncertainty about {C n }n=1 , which is given by σc as of time 0, is the source of political uncertainty,
or uncertainty about the government’s policy choice. Any σc > 0 introduces an element of surprise into
the policy decision. Given its objective function, the government is “quasi-benevolent”: it maximizes the
investors’ welfare on average (because E0 [C n ] = 1 for all n), but it also deviates from this objective randomly.
                              N
   The political costs {C n }n=1 are unknown to all agents until time τ . At time t0 < τ , agents begin learning
about each cn by observing unbiased signals:

                                    dsnt = cn dt + h dZc,t
                                                       n
                                                           ,              n = 1, . . . , N .                  (A11)

The signals dsnt are uncorrelated across n and independent of all other shocks. We refer to dsnt as “political
signals,” and interpret them as capturing the steady flow of political news relevant to policy n. These signals
help agents revise their beliefs about the government’s future actions. Combining these signals with the
prior distribution in equation (A10), we obtain the posterior distribution of cn , for n = 1, . . . , N , at any time
t ≤ τ:                                                            
                                                               2
                                             cn ∼ N b  cnt , b
                                                             σc,t   ,                                          (A12)
where the posterior mean and variance evolve as

                                            cnt
                                           db         = σ 2
                                                        bc,t h−1 dZbn                                         (A13)
                                                                    c,t

                                             2                   1
                                           σ
                                           bc,t       = 1      1          .                                   (A14)
                                                        σ2 + h2 (t − t0 )
                                                            c




    Assuming complete markets, the state price density in this economy is uniquely given by
                                                            1  −γ 
                                                  πt =        Et BT ,                                         (A15)
                                                            λ
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier from the utility maximization problem of the representative investor.


                                                             58
A.2. Restrictions on general dynamics

    The state variables in the PV model follow the martingale processes given in equations (A6) and (A13).
As a result, the model imposes the following restrictions on the state variable process in equation (7):

                  µS (St )   =   0                                                                                 (A16)
                                       σ−1
                                                                                                           
                                     σg−2 +σ−2 t
                                                            0            0   ....            0
                                                                                                          
                                        0                 h−1
                                                                         0   ...             0             
                                                    σc−2 +h−2 (t−t0)                                      
                  σS (St )   =          ..                                  ..              ..                   (A17)
                                                                               .                          
                                         .                                                   .            
                                                                                            h−1
                                         0                  0            0   ...      σc−2 +h−2 (t−t0 )

                   dWS,t     =   vector of expectation errors denoted bydZbt and dZ
                                                                                  bc,t
                                                                                    n
                                                                                       in PV                       (A18)


                                                                                cnt disappear and gbt follows the
   These restrictions hold until time τ ; after that time, the political shocks b
same process as in equation (A6) except that the prior distribution is reset at time τ .

    The restrictions on the dynamics of stock prices in equation (8) are as follows:
                            q
                                                 P
                            (σ + σM,0 (St ))2 + N    n=1 σM,n (St )
                                                                    2 for          t<τ
            σM (St ) =                                                                                             (A19)
                           
                                                   2
                                      σ + (T − t) σ
                                                  bn,t σ −1           for t ≥ τ , n drawn at τ

where σM,n (St ) for n = 0, 1, ..., N are given in equations (37) and (38) in PV,
                             
                                − (σ + σM,0 (St )) (−γσ + σπ,0 (St ))
                             
                                    PN                                              for              t<τ
                                  − n=1 σM,n (St )σπ,n (St )
             µM (St )   =                                                                                          (A20)
                             
                             
                                                      2
                                                                    
                                                                  −1 2
                                       γ σ + (T − t) σ
                                                     bn,t σ                          for   t ≥ τ , n drawn at τ

where σπ,n (St ), for n = 0, 1, ..., N are given in equations (30) and (31) in PV,
                                                                             N
                                                                                                       !
                                                                             X
                        dWM,t = σM (S)    −1
                                                   (σ + σM,0 (St )) dZbt +          σM,n (St )dZbc,t
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                               ,   (A21)
                                                                             n=1

and the jump term JM,τ is a random variable distributed as follows:
                                   0
                                  
                                    R (Sτ ) with probability p0τ (Sτ )
                                  
                                   R1 (Sτ ) with probability p1τ (Sτ )
                           JM,τ =       ..              ..            ..                                           (A22)
                                  
                                        .               .             .
                                  
                                   N
                                    R (Sτ ) with probability pN     τ (S τ)

where the announcement returns Rn (Sτ ), n = 0, ..., N are given in equations (48) and (49) in PV, and the
policy probabilities pnτ (Sτ ) n = 0, ..., N are provided in Corollary 2 of PV.

    The restrictions on the dynamics of the stochastic discount factor in equation (9) are as follows:
                          q
                                               2  PN
                             (−γσ + σπ,0 (St )) + n=1 σπ,n (St )2 for             t<τ
            σπ (St ) =                                                                                 (A23)
                         
                                                    2     −1
                                   −γσ − γ (T − t) σbn,t σ            for t ≥ τ , n drawn at τ

                                                                             N
                                                                                                      !
                                                                             X
                        dWπ,t = σπ (St )−1                           bt +
                                                   (σ + σπ,0 (St )) dZ                         bc,t
                                                                                    σπ,n (St )dZ n
                                                                                                           ,       (A24)
                                                                             n=1



                                                             59
and the jump term Jπ,τ can take on n + 1 values Jπn , n = 0, 1, ..., N , given by
                                                              n              γ2       2   2
                                    πn            e−γµg (T −τ)+ 2 (T −τ) σg,n
                           Jπn     = τ+ − 1 = P                       γ2
                                                                                    −1 ,                                         (A25)
                                     πτ         N    m −γµm                   2 2
                                                            g (T −τ)+ 2 (T −τ) σg,m
                                                m=0 pτ e

where pnτ are the policy probabilities defined earlier and µ0g = b        2
                                                                 gτ and σg,0  =σbτ2 . It is easy to verify that the
expected value of Jπ,τ right before τ is zero. Note that, ceteris paribus, selecting a policy with a lower mean
                           2
µng or higher uncertainty σg,n results in a higher jump in the state price density.

A.3. The option pricing formula

    We now present the option pricing formula from Proposition 2. This formula can be written in two
similar ways, as a function of either book value Bt or market value Mt . First, as a function of book value,
at time t < τ , the price of a European put option expiring at time m > τ is given by

                                                                           O (St , κ)
                                             P ut (St , m, K) = Bt                    ,                                          (A26)
                                                                            Ω (St )

where κ = K/Bt , Ω (St ) is in Equation (A.1) in PV, and
                                             N
                                             X                       γ2
                                                                          (T −τ)2 σg,n
                                                                                   2
                              O (St , κ) =         e−γµn,g (T −τ)+    2                pnt V n   (St , κ) ,
                                             n=0

where pnt is the probability of policy n as of time t, given in PV’s Corollary 2, and
                     Z
    V n (St , κ) =      e−γ∆bτ BSPn (∆bτ , κ) f (∆bτ |n at τ ) d∆bτ for n ≥ 1
                             „                   »          –«
                      Z                             2
                           −γ Et [∆bτ ]+(b   gt ) σ 2 +(τ−t) −γ(b
                                         gτ −b                  gτ −b
                                                                    gt )(T −τ)
       0                                              bt
     V (St , κ) =         e                           σ
                                                                                          BSP0 (b
                                                                                                gτ , κ; b
                                                                                                        gt ) f (b
                                                                                                                gτ |0 at τ ) db
                                                                                                                              gτ .

In the above expression, bτ = log(Bτ ), the probability densities f (∆bτ |n at τ ) and f (b
                                                                                          gτ |0 at τ ) are given in
the Appendix of PV, and BSPn (∆bτ , κ) and BSP0 (b     gτ , κ; b
                                                               gt) are standard Black-Scholes formulas for put
options with different inputs. Namely, denote
                                                                            1 − 2γ         2 2
                    `n (∆bτ )        =   ∆bτ + µ − γσ 2 + µg,n (T − τ ) +           (T − τ ) σg,n
                                                                              2
                                                                               2           
                                                   1 2                         σ
                   `0 (b
                       gτ ; b
                            gt )     =    µ+b gt − σ (τ − t) + (b  gτ − gbt ) 2 + (τ − t)
                                                   2                           σ
                                                                               bt
                                                                   1 − 2γ           2 2
                                         + µ − γσ 2 + b
                                                      gτ (T − τ ) +          (T − τ ) σ
                                                                                      bτ .
                                                                       2
Then, for n ≥ 1

                    BSPn (∆bτ , κ) =           κN [−d2,n (∆bτ , κ)] − e`n (∆bτ ) N [−d1,n (∆bτ , κ)]
                                               `n (∆bτ ) − log (κ) 1
                      d1,n (∆bτ , κ) =                             + σIV,n
                                                     σIV,n           2
                      d2,n (∆bτ , κ) =         d1 (∆bτ , κ) − σIV,n

and for n = 0

                    BSP0 (b
                          gτ , κ; b
                                  gt )     =   κN [−d2 (b           gt)] − e`0 (bgτ ;bgt ) N [−d1 (b
                                                            gτ , κ; b                              gτ , κ; b
                                                                                                           gt)]
                                               `0 (b
                                                   gτ ; b
                                                        gt ) − log (κ) 1
                      d1,0 (b
                            gτ , κ; b
                                    gt )   =                             + σIV,0
                                                        σIV,0               2
                      d2,0 (b
                            gτ , κ; b
                                    gt )   =   d1,0 (b
                                                     gτ , κ; b
                                                             gt) − σIV,0 .



                                                              60
Finally, in these expressions, we have for every n ≥ 0 :
                                                     Z m
                                              2           2
                                             σIV,n =     σM,t dt ,
                                                                  τ

or expected average variance of stock returns. The square root of that variance after τ is σM,t = σ +
(T − t) σ                bt−2 = σg,n
        bt2 σ −1 , where σ       −2
                                     + σ −2 (t − τ ).

    The option pricing formula from equation (A26) can also be rewritten as a function of market value Mt :
                                                                          e (St , K)
                                                                          O
                                               P ut (St , m, K) = Mt                 ,                                (A27)
                                                                           H (St )
      e (St , K) and H(St ) are given in the Internet Appendix.
where O

Corollary A.1: Let St in equation (13) be such that the probability pnt → 1 for some n ≥ 0. Option prices
are then given by the Black-Scholes formula with implied variance of
                                                  Z m
                                            2           2
                                          σIV,n =      σM,0,s ds
                                                                  t

where for n ≥ 1 the stock return volatility σM,0,t is given by
                                        σM,0,t    =                bt2 σ −1 for t ≤ τ
                                                       σ + (τ − t) σ
                                                  =                bt2 σ −1 for t > τ
                                                       σ + (T − t) σ
with
                                        bt−2
                                        σ         =   σ −2
                                                      bg,0 + σ −2 t           for t ≤ τ
                                        bt−2
                                        σ         =    −2
                                                      σg,n   +σ   −2
                                                                       (t − τ )   for t > τ
while for n = 0, stock return volatility is
                                                               bt2 σ −1
                                          σM,0,t = σ + (T − t) σ                  for all t
with
                                                bt−2 = σ
                                                σ        −2
                                                       bg,0 + σ −2 t for all t .

A.4. The jump risk premium formula

   We now present the jump risk premium formula from Proposition 3. Immediately before time τ , the
jump risk premium associated with the political event at time τ is given by
              PN     n −γ(T −τ) (µ   µ0 )+ γ2 (T −τ) 2 (σg,n
                                 en −e                   2
                                                              στ2 ) PN
                                                             −b           n (µ    µ0 )(T −τ)− γ2 (T −τ) 2 (σg,n
                                                                              en −e                         2
                                                                                                                 στ2 )
                                                                                                                −b
                n=0 pτ e                                             n=0 pτ e
  J (Sτ ) =                                    PN                                                                      − 1,
                                                         n (1−γ)(T −τ)(e    µ0 )
                                                                        µn −e
                                                  n=0 pτ e
                                                                                                                        (A28)
where
                                             2
                                           σg,n
                              en
                              µ     =     µng − (T − τ ) (γ − 1)       n = 1, . . . , N                 (A29)
                                              2
                                           b2
                                           σ
                            e0 = b
                            µ         gτ − τ (T − τ ) (γ − 1)                                           (A30)
                                            2
and the probabilities pnτ ≡ pn (Sτ ) are obtained in closed form in Corollary 2 of PV. The jump risk premium
                                    PN
can also be computed as J (Sτ ) = n=0 pnτ Rn (Sτ ), where Rn (Sτ ) is the instantaneous stock return at time
τ conditional on the announcement of policy n. These returns for all n are derived in PV’s Proposition 6.

A.5. The full list of political events

    Tables A.1 and A.2 provide the full lists of elections and summits, respectively, that took place during
our sample period, along with brief descriptions of these events.


                                                               61
                                                 Table A.1
                                                 Elections

The table lists all national elections that took place in the period for which option data for the given country
are available in OptionMetrics (see Table 1). There are three types of elections: parliamentary (‘parl.’),
presidential (’pres.’), and both parliamentary and presidential occurring at the same time (‘both’). The
‘options’ variable is equal to one if enough option data are available for the corresponding election so that
it is possible to calculate IV D in equation (1); if the option data are unavailable then the options variable
equals zero. Option data are missing especially in the early years in our sample. All elections for which
option data are available are included in our sample.

     Country      Date        Type    Options                Country         Date        Type     Options
     Australia    20041009    Parl.   0                      Japan           20090830    Parl.    1
     Australia    20071124    Parl.   0                      Japan           20100711    Parl.    1
     Australia    20100821    Parl.   1                      Korea           20071219    Pres.    1
     Belgium      20030518    Parl.   0                      Korea           20080409    Parl.    1
     Belgium      20070610    Parl.   1                      Mexico          20090705    Parl.    1
     Belgium      20100613    Parl.   1                      Netherlands     20020515    Parl.    0
     Brazil       20061001    Both    1                      Netherlands     20030122    Parl.    0
     Brazil       20061029    Pres.   1                      Netherlands     20061122    Parl.    0
     Brazil       20101003    Both    1                      Netherlands     20100609    Parl.    1
     Brazil       20101031    Pres.   1                      Singapore       20110507    Parl.    1
     Canada       20081014    Parl.   1                      Singapore       20110827    Pres.    1
     Canada       20110502    Parl.   1                      South Africa    20090422    Parl.    1
     Finland      20030316    Parl.   0                      Spain           20080309    Parl.    1
     Finland      20060115    Pres.   0                      Spain           20111120    Parl.    1
     Finland      20060129    Pres.   0                      Sweden          20100919    Parl.    1
     Finland      20070318    Parl.   0                      Switzerland     20031019    Parl.    1
     Finland      20110417    Parl.   0                      Switzerland     20071021    Parl.    1
     Finland      20120122    Pres.   0                      Switzerland     20111023    Parl.    1
     Finland      20120205    Pres.   0                      Taiwan          20040320    Pres.    0
     France       20070422    Pres.   1                      Taiwan          20080112    Parl.    1
     France       20070506    Pres.   1                      Taiwan          20080322    Pres.    1
     France       20070610    Parl.   1                      Taiwan          20120114    Both     0
     France       20070617    Parl.   1                      UK              20050505    Parl.    1
     France       20120422    Pres.   1                      UK              20100506    Parl.    1
     France       20120506    Pres.   1                      USA             19901106    Parl.    1
     France       20120610    Parl.   1                      USA             19921103    Both     1
     France       20120617    Parl.   1                      USA             19941108    Parl.    1
     Germany      20020922    Parl.   1                      USA             19961105    Both     1
     Germany      20050918    Parl.   1                      USA             19981103    Parl.    1
     Germany      20090927    Parl.   1                      USA             20001107    Both     1
     Greece       20120506    Parl.   1                      USA             20021105    Parl.    1
     Greece       20120617    Parl.   1                      USA             20041102    Both     1
     Italy        20080413    Parl.   1                      USA             20061107    Parl.    1
     Japan        20040711    Parl.   0                      USA             20081104    Both     1
     Japan        20050911    Parl.   1                      USA             20101102    Parl.    1
     Japan        20070729    Parl.   1




                                                      62
                                                Table A.2
                                                Summits

The table lists all G8, G20, and European summits that took place between January 2007 and December
2011. We assign an economic relevance score to each summit, with “Yes” denoting the relevant ones and
“No” denoting the rest. All summits rated “Yes” are included in our main sample. The robustness analysis
in Table B1 in the Internet Appendix includes all summits regardless of relevance. The topic list in the last
column is constructed based on summit agendas, summit summaries, and press releases.

                        Economic
    Type    Date        Relevance    Topics
    G8      20070606       No        Global warming; US missile defense system; Consortium for Africa
    G8      20080707       No        Africa; Climate change; Intellectual property rights; Political is-
                                     sues; World Economy; Food crisis
    G8      20090708        No       Climate change; Energy; Africa; Intellectual property; Afghan con-
                                     flict; Nuclear security
    G8      20100625       Yes       Recovery from global recession and European debt crisis; Nuclear
                                     programs of Iran and North Korea; Israel blockade
    G8      20110526        No       Internet, innovation, green growth and sustainable economy; Nu-
                                     clear safety; Arab spring; Africa
    G20     20081114       Yes       Global financial crisis
    G20     20090402       Yes       Stimulus; Regulation
    G20     20090924       Yes       G20 to become premier forum for international economic coopera-
                                     tion; World economic recovery
    G20     20100626       Yes       Recovery from global recession and European debt crisis
    G20     20101111       Yes       Ensuring global economic recovery; Framework for growth; Finan-
                                     cial regulation, institutions and safety nets; Risk of currency war;
                                     Development issues
    G20     20111103       Yes       Recovery from global recession and European debt crisis
    Euro    20070308       No        Lisbon strategy for growth; Regulation; Climate and energy policy;
                                     International relations
    Euro    20070621        No       Treaty reform; Home affairs; Economic, social and environmental
                                     issues; External relations; Northern Ireland
    Euro    20071018        No       Treaty reform; Climate change; US economic crisis
    Euro    20071213        No       Treaty reform; Security; Economic, social and environmental is-
                                     sues; External relations
    Euro    20080313        No       Lisbon strategy; Climate change and energy; Financial stability
    Euro    20080619        No       Lisbon treaty; Security; Food and oil prices; Economic, social and
                                     environmental issues; Western Balkans; External relations
    Euro    20080713       No        Strategy for the Mediterranean (”Barcelona Process”)
    Euro    20080901       No        Extraordinary summit on EU-Russia relations (Georgia crisis)
    Euro    20081015       Yes       Economic and financial situations; Lisbon treaty; energy and cli-
                                     mate change; Immigration
    Euro    20081107       Yes       Global financial crisis
    Euro    20081211       Yes       Lisbon treaty; Economic and financial questions; Energy and cli-
                                     mate change; Agricultural policy; External relations; European se-
                                     curity and defence
    Euro    20090301       Yes       Global financial crisis
    Euro    20090319       Yes       Economic, financial and social situation; Energy and climate
                                     change
    Euro    20090405       Yes       US-EU summit; Economic, financial and social situation; Energy
                                     and climate change; Regional issues; Guantanamo
    Euro    20090618       Yes       Institutional issues; Economic, financial and social situation; Cli-
                                     mate change and sustainable development; Illegal immigration; ex-
                                     ternal relations

                                                     63
Euro   20090917   No    Preparation for 2009 G20 Pittsburgh summit
Euro   20091029   No    Institutional issues; Climate change; Economic, financial and em-
                        ployment situation; Strategy for Baltic Region; External relations
Euro   20091119   No    Chose first President of the European Council and first High Rep-
                        resentative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
Euro   20091210   Yes   Institutional issues; Economic, financial and employment situation;
                        ”Stockholm Program”; Climate change; Enlargement; External re-
                        lations
Euro   20100211   Yes   Greek crisis
Euro   20100325   Yes   Greek crisis
Euro   20100507   Yes   Greek crisis
Euro   20100617   Yes   Strategy for jobs and growth; Millennium development goals, Cli-
                        mate change
Euro   20100916   Yes   Relations with strategic partners; Task force on economic gover-
                        nance; External policy
Euro   20101028   Yes   Task force on economic governance; Climate change
Euro   20101216   Yes   Economic policy
Euro   20110204   Yes   Energy; Innovation; Economic situation; External relations
Euro   20110311   Yes   Economic policy; Crisis response
Euro   20110324   Yes   Economic policy; Libya; Japan tsunami
Euro   20110623   Yes   Economic policy; Immigration; Croatia
Euro   20110721   Yes   Greek crisis
Euro   20111023   Yes   Economy policy; Organization of G20; Climate change; External
                        relations
Euro   20111026   Yes   Crisis response
Euro   20111208   Yes   Economic policy; Energy; Enlargement




                                       64
                                      REFERENCES

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Peter F. Christoffersen, and Francis X. Diebold, 2006,
  Volatility and Correlation Forecasting, in Handbook of Economic Forecasting, G. Elliot,
  C.W.J. Granger, and Allan Timmermann (eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland, 778–878.
Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Ian Martin, 2011, Disasters implied by equity index
   options, Journal of Finance 66, 1969–2012.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2013, Measuring economic policy
   uncertainty, Working paper, Stanford University.
Bakshi, Gurdip, Charles Cao, and Zhiwu Chen, 1997, Empirical performance of alternative
   option pricing models, Journal of Finance 52, 2003–2049.
Bakshi, Gurdip, Nikunj Kapadia, and Dilip Madan, 2003, Stock return characteristics, skew
   laws, and the differential pricing of individual equity options, Review of Financial Studies
   16, 101–143.
Bates, David S., 1991, The crash of ’87: Was it expected? The evidence from options
   markets, Journal of Finance 46, 1009–1044.
Bates, David S., 2000, Post-’87 crash fears in the S&P 500 futures option market, Journal
   of Econometrics 94, 181–238.
Beber, Alessandro, and Michael W. Brandt, 2006, The effect of macroeconomic news on be-
   liefs and preferences: Evidence from the options market, Journal of Monetary Economics
   53, 1997-2039.
Belo, Frederico, Vito D. Gala, and Jun Li, 2013, Government spending, political cycles, and
   the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 305–324.
Benzoni, Luca, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2011, Explaining asset
   pricing puzzles associated with the 1987 market crash, Journal of Financial Economics
   101, 552–573.
Bialkowski, Jedrzej, Katrin Gottschalk, and Tomasz P. Wisniewski, 2008, Stock market
   volatility around national elections, Journal of Banking and Finance 32, 1941-1953.
Bittlingmayer, George, 1998, Output, stock volatility, and political uncertainty in a natural
   experiment: Germany, 1880–1940, Journal of Finance 53, 2243–2257.
Bollerslev, Tim, George Tauchen, and Hao Zhou, 2009, Expected stock returns and variance
   risk premia, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4463–4492.
Bollerslev, Tim, and Viktor Todorov, 2011, Tails, fears, and risk premia, Journal of Finance
   66, 2165–2211.
Boutchkova, Maria, Hitesh Doshi, Art Durnev, and Alexander Molchanov, 2012, Precarious
   politics and return volatility, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1111–1154.
Broadie, Mark, Mikhail Chernov, and Michael Johannes, 2007, Model specification and risk
   premia: Evidence from futures options, Journal of Finance 62, 1453–1490.
Broadie, Mark, Mikhail Chernov, and Michael Johannes, 2009, Understanding index option
   returns, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4493–4529.


                                              65
Brogaard, Jonathan, and Andrew Detzel, 2013, The asset pricing implications of government
   economic policy uncertainty, Working paper, University of Washington.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, 2011, Robust inference with
  multiway clustering, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29, 238–249.
Chernov, Mikhail, A. Ronald Gallant, Eric Ghysels, and George Tauchen, 2003, Alternative
   models for stock price dynamics, Journal of Econometrics 116, 225–257.
Croce, Maximiliano M., Howard Kung, Thien T. Nguyen, and Lukas Schmid, 2012, Fiscal
   policies and asset prices, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2635–2672.
Croce, Maximiliano M., Thien T. Nguyen, and Lukas Schmid, 2012, The market price of
   fiscal uncertainty, Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 401–416.
Drechsler, Itamar, and Amir Yaron, 2011, What’s vol got to do with it, Review of Financial
   Studies 24, 1–45.
Du, Du, 2011, General Equilibrium Pricing of options with habit formation and event risks,
   Journal of Financial Economics 99, 400–426.
Dubinsky, Andrew, and Michael Johannes, 2006, Fundamental uncertainty, earning an-
  nouncements and equity options, Working paper, Columbia University.
Duffie, Darrell, Jun Pan, and Kenneth Singleton, 2000, Transform analysis and asset pricing
   for affine jump-diffusions, Econometrica 68, 1343–1376.
Durnev, Art, 2012, The real effects of political uncertainty, Working paper, University of
   Iowa.
Ederington, Louis H., and Jae Ha Lee, 1996, The creation and resolution of market uncer-
   tainty: the impact of information releases on implied volatility, Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis 31, 513–539.
Eraker, Bjorn, 2004, Do stock prices and volatility jump? Reconciling evidence from spot
   and option prices, Journal of Finance 59, 1367–1404.
Eraker, Bjorn, Michael Johannes, and Nicholas Polson, 2003, The impact of jumps in volatil-
   ity and returns, Journal of Finance 58, 1269–1300.
Erb, Claude B., Campbell R. Harvey, and Tadas E. Viskanta, 1996, Political risk, economic
   risk, and financial risk, Financial Analysts Journal, December, 29–46.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan Rubio-
   Ramı́rez, 2012, Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity, Working paper, University
   of Pennsylvania.
Gao, Pengjie, and Yaxuan Qi, 2013, Political uncertainty and public financing costs: Ev-
   idence from U.S. gubernatorial elections and municipal bond markets, Working paper,
   University of Notre Dame.
Gemmill, Gordon, 1992, Political risk and market efficiency: Tests based in British stock
  and options markets in the 1987 election, Journal of Banking and Finance 16, 211–231.
Goodell, John W., and Sami Vahamaa, 2013, US presidential elections and implied volatility:
  The role of political uncertainty, Journal of Banking and Finance 37, 1108–1117.



                                             66
Gulen, Huseyin, and Mihai Ion, 2013, Policy uncertainty and corporate investment, Working
   paper, Purdue University.
Hentschel, Ludger, 2003, Errors in implied volatility estimation, Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis 38: 779–810.
Jens, Candace E., 2013, Political uncertainty and investment: Causal evidence from U.S.
   gubernatorial elections, Working paper, Tulane University.
Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2012, Corporate financial policy under political uncer-
    tainty: International evidence from national elections, Journal of Finance 67, 45–83.
Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2013, Policy uncertainty, irreversibility, and cross-
    border flows of capital, Working paper, London Business School.
Lewis-Beck, Michael S., and Mary Stegmaier, 2000, Economic determinants of electoral
   outcomes, Annual Review of Political Science 3, 183-219.
Li, Jinliang, and Jeffery A. Born, 2006, Presidential election uncertainty and common stock
    returns in the United States, Journal of Financial Research 29, 609–622.
Pan, Jun, 2002, The jump-risk premia implicit in options: Evidence from an integrated
   time-series study, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 3–50.
Pantzalis, Christos, David A. Stangeland, and Harry J. Turtle, 2000, Political elections
   and the resolution of uncertainty: The international evidence, Journal of Banking and
   Finance 24, 1575–1604.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2012, Uncertainty about government policy and stock
    prices, Journal of Finance 67, 1219–1264.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2013, Political uncertainty and risk premia, Journal of
    Financial Economics 110, 520–545.
Patell, James M., and Mark A. Wolfson, 1979, Anticipated information releases reflected in
   call option prices, Journal of Accounting and Economics 1, 117–140.
Piazzesi, Monika, 2005, Bond yields and the Federal Reserve, Journal of Political Economy
   113, 311–344.
Seo, Sang Byung, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2013, Option prices in a model with stochastic
   disaster risk, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Sialm, Clemens, 2006, Stochastic taxation and asset pricing in dynamic general equilibrium,
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30, 511–540.
Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2007, Partisan impacts on the economy:
   Evidence from prediction markets and close elections, Quarterly Journal of Economics
   122, 807–829.
Todorov, Viktor, 2010, Variance risk-premium dynamics: The role of jumps, Review of
   Financial Studies 23, 345–383.
Ulrich, Maxim, 2013, How does the bond market perceive government interventions?, Work-
   ing paper, Columbia University.
Voth, Hans-Joachim, 2002, Stock price volatility and political uncertainty: Evidence from
   the interwar period, Working paper, UPF.

                                             67
