                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               MISSING GAINS FROM TRADE?

                                          Marc J. Melitz
                                        Stephen J. Redding

                                       Working Paper 19810
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19810


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2014




Melitz and Redding thank Harvard and Princeton Universities respectively for research support. We
are grateful to Jon Eaton, Gene Grossman, Gordon Hanson, Elhanan Helpman and Andres Rodriguez-
Clare for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Marc J. Melitz and Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Missing Gains from Trade?
Marc J. Melitz and Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 19810
January 2014, Revised February 2014
JEL No. F10,F11,F15

                                              ABSTRACT

The theoretical result that there are welfare gains from trade is a central tenet of international economics.
In a class of trade models that satisfy a "gravity equation," the welfare gains from trade can be computed
using only the open economy domestic trade share and the elasticity of trade with respect to variable
trade costs. The measured welfare gains from trade from this quantitative approach are typically relatively
modest. In this paper, we suggest a channel for welfare gains that this quantitative approach typically
abstracts from: trade-induced changes in domestic productivity. Using a model of sequential production,
in which trade induces a reorganization of production that raises domestic productivity, we show that
the welfare gains from trade can become arbitrarily large.


Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
215 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu

Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
reddings@princeton.edu
1     Introduction

The theoretical result that there are gains from trade is a central tenet of international economics.

Assuming perfect competition and no market failures, trade acts like a technological improvement that
expands the set of feasible allocations and enables Pareto superior outcomes to be achieved. A recent
body of research has sought to quantify the magnitude of these welfare gains. In a class of standard
trade models that satisfy a constant elasticity “gravity equation,” the welfare gains from trade can be

computed using only aggregate data: The open economy domestic trade share and the elasticity of
trade with respect to variable trade costs (see Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare 2012). One of
the main …ndings from this literature is that the welfare gains from trade are relatively modest. For
example, in a study of 19 OECD countries, Eaton and Kortum (2002) …nd that the welfare cost of
moving to autarky ranges from 0.2-10.3 percent.
    Many extensions to this quantitative approach have been considered, including the introduction of
input-output linkages (e.g. Caliendo and Parro 2012) and multiple sectors (e.g. Ossa 2012). Some
of these extensions can substantially increase the predicted welfare gains from trade, as surveyed in
Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2013), which reports a range of potential values for the welfare gains
from trade.
    In this paper, we suggest a channel for welfare gains that the standard quantitative approach typically
abstracts from: trade-induced changes in domestic productivity. Since domestic productivity directly
a¤ects welfare in both the closed and open economy (separately from trade ‡ows and relative prices)
it provides an additional potential channel for trade to a¤ect welfare. We provide a simple example in
which the contribution of this additional channel to the overall welfare gains from trade can be large.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews a simple version of the
standard quantitative approach and highlights its abstraction from trade-induced changes in domestic
productivity. Section 3 develops a simple extension in which trade leads to endogenous changes in

domestic productivity through a re-organization of production. Section 4 concludes.


2     Quantifying the Gains from Trade

We consider an Armington model of international trade in which goods are di¤erentiated by country
of origin. The world consists of a number of countries indexed by i; n 2 f1; : : : ; N g. Each country is

endowed with a measure Ln of labor. The utility of the representative consumer in each country n is
derived from the consumption of a non-traded …nal good (Cn ):

                                                Un = Cn :                                              (1)

                                                     2
This non-traded …nal good is produced with traded intermediate inputs according to a constant elasticity
of substitution (CES) production technology:
                                              "   N
                                                                               #
                                                  X                        1
                                                                                     1

                                      Yn =              ( i yni )                        ;                   (2)
                                                  i=1

where Yn is output of the non-traded …nal good; yni is the quantity of the traded intermediate input

from country i used by country n; and         i    parameterizes the quality or productivity of the traded
intermediate input from country i.
   Shipping traded intermediate inputs from country i to country n 6= i incurs iceberg variable trade
costs of dni > 1, where dnn = 1. Cost minimization implies that the share of traded intermediate inputs
from country i in costs in country n is:
                                                                           1
                                                (dni pi = i )
                                       ni   = PN                                 1
                                                                                         ;                   (3)
                                               k=1 (dnk pk =                   k)

and the dual unit cost function for …nal goods production is:
                                             "   N
                                                                                #11
                                                 X       dni pi
                                                                       1
                                     Gn =                                                    :               (4)
                                                  i=1          i

Perfect competition and constant returns to scale imply that the price of the …nal good equals its unit
cost:
                                                    Pn = Gn :                                                (5)

Traded intermediate inputs are produced with labor according to the following constant returns to scale
technology under conditions of perfect competition:

                                                   yn = 'n Ln :                                              (6)

Perfect competition and constant returns to scale imply that the ‘free on board’ intermediate input

price equals unit cost:
                                                  pn = wn ='n :                                              (7)

Using the unit cost function (4) and trade share (3) together with prices, welfare can be expressed in
terms of the domestic trade share and parameters:

                                                                        1=(          1)
                                     Wn = wn =Pn = bn                  nn                    ;               (8)

where bn = 'n    n   is a composite measure of productivity in …nal and intermediate production. The
welfare gains from trade are:

                                  WTn   bTn         T
                                                               1
                                                                   1            T
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     1
                                      =             nn                 =        nn                       ;   (9)
                                  WA
                                   n    bA
                                         n


                                                           3
                                                                                                           A
where we denote the open economy by T and the closed economy by A;                                         nn   = 1; and
                                                                          1
                                         T               dnn wnT =bTn
                                         nn    = PN                                1           < 1:
                                                       k=1       dnk wkT =bTk

To assess the rough magnitude of the implied welfare gains from trade, suppose that the domestic trade

share is 80 percent (not unusual for a large country such as the United States) and the trade elasticity
is        1 = 4 (a central value among existing empirical estimates). For these values, the above formula
predicts welfare gains from trade relative to autarky of around 6 percent.
     However, a crucial assumption behind this expression is that domestic productivity (here a para-

meter) is constant (bTn = bA
                           n ). To the extent that domestic productivity is itself endogenous to trade,

this potential source of welfare gains is not captured. If such trade-induced productivity growth is re-
lated to the domestic trade share, the above approach can be amended to incorporate this relationship.
However, in this case, the functional form relating productivity to the domestic trade share becomes
important for evaluating the welfare gains from trade. In the following section, we develop one set of
microfoundations for trade-induced domestic productivity growth. But the idea is much more general.
It applies to any mechanism through which trade a¤ects domestic productivity: technology adoption,
research and development, knowledge spillovers, infrastructure, institutions, and so on.


3        Sequential Production

The model remains exactly the same as in the previous section except that the non-traded …nal good
is produced using a sequence of traded intermediate inputs indexed by their stage of production s =
1; : : : ; S: The …nal good is the output from stage of production S and is produced using the intermediate
input from stage S       1. The intermediate input from stage S                                    1 is produced using the intermediate

input from stage S       2, and so on. The intermediate input from stage 1 is produced using a primary
input that is manufactured from labor. Each stage of production must be completed for the …nal good
to be produced.1 The production technology for stage s takes the same form as in (2), where traded

intermediate inputs for each stage of production are di¤erentiated by country of origin:
                                                   "   N
                                                                                       #       s
                                                       X                   s       1
                                                                                           s       1
                                                                 s s 1
                                         Yns   =                 i Yni
                                                                               s
                                                                                                       ;                            (10)
                                                       i=1

                                             s               1
where Yns is country n’s output of stage s; Yni                  is country n’s input of stage s                   1 output from country
     s
i;   i   parameterizes the quality or productivity of the intermediate input from country i for production
   1 The vertical disintegration of stages of production across national borders can a¤ect the growth of world trade and

empirical estimates of the border e¤ect (see Yi 2003, 2010). Sequential production also can be consequential for the
organization of stages of production within and beyond the boundaries of the …rm (see Antràs and Chor (2013) and across
countries (see Costinot, Vogel and Wang 2013).



                                                                   4
stage s; the dual unit cost function takes the same form as in (4). We allow iceberg trade costs to di¤er
across stages of production: dsni > 1 for n 6= i and dsnn = 1. The share of country n’s costs for stage of
                                                      s
production s on inputs sourced from itself (          nn )      is:
                                                             s 1
                                                       dsnn Pns            1
                                                                     s
                                       s                     n                 =
                                       nn   = PN                    1                                                  :           (11)
                                                           s 1
                                                               = sk
                                                       s                                                           s
                                                  k=1 dnk Pk

Using this cost share, the unit cost function for stage of production s can be written as:
                                                                                           1
                                                      Pns       1
                                                                           1           1        s
                                            Gsn   =         s              s
                                                                                                       ;                           (12)
                                                            n              nn

where dsnn = 1. Perfect competition and constant returns to scale imply that the price of each stage of

production equals its unit cost:
                                                       Pns = Gsn :                                                                 (13)

Using this result and the expression for the unit cost function (12), we can solve recursively for the
price of each stage of production as a function of the price of the previous stage of production:
                                                                                           1
                                                      Pns       1
                                                                           1           1       s
                                            Pns =        s                 s
                                                                                                       :                           (14)
                                                         n                 nn

Therefore the price of the …nal good in stage S can be written in terms of the price of the primary
input (Pn0 ) and the domestic trade share for each stage of production (                                                   s
                                                                                                                           nn ):

                                                       S                                           1
                                                       Y 1                         1        1              s
                                        PnS = Pn0                     s            s
                                                                                                               :
                                                       s=1            n            nn


The primary input is produced from labor according to the technology (6). Perfect competition and
constant returns to scale imply that price equals unit cost:

                                                      Pn0 = wn ='n :

Therefore welfare in country n can be written in terms of the domestic trade share for …nal goods
               S
production (   nn )   and a composite measure of productivity (Bn ):

                                                  wn                            S
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                S 1
                                        Wn =         = Bn                       nn                             ;                   (15)
                                                  Pn
                                                    S
                                                    Y               S
                                                                    Y1                                  1
                                                                s                  s
                                      B n = 'n                  n              (   nn )
                                                                                                       s 1             :
                                                  s=1               s=1

The welfare gains from trade are:
                                            WTn   BnT                     S;T
                                                                                            1
                                                                                           S 1
                                                =                         nn                               ;                       (16)
                                            WA
                                             n    BnA
                                                  S
                                                  Y1
                                            BnT                         s;T
                                                                                            1
                                                                                           s 1
                                                =                       nn                             ;
                                            BnA   s=1


                                                                    5
which takes the same form as (9) except that (16) features an endogenous change in measured domestic
productivity in …nal goods production because of the gains from trade at each intermediate stage of
production.

                                                  s
Proposition 1 The domestic trade shares {         nn }   and the trade elasticities {   s     1} for each stage of
production s 2 f1; : : : ; Sg are su¢ cient statistics for the welfare gains from trade.

Proof. The proposition follows from (16).



Proposition 2 The welfare gains from trade (WTn =WA
                                                  n ) become arbitrarily large as the number of

production stages becomes arbitrarily large (limS!1 WTn =WA
                                                          n = 1) or the domestic trade share in any

one individual stage of production r 2 f1; : : : ; Sg becomes arbitrarily small (lim        r !0
                                                                                            nn
                                                                                                   WTn =WA
                                                                                                         n = 1).


Proof. The proposition follows from (16).


   Trade has a fractal-like property in this model, in which there are gains from trade at each inter-
mediate stage of production. If one falsely assumes a single stage of production, when production is in
fact sequential, these gains from trade at each intermediate stage show up as an endogenous increase
in measured domestic productivity. As the number of production stages converges towards in…nity, the
welfare gains from trade become arbitrarily large. This captures the idea that trade involves myriad
changes in the organization of production throughout the economy and the welfare costs from forgoing
this pervasive specialization can be large.
   As the domestic trade share for an individual production stage becomes arbitrarily small, the welfare
gains from trade also become arbitrarily large. This captures the idea that some countries may have
strong comparative advantages in some stages of production and the welfare losses from forgoing this
specialization can be large. This result for sequential production has similarities and di¤erences with
Ossa (2012)’s result in a multi-sector model that the presence of sectors with low trade elasticities can
generate large aggregate welfare gains from trade. In contrast, our result holds even if all production
stages have the same trade elasticity, because each production stage has to be completed for the …nal
good to be produced.
   Our analysis of sequential production is also related to models of ‘roundabout’production, in which
intermediate inputs enter a Cobb-Douglas production technology through a single CES aggregate (e.g.
Krugman and Venables 1995 and Eaton and Kortum 2002). In ‘roundabout’production models, mea-
suring the welfare gains from trade simply involves controlling for aggregate information on the share
of intermediate inputs in production. In contrast, in our setting with sequential production, correctly

                                                         6
computing the welfare gains from trade requires disaggregated information on domestic trade shares
and trade elasticities for all stages of production.
    While for simplicity we develop these ideas in an Armington framework, the same analysis can be
undertaken in for example the Eaton and Kortum (2002) Ricardian model.


4     Conclusions

Substantial progress has been made in quantifying the welfare gains from trade using a class of theoret-

ical models consistent with the gravity equation. These models are rich enough to speak to …rst-order
features of the data, such as country-size and geography, and yet are parsimonious enough to permit
model-based counterfactuals. They typically generate relatively modest welfare gains from trade. In
this paper, we highlight a channel for trade to a¤ect welfare that has received relatively little attention
in this quantitative literature, namely endogenous changes in domestic productivity. Trade can induce
a reorganization of production that elevates domestic productivity. Incorporating such endogenous
changes in production organization into a model of sequential production, we show that the welfare
gains from trade can become arbitrarily large.


References

 [1] Antràs, Pol, and Davin Chor (2013) “Organizing the Global Value Chain,” Econometrica, 81(6),
     2127-2204.

 [2] Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare (2012) “New Trade Models, Same
     Old Gains,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94-130.

 [3] Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro (2012) “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare E¤ects of
     NAFTA,” NBER Working Paper, 18508.

 [4] Costinot, Arnaud and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare (2013) “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
     the Consequences of Globalization,”Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4, forthcoming.

 [5] Costinot, Arnaud, Jon Vogel and Su Wang (2013) “An Elementary Theory of Global Supply
     Chains,” Review of Economic Studies, 80, 109-144.

 [6] Eaton, Jonathan and Kortum, Samuel (2002) “Technology, Geography, and Trade,”Econometrica,
     70(5), 1741-1779.




                                                       7
 [7] Krugman, Paul and Anthony J. Venables (1995) “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 857-880.

 [8] Ossa, Ralph (2012) “Why Trade Matters After All,” NBER Working Paper, 18113.

 [9] Yi, Kei-Mu (2003) “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” Journal of
    Political Economy, 111(1), 52-102.

[10] Yi, Kei-Mu (2010) “Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?” American

    Economic Review, 100(1), 364-393.




                                                8
