NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY AND WHEREFORE OF INCREASED SCIENTIFIC COLLABORATION
Richard B. Freeman
Ina Ganguli
Raviv Murciano-Goroff
Working Paper 19819
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19819
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

We appreciate assistance with the survey from John Trumpbour and input from Jennifer Amadeo-Holl,
Paula Stephan and Andrew Wang. We received helpful comments from Adam Jaffe, Ben Jones, Manuel
Trajtenberg and participants at the NBER “The Changing Frontier: Rethinking Science and Innovation
Policy” Conferences. This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation's National
Nanotechnology Initiative, Award 0531146. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Richard B. Freeman, Ina Ganguli, and Raviv Murciano-Goroff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why and Wherefore of Increased Scientific Collaboration
Richard B. Freeman, Ina Ganguli, and Raviv Murciano-Goroff
NBER Working Paper No. 19819
January 2014, Revised September 2014
JEL No. J01,J2,J24,J4,J44,J61,J68,O31,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
This paper examines international and domestic collaborations using data from an original survey
of corresponding authors and Web of Science data of articles that had at least one US coauthor in
thefields of Particle and Field Physics, Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, and Biotechnology and
AppliedMicrobiology. The data allow us to investigate the connections among coauthors and the
views ofcorresponding authors about the collaboration. We have four main findings. First, we find
that UScollaborations have increased across US cities as well as across international borders, with
the natureof collaborations across cities resembling that across countries. Second, face-to-face
meetings areimportant in collaborations: most collaborators first met working in the same institution
and communicateoften through meetings with coauthors from distant locations. Third, the main
reason for most collaborationsis to combine the specialized knowledge and skills of coauthors, but
there are substantial differencesin the mode of collaborations between small lab-based science and
big science, where internationalcollaborations are more prevalent. Fourth, for biotech, we find that
citations to international papersare higher compared to papers with domestic collaborators only, but
not for the other two fields. Moreover,in all three fields, papers with the same number of coauthors
had lower citations if they were international collaborations. Overall, our findings suggest that all
collaborations are best viewed from a framework of collaborations across space broadly, rather than
in terms of international as opposed to domestic collaborative activity.
Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org
Ina Ganguli
SITE
Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavägen 65
PO Box 6501
SE-113 83 Stockholm
Sweden
ina_ganguli@hksphd.harvard.edu

Raviv Murciano-Goroff
Stanford University Economics Department
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
ravivmg@stanford.edu

Scientists increasingly collaborate on research with other scientists, producing an upward
trend in the numbers of authors on a paper (Jones, Wuchty and Uzzi, 2008; Wuchty, Jones and
Uzzi, 2007; Adams, Black, Clemmons, and Stephan, 2005). Papers with larger numbers of
authors garner more citations and are more likely to be published in journals with high impact
factors than papers with fewer authors (Lawani, 1986, Katz and Hicks, 1997; deB. Beaver, 2004,
Wuchty et al., 2007; Freeman and Huang, 2014), which seems to justify increased collaborations
in terms of scientific productivity. The trend in coauthorship extends across country lines, with a
larger proportion of papers coauthored by scientists from different countries (Indicators, 2012;
Adams, 2013). In the United States and other advanced economies, the proportion of papers
with international coauthors increased from the 1990s through the 2010s, while the proportion of
papers with domestic coauthors stabilized. In emerging economies, where collaboration has not
yet reached the proportions in the US and other advanced countries, the share of papers with
domestic collaborations and the share with international collaborations have both increased.
The spread of scientific workers and research and development activity around the world
(Freeman, 2010) has facilitated the increase in international collaborations. The growing number
of science and engineering PhDs in developing countries, some of whom are international
students and post-docs returning to their country of origins (Scellato, Franzoni, and Stephan,
2012) has expanded the supply of potential collaborators outside the North American and
Western European research centers. A rising trend in government and industry R&D spending in
developing countries and grant policies by the European Union and other countries favor
international cooperation. At the same time, the lower cost of travel and communication has
reduced the cost of collaborating with persons across geographic locales (Agrawal and Goldfarb,
2008; Catalini, Fons-Rosen and Gaulé, 2014). The increased presence of China in scientific
research, exemplified by China's move from a modest producer of scientific papers to number
two in scientific publications after the US, has been associated with huge increases in
collaborations between Chinese scientists and those in other countries.2
Finally, the location of scientific equipment and materials, such as CERN's Giant Hadron
Collider, huge telescopes in particular areas, or geological or climatological data available only
in special localities, have also increased collaborations. The US was not a prime funder for

2

Science and Engineering Indicators 2013, Appendix table 5-27 gives scientific papers for the top five countries in
2009: US 208,601; China 74,019; Japan 49,627; UK 45,649; and Germany 45,002.

2

CERN, but Americans are the largest group of scientists and engineers working at CERN. China
eschewed joining the CERN initiative as an associate member state, but many China-born
scientists and engineers work at CERN as members of research teams from other countries.
How successful are collaborations across country lines and across locations in the same
country? How do collaborators meet and develop successful research projects? What are the
main advantages and challenges in collaborative research?
To answer these questions, we combine data from a 2012 survey that we conducted of
corresponding authors on collaborations with at least one US coauthor with bibliometric data
from Web of Science (WoS) (Thomson Reuters, 2012) in three growing fields – Particle and
Field Physics, Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, and Biotechnology and Applied Microbiology.
The survey data allow us to investigate the connections among coauthors in collaborations and
the views of corresponding authors about collaborations. The WoS data allows us to examine
patterns of collaborations over time and to compare patterns found in our fields to those found in
scientific publications broadly. To determine whether borders or space are the primary factor that
affects the nature and impact of collaborations, we contrast collaborations across locations in the
US, collaborations in the same city in the US, and collaborations with international researchers.
We find that US collaborations increased across US cities as well as internationally and
that scientists involved in these collaborations and those who collaborate in the same locale
report broad similarities in their experiences. Most collaborators first met while working in the
same institution. Most say that face-to-face meetings are important in communicating with
coauthors across distances. And most say that specialized knowledge and skills of coauthors
drive their collaborations. We find that international collaborations have a statistically
significantly higher citation rate than domestic collaborations only in biotech, a modestly higher
citation rate in particle physics, but a lower rate in nanotech. Because international
collaborations have a greater numbers of authors than other collaborations, once we account for
the number of coauthors on papers, the higher citation rate for biotech and particle physics
international collaborations also disappear. Our results suggest that the benefits to international
collaboration in terms of citations depend on the scientific field in question, rather from any
“international magic” operating on collaborations with the same number of researchers. By
limiting our sample to papers with at least one US-based author, however, we exclude the

3

possibility that international collaborations greatly benefit researchers in countries with smaller
research communities by linking them to experts outside their country, US aside.

1. The Growing Trend of International Collaboration
We analyze data from corresponding authors and articles in which researchers collaborate
in Particle and Field Physics, Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, and Biotechnology and Applied
Microbiology. These three fields cover a wide span of scientific activity, with different research
tools and methodologies.
Particle physics has a theoretical part and an empirical part. Leading edge empirical
research requires massive investments in accelerators and colliders, of which the Large Hadron
Collider is the most striking. Europe's decision to fund the Hadron Collider while the US’s
rejection to build a large collider in Texas shifted the geographic locus of empirical research
from the US to Europe and arguably spurred the greater growth of string theory (which does not
need direct access to the Collider) in the US than in Europe. Particle physics is the most
mathematically and theoretically sophisticated of the sciences we study, where path-breaking
mathematical analysis guides empirical work, and where the massive equipment exemplifies big
science.
Nanotechnology is a general interdisciplinary applied technology, where engineers often
collaborate with material scientists. The electron microscope is a pivotal research tool. The US
made sizable investments in nanotechnology beginning at the turn of the 21st century, when
President Clinton called for greater investment in nano-related science and technology. This lead
to the 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act that President Bush signed
in 2003. Other countries undertook similar initiatives in the same period.
Biotechnology is lab-based, in which the NIH dominates basic research funding, but
where big pharma firms also fund considerable research. The most important change in biotech
research technology has been the US-sponsored Human Genome Project and associated new
methods of genetic analysis and engineering that allow labs around the world to modify the
biological underpinnings of living creatures to advance medicine and improve biological
products and processes.
To measure collaboration patterns in the three fields we use publication data from the
WoS. We identified all papers in the WoS database from 1990-2010 with at least one US

4

coauthor in journal subject categories Physics, Particles & Fields; Nanoscience &
Nanotechnology; and Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology. From these papers, we identify
teams by the names of coauthors and locate the authors by author affiliations. This sample
includes 125,808 papers.
Using the location of the authors on each paper, we define four types of collaborations:
US-Only Collaborations, divided into US collocated, in which all US authors are in the
same city; and US Non-collocated in which US coauthors are in at least two different cities.
International Collaborations, divided into International/US collocated in which US
coauthors are in the same city with at least one foreign coauthor; and International/US Noncollocated, in which US coauthors are in two or more cities with at least one foreign coauthor.
Distinguishing between these forms of collaborations allows us to identify differences
between papers with international collaborations and papers with collaborations in different
locations, be they in the US or overseas, as well as between papers with collaborations across
locations within the US. By focusing only on papers in which there is some US presence, our
analysis may not generalize to papers written in which all authors are based outside the US; and
by differentiating city location only for US coauthors, our findings do not address the potential
effects of collocation or non-collocation of non-US based researchers on paper outcomes.
Figure 1 displays the proportion of papers in our four categories and the proportion with
single authors in the three fields taken together in each year. The solid top line gives the share of
papers in which a US-based author collaborates solely with authors collocated in the same city.
It shows a marked decrease in collaborations between these persons from 1990 through 2000,
which then stabilizes at about 40% of papers. The line labeled Solo shows the proportion of
papers that are solo-authored. It drops from 20% to about 5% from 1990 to 2010. The line for
International/US Collocated papers gives the share of papers for which at least one of the authors
is in another country while all US authors are in the same city. It increases by 18 percentage
points from 1990 to 2010. The line for International/US Non-collocated increases by about 5
percentage points from 1990 to 2010. Most of the increase in international collaborations was
between US scientists based in one location and persons in another country. Overall, while
papers with authors in different US cities increased less international collaborations, the data
shows that increased geographic scope of collaborations involved more than crossing national
boundaries.

5

To see whether the trend in collaborations varied noticeably among fields, Figure 2
displays the proportion of papers by collaboration type for the three fields separately. The data
for particle physics in Figure 2a show the highest level of international collaborations, due
presumably to the importance of particle accelerators and other equipment that are available at
only some sites. Figure 2b and Figure 2c show that in nano and in biotech, the most common
form of collaborations are US collocated teams, while international/US collocated collaborations
are second most common and US non-collocated collaborations are third in frequency.
International collaborations were roughly as common as US non-collocated collaborations in
nano and biotech until the late 2000s, when international collaborations increased sharply. In all
fields, the proportion of papers by sole researchers and by researchers collaborating in the same
city falls.
The increase in international collaborations in our three fields resembles the patterns in
National Science Board (2012) and in Adams (2013) for science more broadly. Similarly, the
increased geographic dispersion of co-authorship in our fields reflects the pattern in science more
broadly in the US as well.

2. Survey of Corresponding Authors
To go beyond bibliometric data on collaborations, in August 2012 we conducted an online survey of the corresponding authors of papers published in 2004, 2007, and 2010 in the Web
of Science Nano, Biotech, and Particle Physics subject categories with at least one US coauthor.
We identified unique corresponding authors based on email addresses in these categories and
selected one paper for each author, randomly choosing the paper from authors who had more
than one paper in the database. Using the email address of the corresponding author, we sent a
personalized email in English that invited them to complete the survey by clicking a link that
connected them to the on-line survey instrument. If a paper had more than one corresponding
author, we selected the one that appeared first. We sent 2 follow-up email reminders in August
and September 2012. We used Qualtrics Survey Software and respondents accessed it from the
Qualtrics server.
We customized each survey to ask the respondent about the specific collaboration and
individual team members. The survey had 25 questions and was designed so that respondents
could complete it in 10-15 minutes. The questions sought to discover how the team formed, how

6

it communicated and interacted during the collaboration, the contribution of each coauthor, types
of research funding, and the advantages and disadvantages of working with the team. The survey
also included an open-ended question for respondents to make comments. Several respondents
sent emails with additional thoughts and information about the collaboration.
Between August 13, 2012 and August 20, 2012, we emailed a total of 19,836 individuals.
Since some email addresses had expired, changed, or some individuals were deceased, the
number of individuals who received the email is lower. We received 3,925 responses, which
implies a response rate of 20% – a proportion that is in line with other surveys of scientists
(Sauermann and Roach, 2013). For individuals who published their paper in the most recent
year of our survey (2010), the response rate was 26%. Taking account of the proportion of
emails that likely did not reach respondents, we estimate approximately 29% of recipients of
emails answered them.3
The survey asked the respondent which country each coauthor was “primarily based in
during the research and writing” of the article. This gives us a more accurate measure of
whether teams are international than the WoS data, which are based on author affiliations at the
time of publication, which can differ from those during the work either because affiliations
change between the time of the research and the time of publication, or because some people
have multi-country affiliations.
Table 1 compares the characteristics of collaborations in the papers we analyze to those
in the full sample of WoS papers and those in the 2004, 2007, and 2010 WoS sample from which
we drew the survey. Our final sample includes 3,452 respondents, which is lower in part than
the returned responses due to the fact that some papers with US-addresses on the publication did
not meet our requirement that at least one author be primarily based in the US at the time of the
research. Our analysis uses the respondents’ information to define US collocated, US noncollocated and international teams.4 The column giving the difference between the distribution of
our sample in column 3 and the distribution of the WoS sample in column 2 shows that our

3

Of those who received the email, 5,744 opened the survey, and 3,925 completed and submitted their answers.
While we are unable to precisely count how many emails reached active mailboxes, based on the number of emails
which "bounced" back from a sample of the messages sent, we estimate that approximately 32% of emails sent were
undeliverable. Given this estimate, we approximate a response rate of 29% from the deliverable messages.
4
Comparing the 34.01% in row “Int’l Collaboration Survey”, which is based on the respondent’s answers regarding
the location of coauthors, and the 36.35% in “Int’l Collaboration” in Table 1 shows that using only reported author
affiliations from publications overestimates the number of international teams by 2.35 percentage points.

7

survey sample is overrepresented by US collocated teams, the more recent publication year
(2010), and publications from biotechnology.

3. Collaborations over Distance
In what ways, if any, do papers with international collaborations differ from
collaborations that occur solely in the US?
As Katz and Hicks (1997), Rigby (2009) and Adams (2013) have found, international
collaborations tend to produce more highly cited papers than collaborations of persons in a single
country. Taking all of our fields together gives a similar pattern, where the US is the single
country to which we compare the international collaborations. We examined citations for
papers published in 1990-2007 – dates chosen to allow time for papers to gain substantial
numbers of citations. In this group US papers with foreign authors obtained 26.59 citations
compared to 25.65 citations in which collaborations were solely with fellow residents of the US.
Since US-authored papers average more citations than papers worldwide, it would have been
reasonable to expect the opposite: fewer citations for US-based scientists collaborating with
persons outside the country than for US-based scientists collaborating with other US scientists.
Does this mean that international collaborations per se produce better science as reflected
in numbers of citations?5
We answer this question by comparing citations for papers with international
collaborations and citations for papers with collaborations across locales in the US. If the
observed international effect is due to something special about international collaborations, the
average citations for international collaborations would exceed average citations for
collaborations among non-collocated authors in the US as well as exceed the average citations
for collocated authors in the US. Figure 3 shows the average number of citations for papers
published between 1990 (with 21 years of potential citations) and 2007 (with three years of
potential citations) for these three forms of collaboration. The number of citations varies over
time, from approximately 30 for the older papers to 3-4 citations for the newer papers. In almost
all years, papers with international collaborators and papers with non-collocated US
5

Citations measure the attention given to a paper, which is an imperfect measure of its scientific contribution since
citation behavior can be driven by factors besides its contribution to knowledge (see e.g. Simkin and
Roychowdhury, 2003). But it is still a sufficiently valuable indicator of the impact of a paper and is the most widely
used measure in the science of science.

8

collaborators have more citations than those published by collaborators in the same US city. But
there is no clear pattern of differences in citations for papers coauthored by people in different
US cities than for papers coauthored by people in the US and in a foreign location. Among
papers published between 1998 and 2007, US non-collocated collaborations obtain more
citations than international papers, but among papers published between 1990 and 1997, there is
no clear difference. That cites per year between US non-collocated papers and international
collaborations are reasonably similar and that both are notably larger than cites to US collocated
papers suggests that the greater cites of international collaborations reflects multiple locations
more than having authors across national borders.
We pursue the comparison of citations across types of collaborations for each of our three
fields separately. The style of research in the fields differs greatly between particle physics,
where empirical work often involves huge collaborations around particular pieces of equipment,
and the smaller collaborations of nanotechnology and biotechnology research. This difference
shows itself in the much higher average number of authors per paper in physics than in the other
two fields (see Appendix Table A1). The difference is concentrated in the upper tail of the
distribution of authors per paper. In particle physics, the upper 95th percentile of the number of
authors per paper have 100 authors, while those in the 99th percentile have 523 authors – which
far exceed the upper percentile numbers for authors in nano and biotech.
Reflecting the “big science” nature of some of the physics projects, the corresponding
author on a physics paper with over 450 coauthors noted in our survey:
This research was carried out as part of a very large collaboration in which every
member gets authorship and this is listed in alphabetical order on our papers. The
collaboration consists of scientists and engineers with a wide range of expertise - many
primarily involved in designing, building and running instrumentation, and many
analyzing data for various kinds of signal. This particular research was primarily carried
out by myself, and the majority of the listed coauthors (including three of the selected
authors in this survey) had no direct involvement in its preparation other than through
collaboration membership.
We next use regression analysis to examine the relation between the modes of
collaboration and the number of researchers listed as authors and the number of references in a
paper, both of which tend to be positively related to citations. To the extent that the references

9

influence the paper by providing information and ideas from other scientists they can be viewed
as indicators of “invisible coauthors”, self-citations aside.
Table 2 records the regression coefficients and standard errors for regressions of numbers
of coauthors and references on the type of collaboration and a year trend for each field. While
there is a broad similarity in the estimated effect of the collaborations on the number of coauthors and references across the fields, there are also differences that presumably reflect
differences in their research technologies. In all of the fields, the regression of number of coauthors on the dummy variable for whether or not the paper had an international co-author gives
a positive coefficient on the dummy variable. But the magnitudes of the coefficients differ
greatly. The estimated coefficient on international collaborations in particle physics in column 1
(43.8) shows that the number of authors on papers is much higher for those than for the US
collaboration reference group; whereas the estimated coefficients for the relation between
international collaborations and co-authors in nanotech and biotech are magnitudes smaller: 1.3
more authors on international papers than papers written by authors solely in the US for nano
(column 2) and 2.2 more authors on international papers than US-only papers for biotech
(column 3). The more detailed measures of collaborations in columns 4, 5, and 6 show that this
difference is largely driven by international collaborations in which the US scientists doing
particle physics are from many locations as well. This reflects the big science nature of empirical
particle physics, where huge numbers of collaborators work together with massive instruments
and machines compared to the smaller lab science of nano and biotech.
The regressions in columns 7-9 show greater differences among the fields in the number
of references on international papers relative to US non-collocated papers, and differences
among the fields in the relation between numbers of co-authors and numbers of references. In
particle physics, numbers of references for papers with international collaborations exceed those
for US non-collocated papers, which in turn exceed both those for US collocated international
papers and those US collocated (column 7). In biotech, numbers of references for papers with
international collaborations and non-collocated US collaborations exceed those for US noncollocated papers, which in turn exceed those for US collocated papers (column 9). A potential
explanation is that persons in a given location are more likely to cite papers written in their
location, so that the greater the number of locations, the greater the number of references. But
the regression for number of references in the nano papers shows a different relation between

10

references and collaborations (column 8). Finally, the estimated coefficients on the number of
authors also shows no consistent pattern among the fields: negligible effects for particle physics
(potentially because the number of authors can be extremely high), slight negative effects in
nano, but substantial positive effects in biotech (column 9).
All told, Table 2 shows that simple comparisons of papers with international and national
collaborations can present a misleading picture about the science involved in various types of
collaborations. The collaborations can involve huge differences in the numbers of coauthors and
differing relations to the numbers of references. Given these results, we examine the relation
between the citations to a paper and the form of collaboration separately for each filed using a
regression that includes the number of coauthors and the number of references in the paper. To
deal with the life cycle of citations in which the number of citations increases sharply in the first
5 to 7 years after publication and then grows more slowly we include dummy variables for the
year the paper was published as well.
Tables 3a – 3c gives the results of this analysis. Column 1 of each of the tables estimates
the difference in citations between international papers and US only collaborations. The
estimates show a disparate pattern across the fields: an insignificant positive relation between
international collaborations and citations for particle physics; a negative relation in nano; and a
positive relation in biotech. Column 2 of each table adds the number of coauthors to the
regression. In each of the fields, the addition of numbers of authors reduces the coefficient on
international collaborations. In biotech it turns the coefficient from positive to negative.6 With
the addition of numbers of references in column 3, the estimated relation of international
collaborations to citations is significantly negative in all three fields. The disaggregation of
types of collaborations in columns 4 in tables 3a-3c shows sufficiently weak and different
patterns across the fields to suggest that there is nothing universal in the link between
international collaborations and ensuing citations to papers.
All told, the regression analysis in Tables 2 and 3 document the changing patterns of
cooperation across locations in the three fields and their disparate relation with citations. While
invaluable as descriptions about collaborations, such bibliometric analysis cannot, however,
6

To see if this is a more general pattern, we ran similar regressions for other scientific fields in the WoS and find
variation across fields in the difference between citation rates for international collaborations and domestic
collaborations; the addition of the number of coauthors to citation regressions reduces the coefficient on
international collaborations in almost all fields.

11

provide insight into the ways collaborating scientists work together to conduct the research that
leads to published papers. To gain insight into what goes on in collaborations, we turn to the
survey of corresponding authors described in Section 1.

4. Survey Evidence
“I think the best example of collaboration I have done is…where all the authors are from
different countries and we met at the Bellagio Conference Center of the Rockefeller
Foundation.”
“I think that it is absolutely indispensable to meet people in person to have effective
collaborations.”
“Skype was not available…at the time we completed this work. We now use Skype or ITV
connection to meet and discuss data with collaborators on a weekly basis.”
“The international collaboration worked so well because of my frequent trips to Brazil
during the project.”7
For scientists to collaborate, they must meet and decide to work together, communicate
during the collaboration, and combine their knowledge and skills to create sufficient new
knowledge to generate a publishable paper.

Meeting and Communicating
We asked corresponding authors to answer the following question about their coauthors:
“How did you FIRST come in contact with each of these coauthors?” For papers with up to six
authors, we asked about each coauthor. For papers with more than six we asked about the first
and the last authors if they were not the corresponding author and about randomly selected
authors from the list of coauthors to obtain information on a maximum of six collaborators.
Figure 4 displays the proportion of persons of each collaboration type who the
corresponding author first met as advisor-student/post-doc; colleagues in the same
department/institution; through contact without an introduction; at a conference, seminar or other
meeting; of by visiting the department/institution. The figure shows that for all forms of
collaboration, most first meetings occurred when the corresponding author and the other person
7

The four quotes are based on comments from the open-ended section of our survey.

12

worked in the same institution. For papers written in the same location, the predominant contact
was through advisor-student or post-doc relationships but that over one third of the meetings
came about as colleagues. For papers with authors from other US locations or foreign locations,
the corresponding author met them through working in the same place, primarily as a colleague,
but with nearly ten to sixteen percent meeting the person as a visitor. Conferences also
accounted for a substantial proportion of the first meetings between corresponding authors on
papers written with persons in other US locations or in foreign locations.8 Overall, Figure 4
shows broad similarity in the mode of meeting between non-collocated US authors and in the
mode of meeting between US and foreign-located authors compared to the mode of meeting for
coauthors in US collocated collaborations.
We asked corresponding authors the frequency with which they communicated with one
or more of their coauthors from “every week” to “never”. Because collaborations that include
persons in the same locale and persons in other locales as the corresponding author allow the
corresponding author to meet face-to-face easily with some coauthors but only infrequently with
coauthors in other locations, the question does not pin down differences associated with distance.
To overcome this problem, we show in Figure 5 modes of communication between coauthors on
two-authored papers, which differentiate properly communication between collocated, noncollocated US, and foreign coauthors.
The results show that the corresponding author relies extensively on face-to-face
meetings when all authors are in the same location. But Figure 5 also shows that while face-toface meetings are much lower for authors across distances, such meetings are still frequent.
Among the 2-author papers, just over 50% of corresponding authors on international teams
report meeting face-to-face at least a few times per year, while 64% of those on US noncollocated papers reported face-to-face meetings at least a few times a year. By contrast, the
figure shows no noticeable differences in using e-mail by distance. Corresponding authors in all
forms of collaborations use e-mail frequently to communicate with their collaborators,
approximately 40 weeks during the year. There are substantial differences in use of telephone
vs. Internet (e.g. Skype) between US-based teams and international teams that are readily
explained by the differential in cost of international and within US telephone calls.
8

The time series data in Appendix Figure A1 and A2 show that conferences have become a less important way to
meet future coauthors, while students/postdocs have become more important, possibly due to their increased
importance in the scientific production process.

13

Our survey findings that face-to-face meetings are important in both the initiation of
research collaborations and the working of distant collaborations are consistent with evidence on
the role of co-location in the formation of research collaborations (such as Boudreau et al. 2012)
and the need for periodic co-location to maintain the effectiveness of distant collaborations even
with advances in long-distance communication technologies (see e.g. Olson and Olson, 2000;
Olson and Olson, 2003; Cummings and Kiesler 2005).

What Coauthors Bring to Collaboration
To understand what factors helped produce the collaborations, we asked the
corresponding author to specify the unique contribution of each team member. Our question was
“Did any of the team members working on this article (including yourself) have access to one of
the following resources that the other team members did NOT have which made it important for
you to all work together on this topic?” The possible choices were: access to data, material or
components; data, material or components protected by intellectual property; a critical
instrument, facility or infrastructure; funding; or unique knowledge, expertise or capabilities.
Figure 6 shows that the major factor cited for all collaborations was “unique knowledge,
expertise, capabilities”. That access to specialized human capital seems to drive collaborations,
whether US or international, implies that a theory of collaboration should focus on the
complementarity of skills and knowledge of collaborators just as the theory of trade focuses on
comparative advantage in creating trade among countries. But there are differences in the
importance of other factors across forms of collaboration. Non-collocated and international
teams were more likely to have a coauthor contributing data, material or components than US
collocated teams– a pattern that has increased over time (see Appendix Figure A3).
While most corresponding authors reported the contribution and role of their coauthors,
those on huge collaborations told a different story. As one respondent remarked, “Many of the
questions are hard to translate to the field of experimental particle physics, where an
international collaboration of hundreds of scientists work on the same project with funding from
many countries. I can only guess, where the funding from each of the ~300 coauthors comes
from, many of whom I have not even met. The published research is primarily the work of a
single person (myself), but would not have been possible without having access to custom
software and data provided by the collaboration."

14

Finally, taking advantage of the unique identification of authors in two-authored papers,
we compare the specific contributions of foreign-located coauthors and domestic coauthors on
those papers. US and foreign coauthors were equally likely to contribute “unique knowledge,
expertise, or capabilities” and “data, material or components protected by intellectual property”.
Foreign coauthors are slightly more likely to contribute access to “data, material or components”
or “a critical instrument, facility or infrastructure” while the US coauthor was slightly more
likely to contribute funding.

Advantages and Challenges
To assess the effects of the different forms of collaboration on the production and output
of scientific activity, we use our survey, where we asked the corresponding authors their views
of the advantages and challenges on their collaboration, and the bibliometric data, where we
estimated a regression model linking the number of citations to a paper to the attributes of the
collaboration reported on the survey.
Table 4 summarizes the responses of corresponding authors on the advantages and
challenges of the collaborations. It records the average score on a five-point scale of agreement
(5) or disagreement (1) with statements regarding the attributes of the collaboration. The
corresponding authors agreed that their collaboration had substantial advantages in harnessing
human capital to produce a scientific outcome. “Complementing our knowledge, expertise and
capabilities” and “learning from each other” are the only items with average scores greater than 4
in the table. The next highest score was that collaborations made the research experience more
pleasant. There is little variation here in the responses between US non-collocated and
international teams. Corresponding authors on the both of those collaborations gave modestly
higher scores to the knowledge advantages than the collocated teams. Similarly, all three groups
ranked highly “Gaining access to data, material or components”, with the highest assessment
coming from the corresponding authors of US non-collocated teams.
The corresponding authors of international teams gave higher scores to the advantage of
“Our research reached a wider audience” than did the corresponding authors of US-noncollocated teams who in turn gave higher scores than the corresponding authors of US collocated
only teams. Viewing “wider audience” in terms of the geographic distribution of citations, this

15

suggests that the wider geographic distribution of authors, the wider is the distribution of
citations, possibly even among papers with the same numbers of citations.
Regarding the challenges of collaborations, US non-collocated and international teams
reported similarly that there was “Insufficient time for communication”, “Problems coordinating
with team members’ schedules”, and “Insufficient time to use a critical instrument, facility or
infrastructure” than did US co-located teams. As in the bibliometric analysis in section three,
geographic location appears to be more than national boundaries in the way teams operated.
We also asked whether the corresponding authors viewed teams as having the optimal
size. The responses, given in Appendix Table A2, show that most corresponding authors viewed
their team as having the right size. Presumably the principal investigator(s) would have
modified the team if they did not think that was the case. But there are some differences by
collaboration type. US collocated teams were more likely to say that they needed additional
collaborator (7.58% vs. 3.48% and 3.38% for US non-collocated and international); whereas
international teams were more likely to say that fewer team members were needed (6.67% vs.
3.37% for US collocated). Reflecting the role of government policies, twenty four percent of the
international teams received funding aimed at supporting cross-country collaboration, with
6.65% receiving US government funding, 4.64% receiving EU funding, and the remainder from
other government sources.
As our second way to assess how the attributes of collaborations affect outcomes we
added the corresponding authors' descriptions of the collaboration to the Table 3 regressions of
the number of citations on attributes of papers. Because publication of the paper preceded the
survey, some of the corresponding author views of the collaboration will presumably have been
affected by the success of the paper, which would give a distorted view of the link from
collaboration to outcome. To deal with this problem, we limit analysis to the survey responses
that seem least prone to be affected by the outcome – relatively objective questions about the
way corresponding authors met coauthors, what coauthors contributed, and funding support.
Table 5 gives the results of this analysis. Columns 1 and 2 replicate the regression
estimates in Table 3 for the dichotomous international collaboration variable. The results in
Table 5 show some differences in the regression coefficients from that found in the larger WoS
sample. The positive coefficient on international collaborations in column 1 in Table 5 is larger
than the coefficient in the comparable regression using the larger WoS sample papers in our 3

16

fields. The coefficients on the number of coauthors and number of references variables are
positive and significant in column 2 of Table 5 but the coefficient on coauthors is larger than that
of references, contrary to the result in the larger WoS sample. Subject to these differences,
which suggest some modest differences between the papers of respondents to the survey and the
population of papers, the estimated coefficients on the survey variables in columns 3, 4 and 5 tell
a clear story. They show that papers in which at least one coauthor met at a conference had
higher citations; that papers for which a coauthor contributed funding had lower citations, and
that papers that got funding specifically for cross-country collaborations had lower citations.9
The natural interpretation of these patterns is that collaborations based on ideas or relations
developed at conferences produce more cited and potentially better science than collaborations
based on funding.

5. Toward an Economics of Scientific Collaborations
Scientific collaborations have become increasingly important in scientific research, but
the nature of collaborations, their determinants, effects on scientific outcomes, and the incentives
that drive scientists to collaborate or not, and with whom to collaborate, is not well understood.
From the perspective of economics, collaborations occur because they enhance scientific
productivity, but collaborations have costs as well as benefits – the costs of communicating ideas
and coordinating disagreements among collaborators and the expenses of getting them together
in one place or linking them with unique data and equipment. But arguably the biggest problem
collaborations must solve in order to succeed is to find ways to divide the credit for enhanced
productivity among persons, so that each collaborator prefers working in the team rather than by
themselves, where they gain full credit for research outcomes.
This study has linked a unique survey of corresponding authors in particle physics,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology with bibliometric data from the same fields to identify some
of the key empirical relations in the growth of collaborations from the 1990s to 2010. The
bibliometric data shows that the share of papers with a US address written by collaborators in
different locations increased in the period studied and that the largest increase occurred across

9

We also estimated the model including dummies for whether the corresponding author didn't view the team size as
optimal, and an average of the scores assessing the advantages and disadvantages to the collaboration, but found no
effect of these measures on citations.

17

country lines, followed by collaborations in different locations in the US. Commensurately, the
share of papers written by single scientists or by groups of scientists in single locations declined.
The survey of corresponding authors shows similarities in the way collaborators first
meet and later communicate and work together among different types of collaborations, save for
very large physics projects. The bibliometric data shows that the number of collaborators on a
paper is positively associated with the numbers of citations to the paper, but the data is mixed on
whether international collaborations are more productive in terms of citations than domestic
collaborations. In biotech, international collaborations obtain more citations than domestic
collaborations; in nanotech they obtain fewer citations; while particle physics shows no
significant differences between international and domestic collaborations. In all three fields,
papers with the same number of coauthors had lower citations if they were international
collaborations, which suggests that a main advantage of international collaborations for US
authors is that they allow researchers to increase the number of collaborators more easily than if
the supply of potential coauthors was limited to US-based scientists.
The data are thus consistent with the notion that collaborative work has greater
productivity or impact as reflected in citations, but do not give a clear message about whether the
fastest growing form of collaborations – that across country lines – has any productivity edge
over collaborations across space within the US. The most likely reason for the rapid growth of
international collaborations is the more rapid growth of science and engineering PhDs and
researchers in other countries than in the US, which creates a large supply of potential
collaborators overseas.
Wherein does the productivity advantage of collaborations lie? Viewing science as an
aggregate process for producing new knowledge, the most plausible answer is that the
knowledge base has become increasingly complex and specialized (Jones, 2011), and thus
scientific advances require increased numbers of researchers combining their skills and expertise.
Consistent with this, our survey of corresponding authors shows that access to specialized human
capital is the main driver of collaborations. The growing number of references within papers
suggests that each forward step in science builds on a large base of previous knowledge. And the
positive link between numbers of references and citations suggests that the greater the
knowledge that goes into a paper, the greater the scientific contribution of the paper – at least to
the extent that these measures are a valid “paper trail” of flows of knowledge. All of which is

18

consistent with the view that the productivity advantage from collaborations depends on the
combination of ideas/knowledge from persons with different expertise,10 though it does not
prove the validity of this interpretation.
But, as noted, collaborations have costs as well as benefits, and decisions to collaborate
involve balancing the benefits against the costs. On one side are problems of coordinating the
ideas of persons with different expertise or viewpoints or who are in different locations, and the
expenses and difficulty of getting collaborators together or linking them with data and key pieces
of machinery. Our survey finding that researchers meet most collaborators through personal
connections made at their institution or, to a lesser extent, at conferences, suggests that there is
some role of chance in creating collaborations. Most important, the survey finding that
corresponding authors view face-to-face meetings as critical in their collaborations, and hold
them relatively often, suggests that the improvements in communication and reductions in their
cost do not fully substitute for human interactions in collaborations.
To an individual researcher, the biggest issue in collaboration is getting credit for a joint
production. In a one-author paper, the one takes credit or blame. In a two-author paper, many
fields adhere to the convention that the senior person’s name comes last and the junior person
comes first, which potentially gives substantial credit to each. Freeman and Huang (2014) find
that the impact factor of the placement of the paper and citations received depend more on the
characteristics of the last named, typically senior, author rather than of the first named author.
The senior person thus appears to play a greater role in gaining attention to the research, which
can help the junior author as long as other scientists view the first author as more than a pair of
hands in the lab. In papers with more than two authors, the decision on who is the first author
and the placement of the non-first or non-last authors can create disputes. On papers having
huge numbers of names where tasks are highly specialized, the credit to a given author is
presumably related to their specialty, much like the credits that give the names of specialists in a
movie production. Only people who know how the research (movie production) proceeded and
what the particular person's function was would understand how to evaluate their contribution in
the author (credit) list.

10

Weitzman's (1998) model of the growth of useful knowledge from combining the growing supply of past ideas
and knowledge in new ways offers a way to structure such a model.

19

From the perspective of economic rationality, the decision of scientists to collaborate
depends on both the productivity of the collaboration and the distribution of credit. To get some
notion of the interplay of the factors, consider the situation in which a scientist compares the
value of collaborating on a paper with one or more other scientists to writing a paper by
themselves. On the productivity/citation side, assume that a paper with N collaborators gains
proportionately more citations (C) than a solo-authored paper according to a linear productivity
parameter p >1 that links citations to numbers of authors by C= pN. If a single authored paper
gets p citations, then this function gives two authored papers 2p citations, a paper with three
authors 3p citations, and so on.
But whereas each author gets full credit for an individual paper, they get only partial
credit for joint work. Assume that the science community allocates credit for joint work with a
citation crediting function γ(n) that has the value 1 for γ(1) and in which the derivative γ'(n) < 0
so that γ(1)=1 > γ(2) > γ(3) and so on. The only restriction on the citation crediting function is
that each author gets less credit the larger the collaboration. Someone seeking to maximize the
number of citations credited to them would collaborate only if p γ ≥ 1 – that is, if the gain in
productivity from the collaboration exceeds the loss of credit associated with γ. If the crediting
function was based on simple fractionalization of credit, so that each author in a two authored
paper would be credited with 1/2 of the paper and thus 1/2 of the cites, p would have to exceed 2
for the two-authored paper to be worthwhile. Similarly, p would have to exceed n for an n-sized
collaboration to be attractive. But estimates of the extent to which citations increase with
number of authors falls far short of such proportionality. Depending on field and specification,
our Table 3 estimates showed that additional authors raises citations by at most 1-2 citations per
additional author. In this case, if a solo-authored paper gained 10 citations, here would be little
incentive to write a joint paper that gained 12 citations for which each author obtained credit for
just 6 citations.
Why then have collaborations increased so much in the sciences?
One possibility is that scientists who collaborate with others are able to write so many
more papers through division of labor than by themselves that the increased number of papers
offsets the lower credit set by the crediting function. For most scientists, this seems unlikely.
The average number of collaborators in science articles has roughly doubled in the past 4-5
decades, while the number of papers written per researcher has not shown any such doubling.

20

Most of the increase in papers over time has been associated with increased numbers of
researchers rather than increased papers per researcher.
The other possibility, which we view as the likely solution to the question, is that the
crediting function diverges greatly from fractionalization. Fractionalization imposes the
constraint that the sum of credits to all authors is one, but there is no law that rules out allocating
credit differently. The first author of a highly successful paper gains lots of credit for their
contribution. The last author can also gain lots of credit for the different contribution they made.
The authors in the middle of the author list presumably gain some credit, but less than the other
two authors. The purpose of the crediting is to propel the careers of persons who are part of a
successful team activity. Thus, we would expect first and last authors to benefit most from a
successful collaboration in their future careers, and for intermediate authors to benefit
proportionate to their role on the research, subject to the imperfections in markets and market
information. While we cannot test this interpretation with our data, it is testable with information
on the future careers of persons who work on papers with different numbers of collaborators. Our
prediction would be that two coauthors of a well-cited paper would gain more in their careers
from the joint paper than if each had written a solo paper with half as many citations.
Finally, to the extent that the interplay between the productivity of working with other
scientists and the distribution of credit affect collaboration decisions as hypothesized above, we
would expect to find at most modest differences between the nature and effects of collaborations
across national borders as within the US, as our survey and WoS data analysis seem to show.

21

References
Adams, J. (2013). “Collaborations: The Fourth Age of Research.” Nature, 497(7451), 557-560.
Adams, J. D., Black, G. C., Clemmons, J. R., & Stephan, P. E. (2005). “Scientific Teams And
Institutional Collaborations: Evidence From US Universities, 1981–1999.” Research Policy,
34(3), 259-285.
Agrawal, A., A. Goldfarb. (2008). “Restructuring Research: Communication Costs and the
Democratization of University Innovation.” American Economic Review 98(4):1578–1590.
Barrantes Bárbara S. Lancho, Vicente P. Guerrero Bote, Zaida Chinchilla Rodríguez, Félix de
Moya Anegón (2012). “Citation Flows in the Zones of Influence of Scientific Collaborations”
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, Volume 63, Issue
3, pages 481–489, March 2012.
Boudreau, K., Brady, T., Ganguli, I., Gaule, P., Guinan, E. C., Hollenberg, H. & Lakhani, K. R.
(2014). “A Field Experiment on the Formation of Scientific Collaborations,” Harvard University
mimeo.
Catalini, C., Fons-Rosen, C., Gaule, P. (2014). “Air Travel Costs and Scientific Collaborations.”
Mimeo. MIT Sloan School of Management.
Cummings, J. N., & Kiesler, S. (2005). “Collaborative Research Across Disciplinary and
Organizational Boundaries.” Social Studies of Science, 35(5), 703-722.
deB. Beaver, Donald (2004). “Does Collaborative Research Have Greater Epistemic Authority?”
Scientometrics, 60(3), 399-408.
Freeman, Richard B. (2010). “Globalization of Scientific And Engineering Talent: International
Mobility of Students, Workers, and Ideas and The World Economy.” Economics Of Innovation
And New Technology, Volume 19, issue 5, 201 pp. 393-406.
Freeman, R.B. and Huang, W. (2014). “Collaborating With People Like Me: Ethnic Coauthorship within the US.” NBER WP 19905
Guerrero Bote, Vicente P. Carlos Olmeda-Gómez Félix de Moya-Anegón (2013). “Quantifying
the Benefits of International Scientific Collaboration,” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, Volume 64, Issue 2, pages 392–404, February 2013.
Hsu, J.W., & Huang, D.W. (2011). “Correlation Between Impact and Collaboration.”
Scientometrics, 86(2), 317–324.
Jones, B. F., Wuchty, S., & Uzzi, B. (2008). “Multi-University Research Teams: Shifting Impact,
Geography, And Stratification In Science.” Science, 322(5905), 1259-1262.

22

Jones, Benjamin F. (2011). "As science evolves, how can science policy?" Innovation Policy and
the Economy, Volume 11. University of Chicago Press, 2011. 103-131.
Katz, J.S. And D.Hicks (1997). “How Much Is a Collaboration Worth? A Calibrated
Bibliometric Model,” Scientometrics, 40:3, 541-554.
Lawani, S. M. (1986). “Some Bibliometric Correlates Of Quality In Scientific Research,”
Scientometrics, 9:1-1 13-25.
Lee K, Brownstein JS, Mills RG, Kohane IS (2010). “Does Collocation Inform the Impact of
Collaboration?” PLoS ONE 5(12): e14279. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014279
National Science Board (2012). Science and Engineering Indicators, 2012.
Olson, G., & Olson, J. (2003). “Mitigating the Effects of Distance on Collaborative Intellectual
Work.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 12(1), 27-42.
Olson, G. M., & Olson, J. S. (2000). “Distance Matters”. Human-Computer Interaction, 15(2),
139-178.
Rigby, John (2009). “Comparing the Scientific Quality Achieved By Funding Instruments For
Single Grant Holders And For Collaborative Networks Within A Research System: Some
Observations,” Scientometrics 78:1, 145-164.
Sauermann, H., & Roach, M. (2013). “Increasing Web Survey Response Rates In Innovation
Research: An Experimental Study Of Static And Dynamic Contact Design Features.” Research
Policy, 42(1), 273-286.
Scellato, G., Franzoni, C., & Stephan, P. (2012). “Mobile Scientists and International Networks,”
NBER Working Paper 18613.
Simkin, M. V., & Roychowdhury, V. P. (2003). “Read Before You Cite!” Complex Systems, 14,
269-274.
Thomson Reuters (2012). Web of Science ®, prepared by THOMSON REUTERS ®, Inc.
(Thomson®), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: © Copyright THOMSON REUTERS ® 2012.
All rights reserved.
Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). “The Increasing Dominance Of Teams In
Production Of Knowledge.” Science, 316(5827), 1036-1039.

23

TABLES
Table 1. Distribution of papers by characteristics, Web of Science Papers and Survey
Respondents
(1)
(2)
(3)
(3)-(2)
Papers, Papers in 2004,
Survey Sample,
Difference
1990-2010 2007, 2010
Papers in 2004, 2007,
2010
Collaboration Type
US Collaboration Only
US Collocated
US Non-Collocated
Int’l Collaboration
Int'l/US Collocated
Int'l/US Non-Coll.
Int’l Collaboration Survey
Year
2004
2007
2010
Field
Particle Physics
Nano
Biotechnology
N

66.29
44.81
21.47
33.71
24.04
9.68

63.65
41.56
22.09
36.35
26.04
10.31

62.25
46.84
15.41
37.75
26.94
10.81
34.01

-1.4
5.28
-6.68
1.4
0.9
0.5

6.08
8.05
9.83

25.38
33.61
41.01

18.42
29.46
52.11

-6.96
-4.15
11.1

25.19
23.82
50.99
125,808

21.75
32.85
45.40
30,141

19.55
30.5
49.94
3,452

-2.2
-2.35
4.54

Notes: (1) includes all papers in the Web of Science with more than 1 author, at least one US coauthor,
and with journal subject categories of Physics, Particles & Fields; Nanoscience & Nanotechnology; and
Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology, published from 1990-2010. (2) includes those papers in 2004,
2007, and 2010. (3) includes the respondents to our survey, which was a sample based on unique
corresponding authors appearing in (2) that had more than 1 author.

24

Table 2: Estimated Relation Between Number of Coauthors and Number of References on Papers by Nature of Collaboration,
By Field
Coauthors
Coauthors
References
Particle
Nano
Biotech
Particle
Nano
Biotech
Particle
Nano
Biotech
Physics
Physics
Physics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
US Collaboration Only
US Collocated
1.450**
1.688**
3.453**
-0.879**
0.727**
US Non-Collocated
2.654**
(0.150)
(0.033)
(0.029)
(0.377)
(0.232)
(0.179)
Int'l Collaboration
43.776**
1.331**
2.168**
(0.924)
(0.032)
(0.040)
1.458**
1.973**
4.737**
-0.963**
0.275
Int'l/US Collocated
12.017**
(0.641)
(0.033)
(0.032)
(0.313)
(0.272)
(0.189)
Int'l/US Non-Collocated
99.983**
3.075**
5.015**
4.590**
0.168
3.131**
(2.091)
(0.073)
(0.126)
(0.400)
(0.400)
(0.359)
No. Coauthors
0.001
-0.060
0.435**
(0.001)
(0.042)
(0.031)
0.039**
0.078**
-0.183*
0.038**
0.064**
0.796**
1.491**
0.535**
Year Trend
-0.214*
(0.094)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.090)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.013)
Constant
433.018* -73.670** -151.290** 368.918*
-71.578** -125.213** -1.6e+03** -3.0e+03** -1.0e+03**
(188.702)
(6.828)
(4.713)
(179.207)
(6.581)
(4.484)
(47.520)
(48.749)
(26.100)
R2
0.055
0.068
0.091
0.170
0.144
0.159
0.046
0.116
0.044
Nb. of Obs.
31,690
30,761
64,153
31,690
30,761
64,153
31,690
30,761
64,153
Notes: + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, OLS estimation. Includes all papers in the Web of Science with more than 1 author, at least one US
coauthor, and with journal subject categories of Physics, Particles & Fields; Nanoscience & Nanotechnology; and Biotechnology & Applied
Microbiology, published from 1990-2010.

25

Table 3a: The Estimated Relation Between Number of Citations to a Paper and the Type of
Collaboration That Produced the Paper, Particle Physics
(1)

(2)

(3)

US Collaboration Only
US Collocated
US Non-Collocated
Int'l Collaboration

0.718
(0.469)

0.096
(0.452)

-1.212**
(0.464)

0.014**
(0.003)

0.014**
(0.002)
0.398**
(0.017)
15.404**
(1.894)
Yes
0.072
31,690

Int'l/US Collocated
Int'l/US Non-Collocated
No. Coauthors
No. References
Constant
Year FE
R2
Nb. of Obs.

24.030**
(1.953)
Yes
0.030
31,690

24.031**
(1.945)
Yes
0.031
31,690

(4)
1.664*
(0.691)
-1.418**
(0.532)
1.402
(0.856)
0.010**
(0.002)
0.396**
(0.017)
14.817**
(1.901)
Yes
0.073
31,690

Notes: + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, OLS estimation. Sample is all papers in the Web of Science
with more than 1 author, at least one US coauthor, and with a journal subject category of Physics,
Particles & Fields, published from 1990-2010.

26

Table 3b: The Estimated Relation Between Number of Citations to a Paper and the Type of
Collaboration That Produced the Paper, Nanotechnology
(1)

(2)

(3)

US Collaboration Only
US Collocated
US Non-Collocated
Int'l Collaboration

-2.300**
(0.358)

-3.732**
(0.388)

-3.637**
(0.387)

1.074**
(0.083)

1.110**
(0.080)
0.295**
(0.068)
14.660**
(4.805)
Yes
0.068
30,761

Int'l/US Collocated
Int'l/US Non-Collocated
No. Coauthors
No. References
Constant
Year FE
R2
Nb. of Obs.

26.252**
(4.749)
Yes
0.039
30,761

21.712**
(4.683)
Yes
0.045
30,761

(4)
-3.971**
(0.423)
-4.849**
(0.470)
-6.305**
(0.621)
1.294**
(0.085)
0.293**
(0.068)
14.747**
(4.819)
Yes
0.070
30,761

Notes: + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, OLS estimation. Sample is all papers in the Web of Science
with more than 1 author, at least one US coauthor, and with a journal subject category of Nanoscience &
Nanotechnology, published from 1990-2010.

27

Table 3c: The Estimated Relation Between Number of Citations to a Paper and the Type of
Collaboration That Produced the Paper, Biotechnology
(1)

(2)

(3)

US Collaboration Only
US Collocated
US Non-Collocated
Int'l Collaboration

1.800**
(0.597)

-1.466*
(0.680)

-1.583*
(0.677)

1.506**
(0.103)

1.412**
(0.101)
0.193**
(0.015)
24.805**
(2.075)
Yes
0.036
64,153

Int'l/US Collocated
Int'l/US Non-Collocated
No. Coauthors
No. References
Constant
Year FE
R2
Nb. of Obs.

34.629**
(2.047)
Yes
0.025
64,153

29.522**
(2.054)
Yes
0.032
64,153

(4)
1.109*
(0.531)
-2.138**
(0.647)
2.394
(1.891)
1.333**
(0.110)
0.191**
(0.015)
24.917**
(2.067)
Yes
0.036
64,153

Notes: + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, OLS estimation. Sample is all papers in the Web of Science
with more than 1 author, at least one US coauthor, and with a journal subject category of Biotechnology
& Applied Microbiology, published from 1990-2010.

28

Table 4. Advantages and Challenges to Working with the Team
US
US NonCollocated Collocated
Advantages
Learning from each other
Complementing our knowledge, expertise and capabilities
Gaining access to data, materials or components
Gaining access to data, materials or components protected
by IP
Our research reached a wider audience
The research experience was more pleasant
Challenges
Insufficient time for communication
Less flexibility in how the research was carried out
Unable to unequivocally portray my contribution
Problems coordinating with team members’ schedules
Insufficient time to use a critical instrument, facility or
infrastructure
Observations

Int’l

4.26
4.39
3.21
2.14

4.33
4.58
3.56
2.30

4.36
4.57
3.32
2.29

3.24
3.96

3.37
3.92

3.48
4.02

1.82
1.73
1.55
1.96
1.45

2.13
1.99
1.59
2.18
1.67

2.11
1.93
1.65
2.11
1.67

1,693

585

1,174

Notes: Respondents were asked to indicate their level of agreement with these statements regarding the
main advantages/disadvantages of “carrying out the research for this article with your team members”,
where 5 = Agree, 1 = Disagree.

29

Table 5: The Estimated Relation Between Number of Citations to a Paper and the Type and
Characteristics of Collaboration, Survey Sample
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.192
(0.538)
0.161*
(0.066)
0.099**
(0.015)

-0.355
(0.779)
-0.579
(0.649)
0.157*
(0.066)
0.098**
(0.015)

0.434
(0.779)
0.370
(0.600)
0.160*
(0.066)
0.099**
(0.015)

0.444
(0.773)
0.495
(0.586)
0.161*
(0.066)
0.098**
(0.015)

US Collaboration Only
US Collocated
US NonCollocated
Int’l Collaboration

0.878+
(0.529)

No. Coauthors
No. References
How They Met
Advisor-Stu./Postdoc

-0.734
(0.656)
0.592
(0.547)
0.703
(0.877)
2.939**
(0.993)
0.575
(0.890)

Colleagues
Visiting
Conference
No introduction
Coauthor Contributions
Knowledge, etc.

0.498
(0.682)
-1.327*
(0.553)
-0.305
(0.520)
0.124
(0.630)
0.166
(0.567)

Funding
Data, etc.
IP Data, etc.
Instrument, etc.
Cross-country funding
Constant
R2
Nb. of Obs.

17.433**
(2.497)
0.076
3,452

14.655**
(2.513)
0.114
3,452

14.654**
(2.593)
0.119
3,452

14.925**
(2.607)
0.116
3,452

-1.207*
(0.610)
14.676**
(2.548)
0.115
3,452

Notes: + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, OLS estimation. All regressions include year, field, and year x
field fixed effects. Sample is the survey sample described in Section 2. “How They Met” and “Coauthor
Contribution” variables are dummies indicating whether any coauthor on the team met that
way/contributed the resource.

30

FIGURES
Figure 1. Share of Papers by Collaboration Type

US Collocated

Int’l/US Collocated
Solo

US Non-Collocated

Int’l/US Non-Collocated

Notes: Includes all papers in the Web of Science with at least one US author, and with journal subject
categories of Physics, Particles & Fields; Nanoscience & Nanotechnology; and Biotechnology & Applied
Microbiology, published from 1990-2010.

31

Figure 2a: Share of Papers by Collaboration Type, Particle Physics

Solo
Int’l/US Collocated
US Collocated

Int’l/US Non-Collocated

US Non-Collocated

Figure 2b: Share of Papers by Collaboration Type, Nanotechnology

US Collocated

US Non-Collocated

Int’l/US Collocated

Solo

Int’l/US Non-Collocated

32

Figure 2c: Share of Papers by Collaboration Type, Biotechnology

US Collocated

US Non-Collocated
Int’l/US Collocated
Int’l/US Non-Collocated

Solo

33

Figure 3. Citations By the Nature of Collaboration, All Fields by Year of Publication

International/US
US Non-Collocated

US Collocated

Notes: Figure shows forward citations of all papers in the Web of Science with at least one US author,
and with journal subject categories of Physics, Particles & Fields; Nanoscience & Nanotechnology; and
Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology, published from 1990-2007. Year indicates the year of
publication of the cited paper.

34

Figure 4: Share of Persons Who Were First Met in a Given Way by the Nature of Collaboration

Notes: Share of all coauthors on papers for a given collaboration type. Question was phrased as “How did
you FIRST come in contact with each of these coauthors?”

35

Figure 5. Overcoming Distance: Frequency of Communication Modes for 2-Author papers by
the Nature of Collaboration (Approx. Weeks per Year)

Notes: Question was phrased as “When carrying out the research and writing for this article, how
frequently did you use the following forms of communication with one or more of your coauthors?” The
possible choices were transformed into approximate number of weeks per year that each communication
type was used: 6 = Every week (52), 5 = Almost every week (45), 4 = Once or twice a month (15), 3 = A
few times per year (5), 2 = Less often than that (2), 1 = Never (0).

36

Figure 6: Contribution of Coauthors by the Nature of Collaboration

Notes: Share of papers for which the corresponding author reported at least one coauthor contributing the
given resource. Question was phrased as “Did any of the team members working on this article
(including yourself) have access to one of the following resources that the other team members did NOT
have, which made it important for you to all work together on this topic?”

37

Figure 7. Contribution of US and Foreign Coauthors for 2-Author Papers

Notes: Share of US and foreign coauthors on 2-author papers only, as reported by the corresponding
author.

38

APPENDIX
Table A1. Team Size Summary Statistics

Mean
Standard Deviation
Maximum
Percentiles
10th
50th
75th
95th
99th
N

Particle Physics
21.86
82.49
1062

Nano
4.56
2.49
32

Biotech
4.74
3.61
202

1
3
4
100
523
40,474

2
4
6
9
13
31,934

2
4
6
11
16
68,731

Notes: Measures of number of authors on papers in the Web of Science published 1990-2010, with a US
author (including solo author papers), and with journal subject categories of Physics, Particles & Fields;
Nanoscience & Nanotechnology; and Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology.

Table A2. Optimal Team Size by Nature of Collaboration

Yes
No, Additional
No, Fewer
N

US
Collocated
89.06
7.58
3.37
1,663

US NonCollocated
91.11
3.48
5.40
574

All Int’l
89.95
3.38
6.67
1,154

Int’l with CrossCountry Funding
92.50
2.86
4.64
280

Notes: Question phrased as “Do you think that the size of your team was optimal?” The cross-country
funding question was phrased as “In carrying out the research for this article, did any of the coauthors
receive funding that was specifically aimed at supporting cross-country scientific collaboration?”

39

Figure A1. Share of Coauthors Who Were First Met at a Conference

Figure A2. Share of Coauthors Who Were First Met as Advisor-Student/Postdoc

40

Figure A3. Share of Papers With a Coauthor Contributing Data, Material or Components

41

