                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MARKET SET-UP IN ADVANCE OF FEDERAL RESERVE POLICY DECISIONS

                                         Dick van Dijk
                                       Robin L. Lumsdaine
                                       Michel van der Wel

                                       Working Paper 19814
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19814


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2014




We would like to thank seminar participants at Maastricht University. Possible remaining errors are
our own. Michel van der Wel is grateful to Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO)
for a Veni grant; and for support from CREATES, funded by the Danish National Research Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Dick van Dijk, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and Michel van der Wel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market Set-Up in Advance of Federal Reserve Policy Decisions
Dick van Dijk, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and Michel van der Wel
NBER Working Paper No. 19814
January 2014
JEL No. E43,E44,E58,G18

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the uncertainty associated with upcoming Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
announcements and the extent to which the market begins to set up for such announcements well before
they actually occur. We demonstrate that markets set up well in advance of known announcementdays;
as a result, there is often less uncertainty in the period immediately preceding an FOMC announcement,
despite greater volume of activity, as the market has already incorporated anticipated signals. We consider
the relative importance of both macro announcements and central bank officials’ speeches and congressional
testimony in shaping market expectations. We find substantial evidence of anticipatory effects; these
results are particularly relevant as the Fed develops its communication strategy to achieve an orderly
exit from its program of quantitative easing.


Dick van Dijk                                        Michel van der Wel
Econometric Institute                                Econometric Institute
Erasmus University Rotterdam                         Erasmus University Rotterdam
P.O. Box 1738                                        P.O. Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam                                    3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands                                      The Netherlands
aOVR ERIMDQG Tinbergen Institute                    aOVR ERIM, Tinbergen Institute, and CREATES
djvandijk@ese.eur.nl                                 vanderwel@ese.eur.nl

Robin L. Lumsdaine
Kogod School of Business
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016
aOVR 1%(5DQGCenter for Financial Stability
robin.lumsdaine@american.edu
1       Introduction
This paper considers the expectation formation process in financial markets in advance of
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decisions concerning the federal funds target
rate. Much of the literature on the effects of such announcements1 has demonstrated that
asset prices and volatilities only respond to the surprise component in these announcements,
that is, when the actual target decision differs from the market’s expectation (see, among
others, Bomfim, 2003; Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005; Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson, 2005;
Chulia-Soler, Martens, and van Dijk, 2010), mirroring the findings of a substantial body of
work considering the effects of macroeconomic announcements (see, for example, Ederington
and Lee, 1993; Jones, Lamont, and Lumsdaine, 1998; Balduzzi, Elton, and Green, 2001;
Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega, 2003, 2007; Faust, Rogers, Wang, and Wright,
2007; Love and Payne, 2008; Beber and Brandt, 2010; Taylor, 2010). For the most part,
this literature has focused on the market reaction to the announcement, rather than on
anticipatory effects or market set-up in advance of the information arrival.
    In earlier literature, the market price of federal funds futures right before the announce-
ment is often interpreted as the market’s expectation of the target rate decision. We argue
that to fully identify how information shapes market expectation and perception, it is nec-
essary to look much farther back in time, as a substantial amount of market set-up may
occur well before the days immediately preceding an announcement of the FOMC decision.
We therefore examine the dynamics of federal funds futures prices for a period of up to
six months before a target rate decision is scheduled to be made. Specifically, we examine
how these futures prices are affected by various forms of central bank communication, such
as speeches and congressional testimony, and how those effects interact with scheduled an-
nouncements of macroeconomic variables. We consider such a long pre-decision period to
allow for early anticipatory action whereby market participants set up well in advance of an
actual FOMC decision. Such anticipatory set-up may be caused by, for example, a desire
to hedge the added risk/uncertainty surrounding the future path of upcoming announce-
ments. Alternatively, it may reflect early warning signals that the market believes provide
information about the Fed’s intentions. In addition, the Fed’s convention of a “blackout
period” (i.e., a period before the meetings whereby FOMC members curtail public speaking
engagements), suggests that: (1) relatively more information about the Fed’s intentions may
be available before this period begins (through speeches and testimony by FOMC members),
    1
    Throughout this paper, we will use the terms “announcement” and “decision” interchangeably to refer
to the announcement surrounding the FOMC decision.



                                                  1
and (2) macro announcements during this period may have a greater effect than earlier ones
since (in the absence of direct communication from the FOMC) these announcements serve
as a predominant source of information to the market about the upcoming FOMC decision.
    We address the following questions: (1) How far in advance does the market set up
for an FOMC announcement and how does the uncertainty surrounding various upcoming
events (in the form of scheduled macro announcements) affect the timing of such set-up?
(2) How do central bank communications and macro announcements affect the market’s
expectation of the target rate decisions? (3) What is the interaction between scheduled
macro announcements and central bank communications (e.g., which is more important,
does the effect of one differ depending on the presence or absence of the other, etc)?
    By focusing on the anticipatory set-up in advance of FOMC target rate decisions, this
paper contributes to a large body of existing literature (discussed further in the next section),
including research on the prediction of FOMC decisions, the information content of Fed funds
futures prices, and the impact of Federal Reserve communications on financial markets.
In each of these strands of the literature, some studies hint at the possibility of advance
market set-up, but none provides a formal investigation as we conduct here. For example
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) find that changes in the Fed funds rate target are
not sufficient to explain the effects of FOMC decisions (at least two factors are required).
They define an additional factor, termed the “future path of policy” which is linked to the
policy statements themselves. Similarly, Kuttner (2001) and Poole, Rasche, and Thornton
(2002) note little evidence of anticipatory effects in Fed funds futures prices prior to FOMC
actions. These studies, however, only consider a couple of days immediately preceding the
announcement and do not consider an extended period in which the market may prepare for
such announcements.
    In addition to contributing to the literature, the topic has timely relevance for policy-
makers as market anticipation of the Fed’s exit from quantitative easing grows. A similar
episode of heightened attention to Fed communications arose in the spring of 2004. After
an extended period of benign economic conditions and Fed easing followed by nearly a year
of the Fed being “on hold”, market anxiety as to when the Fed would begin an inevitable
tightening cycle was evident. Indeed minutes of the FOMC meetings during that time period
indicate that committee members were aware of the market uncertainty and desired trans-
parent communication. Once the tightening began, similar anxiety was observed as to when
the tightening cycle would end (it ultimately ended in after the June 2006 meeting).2 The
  2
   Perhaps the most notable example of the impact of Fed communication during this era occurred
when both stocks and bonds rallied sharply following Dallas Fed President Richard Fisher’s “eighth in-


                                                  2
potential importance of these communications has been recognized by the Federal Reserve
itself, through a series of decisions since 1994 designed to increase transparency.3 Addition-
ally, in 2005 the Federal Reserve announced it would shorten the length of time between its
meetings and the release of the associated meeting minutes. The most recent change to the
Fed’s communication policy, on March 24, 2011, involved the announcement that Chairman
Bernanke would hold regular press briefings (following four of the eight scheduled FOMC
meetings) “to present the FOMC’s current economic projections and to provide additional
context for the FOMC’s policy decisions.” The press release noted that, “The introduction
of regular press briefings is intended to further enhance the clarity and timeliness of the
Federal Reserve’s monetary policy communication.” Enhanced clarity might be expected to
increase the extent of anticipatory set-up.
    We propose a model to capture anticipatory set-up of financial market participants as
they form their expectations of FOMC decisions concerning the federal funds target rate. We
examine how these actions are shaped by scheduled FOMC and macroeconomic announce-
ments, as well as Federal Reserve communications in the form of speeches and testimony of
members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. We find strong evidence
of anticipatory set-up, going back as far as six months prior to an FOMC meeting. Our re-
sults indicate that the market prepares for FOMC announcements much farther in advance
than had previously been demonstrated. We also find that while these effects decline as the
FOMC meeting nears, the effects are long-lasting. Specifically, earlier FOMC decisions and
surprises in macro announcements affect fed funds futures prices more strongly than more
recent ones. Failure to look back far enough results in inference that attributes much less
significance to both Fed communications and macro announcements in shaping fed funds
futures prices.
    Among the different information sources that we examine, we find that previous FOMC
announcements are the most important drivers of fed funds futures prices. The relevance
of macro announcements differs substantially across the (24) variables considered, with sur-
prises in nonfarm payrolls having the strongest effects. Macro announcements generally
ning” statement in reference to where the Fed was in its tightening cycle – see, for example, Robb,
Greg (2005), “ ‘Eighth inning’ of cycle: Dallas Fed chief”, Market Watch, June 1, 2005, available at
http://www.marketwatch.com/story/feds-fisher-nearing-end-of-rate-hike-cycle, accessed 5 July 2013.
   3
     Middeldorp (2011) notes an earlier reform, related to the consolidation of the documentation
into the “Minutes of the FOMC”; February 1994, however, was the first time the FOMC issued
a statement in conjunction with the meeting. A list of the key steps the Fed has taken to im-
prove transparency is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Ask Dr. Econ blog,
available at http://www.frbsf.org/education/publications/doctor-econ/2012/august/transparency-lessons-
financial-crisis, published August 19, 2012, accessed June 24, 2013.



                                                  3
have stronger effects when they are released during the black-out period that precedes an
FOMC announcement, when Fed Board members typically curtail their public speaking en-
gagements. Speeches and testimony by Fed Board members are of comparable importance
to the most influential macro announcements. In addition, for speeches we find that these
tend to lower the volatility of the expected fed funds rate, which may be interpreted as this
type of Fed communication having a calming effect on the market. The market also seems to
pay more attention to congressional testimony when it coincides with days when important
macro variables are released.
    The paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly discusses some of the related
literature in the next section. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the baseline
specification, considers market set-up from a variety of angles, and discusses the results.
Section 5 contains robustness and sensitivity analyses. The final section concludes.


2    Related literature
Our paper relates to several strands in the literature on predictability of FOMC target rate
decisions and Fed communication.
    First, there is a large literature that investigates whether the FOMC target rate deci-
sions are predictable via either macroeconomic announcements or Fed funds futures (e.g.,
Lange, Sack, and Whitesell, 2003; Hamilton, 2007, 2008; Hamilton, Pruitt, and Borger, 2011;
Hamilton and Okimoto, 2011) or a combination of the two. For example, Gürkaynak, Sack,
and Swanson (2005) note that Fed funds futures are better at predicting the resulting target
rate than other securities (as noted in Middeldorp, 2011).
    In this literature there is some evidence that anticipatory effects build gradually and
that Fed funds futures may not entirely capture the complexity associated with the path
of financial market participants’ expectations. For example, Söderström (2001) notes that
many changes to the effective Fed funds rate are unrelated to changes in the funds rate
itself, implying that market participants change expectations due to other information (such
as macro announcements or speeches).
    There is also evidence that after the Fed’s 1994 communication enhancements, the mar-
ket has been able to predict Fed actions much farther in advance, in addition to being more
accurate about what the action would be. For example, Poole and Rasche (2003) document
that policy actions taken at scheduled FOMC meetings generate little if any news in the
market. Furthermore they demonstrate (using a case study for the June 2002 FOMC meet-


                                             4
ing) that the market forms accurate expectations quite far in advance (about six months in
their specific example).
    A second relevant (and closely related to the first) literature concerns modeling and fore-
casting FOMC target rate decisions from macroeconomic and financial variables (see Dueker,
1999; Hamilton and Jordà, 2002; Dueker and Rasche, 2004; Hu and Phillips, 2004; Piazzesi,
2005; Kim, Jackson, and Saba, 2009; Hayo and Neuenkirch, 2010; Kauppi, 2010; Monokrous-
sos, 2011, among others). Ordered probit models are often used for this purpose, to take
into account that target rate decisions are discrete, occurring in multiples of 25 basis points
(with few exceptions). In fact most studies are limited to modeling the sign of the target rate
decisions (i.e. the direction of monetary policy), making no distinction between changes of
different magnitudes. This is further motivated by the fact that relatively few decisions have
actually involved changes of more than plus/minus 25 basis points, which obviously limits
the possibility of successfully modeling a refined classification of the decisions. A dynamic
version of the ordered probit model is often used to accommodate the inertia in monetary
policy decisions (Rudebusch, 2002; Dueker and Rasche, 2004; van den Hauwe, Paap, and van
Dijk, 2013). The information embedded in recent releases of various measures of inflation
and output (in deviation from a target) is usually considered, as these are most directly
related to the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy goals. The minutes of FOMC meetings
indicate, however, that a large number of other economic variables, reflecting developments
in the labor market, housing market, and financial markets, also play a substantial role in
the considerations. For this reason, a variety of alternative macroeconomic and financial
variables have been examined. These typically include established leading indicators (pro-
viding signals about future economic developments that are potentially useful for predicting
FOMC decisions), asset prices such as stocks and interest rates (obviously these also have a
forward-looking character), survey measures of consumer confidence and expectations, and
professional forecasts for inflation, output and interest rates.
    A final related literature concerns the financial market’s response to a variety of other
Federal Reserve communications beyond the FOMC decision statement itself. These include
speeches (Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack, 2004) and testimonies by the seven-member Fed-
eral Reserve Board and twelve Federal Reserve Bank Presidents, and the subsequent release
of the minutes from FOMC meetings (Blinder, Ehrmann, Fratzscher, de Haan, and Jansen,
2008, contains a survey). For example, Kohn and Sack (2004) document that congressional
testimony by Chairman Greenspan had a considerable influence on short- and medium-term
interest rates. Similarly, Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007) show that financial markets re-
spond to statements by FOMC members, especially statements by the Fed Chairman. Their

                                              5
results also suggest that the Fed’s communication policy has improved the predictability
of actual monetary policy decisions. Recent literature takes the approach of parsing the
actual text of the speeches themselves (e.g., Lucca and Trebbi, 2009). Hayo, Kutan, and
Neuenkirch (2012) consider the effects of both the delivery and the tone of speeches and testi-
monies on daily bond, stock, and foreign exchange data fluctuations, arguing that the higher
frequency of such communications renders them an important source from which financial
market participants glean information about the economy and the future path of monetary
policy. They find that while central bank communications have a significant impact on the
behavior of market participants, the effect is not any more pronounced than that of macro
announcements. In addition, an excellent review of much of the research related to FOMC
communication is contained in Middeldorp (2011), where it is noted that, “Communication
reforms that allow market interest rates to anticipate monetary policy earlier than one meet-
ing ahead can’t be identified,” a conclusion reached by examining the ability of Fed funds
futures to predict the target rate.


3    Data
In this section we describe the data used for our analysis. We combine information from three
sources: (1) Federal funds futures data from Bloomberg, (2) macroeconomic announcement
data from Econoday, and (3) information on speeches, testimonies, and other important
statements collected from the Federal Reserve’s website. Scheduled FOMC meeting (and
hence announcement) dates are known well in advance (e.g., via Bloomberg or the Federal
Reserve’s website), although at times there have been unscheduled meetings as well (see
below).
    The data are of a daily frequency, excluding weekends and holidays. It is necessary to
use daily data since the timing of speeches is not random. Speeches tend to occur in clusters
because FOMC members generally refrain from speaking on monetary policy near the time
of an FOMC announcement (the “blackout period”). Since not every month has an FOMC
meeting, using lower frequency (i.e., monthly) data would induce a speech seasonality because
months with a blackout period would have fewer speeches than the other months. Due to
the blackout period, we also would expect that macro announcements are more important
to market set-up in the days immediately preceding FOMC announcements while speeches
may be more important earlier in the expectations-formation process.




                                              6
3.1     Expected federal funds target rates4
The daily effective fed funds futures data come from Bloomberg and span the period July
31, 2001 – September 30, 2008. The fed funds futures contract has as underlying the average
effective fed funds rate over the contract month. Each month in the year can be traded,
and for each contract data are available for two years preceding expiration. We obtain the
open, high, low, close, volume, and open interest for each contract. Each of the prices
(representing averages) can be translated to average effective fed funds rates for the contract
month using 100 minus the contract price. We use the daily closing price to calculate the
market expectation for the contract month on a particular day.
    The FOMC meets eight times a year, according to a pre-announced schedule. In addi-
tion, the Committee has occasionally convened at non-scheduled times as conditions have
warranted. A complete list of meeting dates, the target rate that was decided at each meet-
ing, and the market expectations of the target rate on the day immediately preceding the
FOMC meeting, as inferred from fed funds futures contracts,5 is given in Table 1 for the
period August 2001 until September 2008. The unexpected component of the decision is
the difference between the actual and expected levels, with a positive number indicating a
higher-than-expected target rate and a negative number indicating a lower-than-expected
level.

                                               [insert Table 1]

    Table 1 shows that in general the market is very capable of predicting the target rate
decision at scheduled FOMC meetings, cf. Poole and Rasche (2003). Most of the time
the unexpected component (expressed in basis points, bps) is very small and below 5bps,
in absolute magnitude. This is particularly true during the calmer times between August
2003 and June 2007. Cases where the market was surprised by the target rate decision are
November 6, 2002, when the target rate was cut by 50bps rather than the expected 25bps;
June 25, 2003, when the Fed ended its easing cycle; and the period of the financial crisis
(from the unexpected intermeeting decision on August 17, 2007 onwards). Even with these
big moves, over our sample the average unexpected component of the scheduled meetings
is 1 bp; the average absolute unexpected component 4 bps. These low numbers confirm
   4
     As noted in the introduction, earlier literature has often interpreted the market price of fed funds futures
as the market’s expectation of the underlying security; we follow that convention for ease of discussion
although we emphasize that we are agnostic regarding this interpretation and recognize a number of reasons
why departures from such expectations may occur.
   5
     Below we describe in detail how the market expectations are obtained from fed funds futures contracts.


                                                       7
the market’s ability to anticipate the target rate decision quite well in the near-term, as
documented in the literature.
    For each scheduled FOMC meeting date in the period January 2002-September 2008
we construct an associated market expectation of the target rate for every day preceding
the meeting back to 124 trading days prior, using the following procedure.6 First, for each
scheduled FOMC meeting we select the relevant fed funds futures contract to use. An
important consideration here is that the fed funds contracts represent the average effective
fed funds rate over the relevant contract month. Hence, for months with (scheduled) FOMC
meetings, the futures price reflects the weighted average of (market expectations of) pre-
and post-meeting target rates. For that reason, we use the futures contract for the month
following the FOMC meeting if there is no (scheduled) FOMC meeting in that month. We
can readily use a rate based on this contract without dealing with possibly different pre- and
post-announcement target rates. For example, for the January 20, 2002, meeting we use the
2002-February futures contract to obtain the market’s expectation of the target rate after the
January meeting. If, however, the month following the (scheduled) FOMC meeting contains
another FOMC meeting, we use the futures contract corresponding to the actual month of
the meeting.7 For example, for the November 6, 2002, meeting we use the 2002-November
contract as on December 10, 2002, there is also an FOMC meeting.
    In case the contemporaneous futures contract is used, we follow the procedure of Kuttner
(2001) to extract the expected post-meeting FOMC target rate. We can write the effective
fed funds rate in month l (denoted with F F Rl ) as the average of the proportion of days in
month l (Pl ) before the FOMC meeting of interest i times the previous target rate T Ri−1
and the remaining proportion of days (1 − Pl ) times the target rate after FOMC meeting i
   6
      We choose 124 trading days because it balances our desire to look as far back as possible to capture
potential set-up effects with the reality of limited trading activity in the farther out contracts. When there
is limited trading activity, price accuracy is impaired. Although for some months there is ample trading
activity even beyond 124 trading days, our choice of look-back period enables us to have a balanced sample
for all FOMC events we consider.
    7
      Kuttner (2001) notes that because the futures contract represents the average effective fed funds rate
(FFR) over the month of the contract, an announcement that arrives towards the end of the month will not
have much impact in the current contract. This is a second reason to use the next full-month contract when
there are no FOMC meetings the next month (this is typically the case for FOMC meetings near the end
of the month). Kuttner (2001) contains an excellent description of some of the technical nuances related
to using effective fed funds futures data; the reader is referred to that article for more thorough discussion.
These nuances include: (a) the reference point for each contract is the average over the month rather than at
a single point in time, (b) the contract is based on the effective fed funds rate rather than the actual FOMC
target rate, (c) how to deal with multiple signals that arise as a result of the term structure of the futures
contracts, (d) the use of futures info as a proxy for market expectations since the latter are not observable,
(e) how maturity roll affects the embedded time-varying risk premium and how to correct for this.



                                                      8
(T Ri ). Given the previous target rate, the expectation of the post-FOMC meeting i target
rate is calculated by solving

                                   Pl T Ri−1 + (1 − Pl )T Ri = F F Rl ,

to get
                                              1                 Pl
                                    T Ri =   1−Pl
                                                  F F Rl   −   1−Pl
                                                                    T Ri−1 .                                (1)

So in order to calculate the day t expected target rate at FOMC meeting i for the case when
we use the current month’s contract, we subtract the scaled previous target rate from the
day t futures-implied target rate. When day t is before the i-th FOMC meeting but after
the (i − 1)-th meeting, we use the actual target rate after announcement (i − 1) for T Ri−1 .
When, however, day t is also before the (i − 1)-th meeting, we use the expected (i − 1)-th
target rate and thus follow a recursive procedure. For example, for the November 6, 2002,
meeting we use (1) with the actual previous target rate (1.75%) on all days between the
date of the previous meeting, that is September 24, and November 6. To infer the market’s
expectation of the November 6 post-meeting rate on days before September 24, we use the
expected September 24 post-meeting target rate in (1). This more involved procedure when
using the contemporaneous futures contract explains our preference to use next month’s
contract in case no meeting is scheduled for that month. In practice, of the 54 scheduled
FOMC meetings in our sample we are able to use the next ‘full-month’ contract 27 times
(exactly half).8

3.1.1    An example of market set-up

As an example of how market expectations are shaped in advance of an FOMC announce-
ment, consider the beginning of the tightening cycle that resulted from the Fed’s June 30,
2004 meeting, shown in Figure 1. This figure shows the market’s expectation of the June
30, 2004 target rate, as inferred from the fed funds futures corresponding to that date as
calculated above.9 After nearly a year of being “on hold”, speculation began to arise as to
when the Fed would begin tightening. By March 2004, some market participants and the
   8
     This is to be expected as the FOMC meets eight times a year, such that there are four meetings for
which no meeting is scheduled during the next month.
   9
     At first glance, the fluctuations in this figure may seem to be at odds with the information given in Table
1. It is important to recognize that Table 1 contains the expected fed funds futures on the day immediately
preceding each FOMC meeting date (i.e., corresponding to the “-1” point in each of 54 distinct figures like
Figure 1, one for each meeting) while Figure 1 is for a single meeting date and shows the expected fed funds
futures on 124 distinct days preceding that specific meeting date.


                                                       9
press started worrying that the Fed was “behind the curve” and would wait too long to hike,
potentially giving rise to inflation. The top half of the figure shows how the expected target
rate evolved in the 124 days leading up to the announcement that the Fed would increase the
target rate from 1% to 1.25%. Despite the overall increase to the actual target rate by the
time the Fed had its meeting, there was significant volatility in the rate due to uncertainty
as to the timing of the increase, as illustrated in the daily fluctuations in the rate, shown in
the bottom half of the figure.

                                       [insert Figure 1]

    From this picture, we observe that six months prior to the June 30, 2004 meeting, which
corresponds with January 5, the market’s expectation of the target rate was rather close
to the actual level of 1.25%. Although over all days the mean change in the expected rate
was −0.1bps and the median change was zero, there are a number of days with much larger
changes, suggesting increased uncertainty and market nervousness. For example, two large
drops occurred on January 6 and 9, corresponding to a manufacturing release that was below
market expectations and much softer nonfarm payrolls (1,000 versus the market expectation
of 130,000), lowering the expected target rate to around 1.1%. It remained fairly stable at
that level until the end of the month when it began to rise, but sharply decreased again
when the FOMC announced (after the meeting on January 28) that it would leave the
target rate unchanged. Over the following month, the market expectations of the target
rate gradually declined again to around 1%, the current level at the time. A large increase
(2bps) in the expected target rate occurred with 86 days to go, on March 2nd. On that
day, both then-Chairman Greenspan and then-Governor Bernanke made speeches. While
neither directly addressed the Fed’s intentions regarding the policy rate, Greenspan’s speech
referenced inflation in import prices as a result of a weaker dollar and Bernanke’s discussed
historic episodes where Fed tightening may have made matters worse.
    Three days later, on March 5th, a nonfarm payrolls release (an actual increase in the
number of jobs of 21,000 versus a consensus estimate of 125,000) sent the expected target
rate down by 6bps, as the market wondered whether the Fed might ease further, rather than
tighten. From March 7 until March 15, there was no change in the expected target rate; it
is episodes like this that lead us to speculate that the market prepares for FOMC meetings
well in advance, given the weak employment data. On March 16th, the Fed left the policy
rate unchanged at 1%, resulting in a further 1bp decline in the expected target rate. There
were three large changes in April, on the 2nd, 13th, and 14th. On April 2, nonfarm payrolls
again resulted in a large surprise, this time to the upside as the release was an increase in

                                              10
the number of jobs of 308,000 versus a consensus estimate of 120,000. The expected target
rate rose 3.5bps on speculation that the positive economic news increased the likelihood the
Fed would tighten. The large changes on April 13 and 14 were a reflection of the arrival of
a large chunk of economic news, with higher-than-expected retail sales, business inventories,
and budget deficit on the 13th. In addition, both PPI and CPI came in higher than expected
on April 14; no doubt accelerating the market’s expectations of Fed tightening.
    The largest change in the expected target rate occurred on May 6, 2 days after the May 4
meeting and 39 days prior to the June 30 meeting. On this day, the minutes from the Fed’s
March 16 meeting were released.10 These minutes made reference to the perception that the
Fed was “behind the curve” and also acknowledged the market’s concerns about inflation
while the Fed’s internal models saw little signs. From this point on, the expected target
rate moved closer to the eventual 1.25% level and away from the then-prevailing 1% rate as
the market clearly believed the Fed would raise the policy rate at its June 30 meeting. On
June 1, 21 trading days before the next FOMC meeting the expected target rate reached the
eventual rate for the first time and stayed above that level for the remaining days. Concerns
that the Fed had waited too long and inflation would rise too quickly led the market to briefly
consider the possibility that the Fed would hike by more than 25bps in its first instance of
tightening. Two more large moves followed (in opposite directions) on June 11 and 14 (12
and 11 days prior to the meeting, respectively).
    This figure motivates our model and analysis of the interplay between macro announce-
ments and Federal Reserve communications. In particular, it illustrates that much of the
market set-up occurs well before the actual FOMC announcement. In the last 10 days prior
to the meeting, the expected target rate barely moved. One might interpret this as evidence
that the Fed’s communication about its intentions was understood by the market.

3.1.2     Market set-up over the sample

Another way to characterize the potential market set-up is by considering the average ab-
solute change in the expected target rate in the days leading up to an FOMC decision. In
Figure 2(a) we present the average absolute change in expected target rate, shown in event-
time for the period of 124 trading days prior to an FOMC announcement day. For example,
the value corresponding to −57 is computed by summing the absolute change in expected
target rate 57 days prior to each of the FOMC meetings and dividing by the total number
of meetings (54). Despite substantial day-to-day variation, there is a clear downward trend.
 10
      In addition, three Board members gave speeches: Chairman Greenspan, and Governors Bies and Olson.


                                                   11
The large spikes between 70 and 65 days preceding and between 40 and 30 days preceding
correspond to previous FOMC decision days. It is also clear that the decisions themselves
show large changes in the expected target rate (at day 0). This is largely driven by the days
when an actual rate change occurred; on days when there is no change, the effect is much
smaller. Note that this figure does not take macroeconomic announcements into effect - pre-
sumably many of the fluctuations are largely driven by those. Because the FOMC calendar
does not correspond to the periodicity of any of the macro events (i.e., weekly, monthly,
quarterly), however, the trend is still apparent.

                                       [insert Figure 2]

    As noted above, on many days the expected target rate does not change. Figure 2(b)
shows the number of preceding days with no changes, for each FOMC decision. The total
number of 124 days prior to the FOMC meeting are divided into five bins of equal length.
This graph largely corroborates the inference from Figures 1 and 2(a). It is apparent from
this figure that there is no change in expected target rate in a larger proportion of trading
days in the 25 days immediately before an FOMC meeting than in earlier subperiods. In fact,
across the 54 FOMC decisions in our sample, the average number of zero-change trading days
declines from 15.3, 10.1, 6.1, 4.3 to 2.4 for the subperiods corresponding with 1-25, 26-50,
51-75, 76-100 and 101-124 days prior to the meeting. Again this suggests that the market
sets up for FOMC decisions well before the actual decision is made. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate such a large lead time.
    In contrast, the data also indicates that trading volume in Fed funds futures substantially
increases in the days leading up to an FOMC announcement, see Figure 3. Average volume
on the day of an FOMC decision is markedly more than that of any other day (more than
double the next highest average). It is interesting that in the lead-up to the FOMC decision,
average absolute changes in expected target rate decline even as volume increases, suggesting
a convergence of market opinion (i.e., a reduction in uncertainty as to the Fed’s intention).
While one might interpret the large spikes in both average absolute change in expected target
rate and volume as suggesting the market was caught unawares, an alternative interpretation
is that once the FOMC decision is revealed, the market repositions in preparation for the
next meeting.

                                       [insert Figure 3]




                                              12
3.2     Speeches and testimony
The speech and testimony data are collected from the Federal Reserve’s website11 for each
of the 11 individuals that served on the Federal Reserve Board during the sample period.
Speeches and testimony are treated separately in our model, since the latter are often viewed
by the markets with particular scrutiny and contain extensive Q&A (as well as a transcript).
Note that in two cases (Bernanke, Kohn), a Governor became Chair or Vice-Chair; we treat
these positions as separate from the earlier roles. The terms of all 11 Governors, Vice-chairs,
and Chairmen are shown in Figure 4(a) while the distribution of speeches and testimonies for
each Board member is given in Figure 4(b).12 Over our sample period, the average number
of speeches by Board members is about 72 per year.

                                             [insert Figure 4]

    Evidence of a so-called “blackout period” is shown in Figure 5. This figure contains the
total number of announcements, speeches, and testimonies, again shown in event-time for
the period of 124 trading days prior to an FOMC announcement day. While the numbers
fluctuate across days, there is a notable drop-off in the number of speeches and testimonies
in the 10-15 days right before an FOMC meeting. The same pattern can be observed 35-45
days before, due to the black-out period before the previous scheduled FOMC meeting. This
pattern suggests that in the lead-up to an FOMC meeting, the macro announcements may
take on greater significance as the market seeks guidance from economic information in the
absence of Federal Reserve communication.

                                             [insert Figure 5]


3.3     Macroeconomic announcements
We obtain data on 24 macroeconomic announcements from Econoday. For the announce-
ments the data set records a consensus expectation among market participants, and the
actual first released number. Our selection of macroeconomic variables follows Andersen,
  11
     www.federalreserve.gov. Following the delineation on this website there are three distinct types of public
addresses considered: speeches, testimony, and the semi-annual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.
Public addresses that on the Federal Reserve’s website were designated as either “opening remarks” or
“dedication remarks” are not included in the sample.
  12
     Kelley was also a Governor at the beginning of our sample but left in 2001 and hence is not included
in our speech dataset. Similarly Duke joined in August 2008 but did not deliver any speeches or testimony
during our sample period. We also do not include speeches by the 12 Reserve Bank Presidents.



                                                      13
Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2003) and includes GDP, employment, price indices and in-
come numbers. A full list of the indicators and the time of public releases is given in Table
2. There are three frequencies at which the variables are released: quarterly (the GDP
figures), weekly (the initial unemployment claims number on Thursdays) and monthly (all
other variables). The two rightmost columns in the table give the average surprise and av-
erage absolute surprise for each macroeconomic variable, in standard deviation units (for
comparability across variables). Comparing the two columns, it is apparent that the mag-
nitude of the surprise is often quite large, with the average absolute surprise ranging from
one-half to nearly one full standard deviation. Yet for most series there is little evidence
of systematic bias, as the average surprise is near zero. There are a few series, however,
where the market’s expectations systematically differs from the actual release, for example,
the GDP advance number, nonfarm payrolls, personal consumption expenditures and the
NAPM index.
    We consider the uncertainty associated with these announcements in two ways: (1) as
a dummy variable to denote the occurrence of a macro release on a given day, (2) as a
surprise. The first characterization (dummy) can be viewed as an attempt to measure
general market nervousness or uncertainty. The second (surprise, i.e., a deviation from
expectation) recognizes the likelihood that a larger deviation from expectation generates
greater volatility than a smaller one. Since measurement units vary across macro variables,
we standardize the surprises by dividing each of them by their sample standard deviation.
This standardization facilitates comparison across announcement surprises and does not
affect the statistical significance of the response estimates nor the fit of the regressions.

                                      [insert Table 2]


4    An analysis of market set-up
We analyze our research questions concerning the market set-up in advance of an FOMC
decision by relating the expected fed funds target rates to information conveyed by macroe-
conomic announcements and Fed communication in the form of previous FOMC decisions,
and speeches and testimony by Fed Board members. We start with a baseline specification
in which the effects of these variables on the expected target rate are assumed to be con-
stant throughout the six month period before the FOMC decision that we consider. This is
followed by a more detailed investigation where the effects are allowed to vary over time in



                                             14
a number of different ways.13


4.1     Baseline specification
Using the procedure described in Section 3.1, we construct the expected fed funds target rate,
denoted Efi,j,t after FOMC decision i at the close of day t, which is j trading days (excluding
weekends and holidays) prior to the announcement of interest.14 Here i = 1, 2, . . . , I = 54
(the total number of scheduled FOMC announcements in the sample) and j = 0, 1, . . . , J =
124 (trading days, corresponding with a calendar period of approximately six months).
   We relate the absolute change in the expected federal funds rate to macroeconomic
announcements and speeches using a linear regression. We use the absolute value of the
change in the expected target rate since we do not have information on the tone of the
speeches and therefore cannot distinguish between a positive and negative change. Our
baseline regression model is given by:

                       K
                       X                   L
                                           X                   M
                                                               X                                  N
                                                                                                  X
                                 S                   T                   F
   |∆Efi,j,t | = α +         κk Dk,t   +         λl Dl,t   +         θm Dm,i,t   +   θu DtU   +         γn |Sn,t | + εi,j,t ,   (2)
                       k=1                 l=1                 m=0                                n=1


where ∆ is the first-difference operator between two consecutive trading days. The infor-
mation in speeches and testimony is included in the form of two sets of dummy variables.
                  S
Specifically, Dk,t  is a dummy that is equal to 1 if there was a speech by Fed official k on
                                                       T
day t (and zero otherwise), k = 1, 2, . . . , K = 11. Dl,t , l = 1, 2, 3, is a dummy that is equal
to 1 if there was a testimony of type l on day t. We distinguish three types of testimony:
(1) the so-called Humphrey-Hawkins testimony to Congress by the Fed chairman related
to the semi-annual Monetary Policy Report, (2) other testimony by the Fed chairman, and
(3) testimony by other Board members. In contrast to the treatment of speeches where we
assign a separate dummy variable to the speeches of each Board member, it is necessary
to group the testimony into these types due to the lower frequency of congressional testi-
mony. Important information for the expected target rate after meeting i presumably is
                                                                                              F
obtained from previous target rate decisions. For that reason we include dummies Dm,i,t          ,
m = 0, 1, . . . , M = 4, which are equal to 1 if the m-th scheduled FOMC meeting prior to
  13
     In the discussion of the results in this section and the next, we occasionally refer to results of additional
analyses we conducted. For all such instances these detailed results are available from the authors on request.
  14
     Technically only two of these subscripts are necessary: i identifies the announcement number in our
sample. The date of the FOMC meeting at which this decision is made together with the index j for the
number of days left until this meeting produces the calendar date t. For notational convenience, we also
include t as a third subscript to denote the actual date.



                                                               15
meeting i occurred on day t. We set M = 4 because this is the maximum number of prior
FOMC meetings during the period of 124 trading days we consider. We include a separate
dummy variable DtU for unscheduled FOMC meetings, given that their impact presumably
is different from scheduled FOMC decisions. Finally, |Sn,t | is the absolute surprise of macro
announcement n (n = 1, 2 . . . , N = 24) on day t (and 0 if there is no such announcement).
The reason for using the absolute value of the macro surprises is for comparison with the
Fed communications variables where we lack information on the tone of the speeches and
testimony. This regression is combined with the error specification

                                            εi,j,t = ωj + ηi,j,t ,                                      (3)

which includes ‘fixed effects’ ωj for each day j prior to announcement i. Note that because
we consider up to 124 trading days prior to an FOMC meeting, the data structure we
employ creates overlapping observations. We control for this by using heteroskedasticy and
autocorrelation consistent standard errors throughout the entire analysis.
    Estimation results for the baseline model in (2) are shown in Table 3. For comparison
purposes we note that the federal funds rate moves an average of 1.6bps on days without
any information events (i.e., no FOMC decisions, speeches, testimony, or macro announce-
ment).15 Not surprisingly, previous FOMC meetings have a large and significant effect on
the expected target rate. Consistent with the idea that the market sets up for FOMC meet-
ings well in advance of the actual decision, the effect of the four previous FOMC meetings
increases the farther back one goes. On average, the fed funds rate changes by 2.17bps more
on the day of the FOMC meeting itself and 1.60, 2.16, 2.47, and 3.92bps more on days
corresponding to the first, second, third and fourth preceding FOMC meetings. We also
observe a substantially larger effect when the market is caught by surprise via an unsched-
uled FOMC decision. On average, unscheduled FOMC announcements shift the expected
fed funds futures by more than an additional 22bps.

                                             [insert Table 3]

   Several macro announcements have an economically and statistically significant effect on
the expected fed funds rate. The largest effect comes from nonfarm payrolls, on average
a 2.55bps change (similar in magnitude to the scheduled FOMC meetings) in response to
  15
     For purposes of presentation and interpretation, coefficients and standard errors have been multiplied
by 100. Therefore, a coefficient of 2.17 means that on average the change in the expected federal funds rate
is 2.17bps larger than on an average (non-event) day.


                                                     16
a one standard deviation surprise. This is in line with previous literature, which generally
has concluded that nonfarm payroll employment is the ‘king’ of macro announcements (An-
dersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega, 2007). A one standard deviation surprise in retail
sales, durable goods, PPI, and NAPM each increases the change in expected fed funds by
between 0.5 and 0.8bps, while a one standard deviation surprise in final GDP results in a
lower change of similar magnitude. The negative sign of the significant coefficient on final
GDP bears mention – on days that these data are released, the federal funds rate changes on
average by 0.5bps less than on non-announcement days. These releases occur on the same
day as other releases; hence the negative coefficient likely reflects the lower periodicity of
the GDP final release. Surprisingly the effect of a surprise in PPI is larger than that of CPI;
this may reflect the fact that over the sample period PPI was announced before CPI 84% of
the time. It is noteworthy in part because the Federal Reserve typically focuses its attention
on CPI (specifically core CPI, that is excluding food and energy). The results suggest that
despite the importance to the Fed, the market does not wait for the CPI release, but rather
reacts to the earlier PPI release. The correlation between changes in these two inflation mea-
sures is 0.82 over the time period we examine. Weekly unemployment claims numbers are
also significant, although the effect (0.3bps) is not as large as for the other macro variables.
    Congressional testimony of the Chair of the Federal Reserve as part of the semi-annual
Monetary Policy Report to Congress (i.e., the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony) increases the
change in the federal funds rate by almost 0.8bps, a magnitude similar to that of a one
standard deviation surprise in the most important macro variables (except nonfarm payrolls)
we consider. Other testimony by the Fed chairman has a comparable impact on the expected
target rate. Testimony by other FOMC members does not have a significant effect.
    The estimation results also reveal interesting effects of FOMC members’ speeches. In
particular, large changes in the fed funds rate accompany the speeches of Meyer and Mishkin
(5.5bps and 1.7bps, respectively). In contrast, there is evidence that speeches of Bies and
Bernanke before he became Chairman helped to calm the markets, with a 20-25% lower-than-
average change to the fed funds rate on days of these speeches. Kohn similarly had a calming
effect on the fed funds rate as Governor, but his speeches as Vice-Chairman corresponded to
a 1.4bps increase in fed funds rate volatility. We emphasize that these effects may as much
reflect the differences in calendar time as to when the speeches and testimonies occurred; for
example, all of Meyer’s speeches were in 2001, a particularly volatile time.16
  16
    Measuring volatility by means of the average absolute value of the daily change in the effective fed funds
rate, we find that this is equal to 7.79bps during the second half of 2001. This contrasts with values of 3.57,
2.84, 2.14, 3.28 and 2.18 for the years 2002,. . . ,2006. Volatility increased again in 2007 and 2008 to values



                                                      17
   The final set of estimates correspond to ωj , for j = −124, −123, . . . , −2, −1, 0 to signify
days before the FOMC announcement. They are summarized graphically in Figure 6; the
complete set of estimates and associated standard errors are in Appendix Table A.1.

                                             [insert Figure 6]

    These estimates confirm our hypothesis that the market sets up for an FOMC meeting
well in advance of the actual meeting: on average changes in fed funds futures clearly dampen
as the FOMC decision day approaches. The average change in the fed funds rate over the
nearest 25 days is 0.59bps while the average over the preceding 25 days is 1.01. The averages
over the next two 25-day intervals (−51 to −75 and −76 to −100) are 1.55bps and 2.11bps,
respectively. During the farthest back interval we consider (100 to 124 days before the
FOMC), the average change in fed funds rate is 2.78bps, nearly five times the change in the
period immediately preceding the FOMC meeting. In addition, in the 25 days leading up to
the FOMC, only half of the dummy variables are significantly different from zero, while in
the 100 days prior to that, all except one are. An alternative interpretation of the declining
magnitude of the estimates is that there exists information in addition to that considered
in our model that is important to the expectations formation process but becomes less
important as the decision day approaches. We consider the possibility of such time-varying
effects subsequently.


4.2     Effects of macro surprises
The results from our baseline model specification suggest that the effects of macroeconomic
surprises are smaller than the effects of Federal Reserve communication (in particular as
measured by FOMC statements but also in the form of speeches and testimony of Board
members). This is not to say that macro announcements are completely irrelevant. On
the contrary, when we re-estimate the model in (2) omitting the macro surprises Sn,t , n =
1, . . . , N (not shown), we find that the estimates of ωj for values of j up to 25, approximately,
are much more significant.17 These indicators are no doubt proxying for important macro
announcements that occur in the month leading up to the FOMC announcement.18 Thus we
of 4.73 and 8.06, respectively.
  17
     There is little change to the other variables in the model when the macro surprises are omitted, i.e., the
results for prior FOMC meetings, as well as speech and testimony dummies, are qualitatively similar to the
baseline specification.
  18
     The same finding emerges when we re-estimate the baseline specification but omit the dummy variables
for speeches and testimony.


                                                      18
view this result as indirect evidence for the importance of including macroeconomic surprises
in the specification.
    This also motivates an examination of the effects of macro surprises in more detail, in
particular whether these effects vary over (event) time. Recall that the effects of a macro
surprise are assumed constant in the baseline specification (2). There may in fact be several
mechanisms that could lead to time-varying effects of macro announcements. First, if market
expectations are shaped mostly well in advance of an FOMC meeting, it may be that macro
surprises have a larger impact the longer before the FOMC decision they occur. On the other
hand, macro announcements may also have a larger impact immediately prior to an FOMC
meeting during the blackout period, where there is little Federal Reserve communication.
Also, macro announcements may be looked upon differently if they occur at the same time
as a speech or testimony by an FOMC member. The market may pay less (or more) atten-
tion to a macroeconomic surprise if later in the day a Federal Reserve official is speaking
or testifying before Congress, believing that the Fed communication may provide helpful
interpretative information regarding the surprise. We consider each of these mechanisms
in turn, and investigate whether there are time-varying effects of macroeconomic surprises
(a) in conjunction with the number of days before an FOMC announcement, (b) during the
“blackout” period, and (c) in conjunction with Fed communication. The intuition behind
these three variations is to allow for the possibility that following a macroeconomic surprise,
the market will set up for the FOMC announcement differently depending on what other in-
formation that might be available. In all three cases, there is little qualitative change to the
coefficients on the dummies for prior FOMC meetings, speeches, or testimony. We therefore
focus our remarks below on the coefficients related to the macroeconomic surprises.

4.2.1    Market set-up and macro surprises

To examine the extent and timing of market set-up in response to macro announcements, we
divide the complete 124-day period before an FOMC meeting into five sub-periods according
to the preceding FOMC meetings. The effects of the macro announcements are allowed
to vary (unrestrictedly) across these sub-periods. Thus, we allow for different effects of
macroeconomic releases that occurred (1) since the most recent FOMC meeting, (2) more
than one but less than two FOMC meetings ago, (3) more than two but less than three
meetings ago, (4) more than three but less than four meetings ago, and (5) more than four
(but less than five) meetings ago.19
  19
    An alternative interpretation is that this specification allows a given macroeconomic announcement on
day t to have different effects on the expected target rates after each of the next four FOMC meetings. Note

                                                    19
    A first impression of the relevance of this type of time-variation in the effects of macro an-
nouncements is obtained by pooling all releases of the different variables and only considering
their occurrence and not their ‘content’ or surprise. That is, in the baseline specification (2)
we replace the 24 macro surprise variables |Sn,t | with a single ‘macro announcement dummy’
that takes the value 1 on days with a macro announcement and zero otherwise. We then
estimate a specification in which the coefficient of this dummy is allowed to be different
across the different sub-periods of the 124 trading days prior to the FOMC meeting. Figure
7 shows the resulting coefficients together with two standard error bands, which provides
strong evidence of set-up effects. Contrary to intuition of a decay in effect, we find that the
effect increases monotonically as we go farther back in time. While the impact of macro
announcements that have occurred since the most recent FOMC meeting averages 0.19bps
and is not statistically significantly different from zero, macro announcements that occurred
more than four meetings ago increase the change in the fed funds rate by an average 1.3bps.

                                            [insert Figure 7]

    Next we return to the baseline specification in (2) and again consider the effect of sur-
prises of individual macro announcements, but with the magnitude of these effects varying
across sub-periods. Table 4 reports the estimates of the five coefficients for each of the macro
surprises; for ease of interpretation we also display them graphically in Figure 8. Although
not always monotonic, in general the effects of macro announcements are larger when one
goes farther back in time. For example, for nonfarm payrolls we find that a one standard de-
viation surprise (on average) in the releases leading up to an FOMC announcement moves the
fed funds future by just over half a basis point, whereas similar surprises in the releases oc-
curring more than four FOMC announcements earlier have an effect of almost 6.5bps. These
results echo the evidence from the baseline specification that the fed funds futures market
shows signs of anticipatory movement much earlier than considered in previous literature.

                                            [insert Table 4]

                                            [insert Figure 8]

4.2.2    Macro announcements during blackout periods

Next we examine whether the effect of macroeconomic surprises is different when they arrive
during the Fed’s blackout period versus during other parts of the FOMC meeting cycle.
that in the baseline specification in (2) the effects on all future FOMC decisions are restricted to be the
same.

                                                    20
Based on the pattern in the number of speeches observed in Figure 5, we assume that the
blackout period corresponds with the ten weekdays leading up to an FOMC announcement.
Table 5 shows the estimation results for a specification that allows the coefficients on the
macro announcements to differ during blackout periods versus non-blackout periods. Because
there are fewer releases that occur during blackout periods than during non-blackout periods,
the standard errors are larger on all coefficients in the blackout period. As a result, fewer
surprises are statistically significant; however, the magnitude of the effect of a one standard
deviation surprise is larger during the blackout period than in the non-blackout period for 20
of the 24 variables, and in many cases substantially so. For example, for nonfarm payrolls,
the effect of a surprise almost doubles from 2.4bps in the non-blackout period to 4.2bps
during the blackout period.

                                       [insert Table 5]

4.2.3   Interaction between macro announcements and Fed communication

Using a similar approach as in the previous section we consider whether macroeconomic
surprises have more of an effect on days where there is a speech or testimony or on days
without. The results are reported in Table 6. For 15 of the 24 macro surprises, the effect on
the fed funds futures is larger in magnitude on days where a speech or testimony occurred
than on days without one. There is also modest evidence that the market receives the
news more calmly when it occurs on a day with a Federal Reserve speech or testimony; 11
coefficients have negative signs versus 8 when there is not a speech or testimony. When
split in this way, more macroeconomic surprises are seen to have an effect. For example,
the coefficients on GDP (preliminary), capacity utilization, business inventories, government
purchases, and the trade balance are all statistically significant when the release coincides
with a day in which a Fed speech or testimony occurs.

                                       [insert Table 6]


4.3     Effects of speeches and testimonies
Our baseline model identifies a number of speech and testimony variables that are highly
significant in determining changes in fed funds futures. We next consider whether the effects
of these specific types of Federal Reserve communication differ according to whether the day
they are given coincides with an important macroeconomic release. Results are reported
in Table 7. We find that the effects of Bernanke (when Governor), Meyer, and Gramlich

                                              21
speeches were larger on non-release days than on days with a macro release; for all other
officials, the speech effects are larger on release days. Interestingly, we find a significant
effect on testimony only for the days that also had a macroeconomic release, although we
note larger standard errors on the non-release days. The magnitude of the effect from the
testimony of the Federal Reserve Chairman is more than 35% greater on a macro release
day than on a non-macro release day, suggesting greater market attention to congressional
testimony following a macroeconomic surprise.

                                       [insert Table 7]

    We next consider whether the magnitude of the speech and testimony effects varies over
the six-month period before an FOMC meeting according to the five sub-periods determined
by the preceding FOMC meetings. As for the macro surprises in Section 4.2.1, we find
that the effects of speeches and testimony are generally greater when one goes farther back
in time, particular for Kohn (when Vice-Chair) and Meyer. For Gramlich and Mishkin,
only speeches delivered since the most recent FOMC meeting are significant, suggesting
less salience. Interestingly, neither Bernanke’s speeches nor any congressional testimony is
significant once interacted with the subperiod indicators.
    Finally, we acknowledge that the timing of both macro announcements and Fed commu-
nications varies throughout the day, so that in some cases there is a possibility that some
of these events occurred after the close of the Fed funds futures market. To consider the
sensitivity of our results to this timing, we re-estimate the model (not shown) excluding the
contemporaneous FOMC meeting from the specification because during our sample period,
the FOMC announcement that coincides with the end of the meeting typically occurred at
around 2:15pm, near the close of the Fed funds futures market. The results are qualitatively
unchanged; in addition to no change in sign, there is little change to the magnitude of any
of the coefficients. The results regarding Federal Reserve communications are qualitatively
unchanged with a few notable exceptions: (1) the coefficients on both Bernanke and Kohn as
governor remain negative but double in magnitude, indicating that markets were calmed by
their speeches, (2) in contrast, the coefficient on Bernanke while chair is positive (although
less than in the baseline specification) and becomes highly significant suggesting greater
volatility on days following his speeches, (3) the coefficient on the Humphrey-Hawkins in-
dicator changes sign (from positive to negative) and remains highly significant. Since we
know the bulk of the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony occurs prior to the close of that day’s
fed funds futures market, one interpretation of this change in sign is that it provides evi-
dence of overshooting; while on average changes in fed funds futures are 0.78bps higher on

                                             22
Humphrey-Hawkins days than non-Humphrey-Hawkins days, the day following they are on
average 1.16bps lower.20


5      Robustness and sensitivity analysis
In this section we examine a number of additional issues that allow us to assess the robustness
of the empirical results documented in the previous section. Specifically, we consider (1) a
particular specification for time-varying volatility in the fed funds futures, and (2) the length
of the period before the FOMC decision.


5.1     Time-varying volatility
Our analysis so far implicitly assumes that the volatility of the fed funds futures is constant
over time (apart from the effects of macro announcements and Fed communication). This
may be unrealistic, as our sample period is quite varied in terms of economic conditions,
starting with the aftermath of the burst of the dot-com bubble and 9/11 and ending with
the first part of the financial crisis and Great Recession with a relatively calm period in
between. Also in terms of the target rate itself, our sample period includes prolonged sub-
periods with a (close to) stable target rate with the Fed being on hold, as well as periods of
easing and tightening monetary policy with substantial changes in the target rate. Obviously,
the volatility of the fed funds futures may be quite different during these sub-periods, and
failing to account for this may influence our results. We examine whether this issue is
relevant by extending the error specification in (3) to

                                          εi,j,t = ωj + δi + ηi,j,t ,                                      (4)

where δi , i = 1, 2, . . . , 54 are fixed effects for each FOMC meeting. The estimation results
show that including these effects decreases the impact of the contemporaneous FOMC meet-
ing by quite a lot (about 40%); this variable is now only significant at the 10% significance
level. The impact of the previous FOMC meetings does not change. The impact of speeches
  20
     In addition, to ensure that all explanatory variables chronologically preceded the change in the futures
price (our dependent variable), we also re-estimate the model lagging all explanatory variables by one day. In
this case, while many of the coefficients on the macroeconomic variables are less significant, the coefficients
on new home sales and housing starts are now significant and negative, indicating a reduction in volatility
on the days following these announcements. When lagged, neither consumer confidence nor NAPM are
significant at the 5% level of significance.




                                                      23
is dramatically reduced; only those of Vice-Chair Kohn and Governor Meyer remain signif-
icant. In contrast, the effects of congressional testimony appear to be more robust. The
coefficients for Humphrey-Hawkins and other testimonies of the Fed Chair are of similar
magnitude as in the baseline specification and remain highly significant. The effect of the
testimony of other Governors now also is significant at the 1% level, while its magnitude is
about 50% larger. As this coefficient is negative it means that on days that other Governors
testify before Congress, the federal funds rate moves on average 0.38bps less than on other
days.
    For the macro surprises, for the most part the results are qualitatively similar with three
exceptions. The final GDP surprise is no longer significant and factory orders are only
significant at the 90% level of confidence. In contrast, consumer credit is more significant
(and negative at 5% level).
    These different effects on speeches on the one hand and on testimony and macro an-
nouncements on the other hand may not be completely surprising. Recall from Figure 4
that most of the individual Board members served only during part of our sample period.
Hence, the significant effects of their speeches found in the baseline specification in Table 3
may well be due to neglected time-varying volatility. Testimony and macro announcements,
however, occurred during the complete sample period, such that their effects obtained with
the baseline specification may be more stable and not proxying for heteroskedasticity in the
fed funds futures.
    Figure 9 shows the estimated values of δi along with associated 95% confidence bands.
The chart clearly shows the increased effect of FOMC meetings post-crisis; The meetings
since October 2007 are associated with a significantly larger average magnitude of the change
in the federal funds rate. The largest increase in δi , more than 6.5bps, occurred in response
to the March 18, 2008 meeting that occurred immediately after Bear Stearns was sold to JP
Morgan Chase. We identify similarly significant effects (albeit smaller in absolute magnitude)
prior to December 2003, when the Fed was nearing the end of its easing cycle. Interestingly,
for most FOMC announcements between October 2003 and August 2007, the values of δi
are not statistically significantly different from zero, suggesting the market had already
incorporated/anticipated the results of the meetings. Two interesting exceptions occur.
First, for a brief period of about six months following the June 30, 2004 meeting, the values
of δi are again highly significant, perhaps a reflection of market uncertainty regarding the
pace of tightening. Second, significant meeting effects also are found for the second half of
2006, possibly indicating that the market was not completely convinced that the period of
tightening had actually ended.

                                              24
                                       [insert Figure 9]


5.2    Shorter lookback period
The main conclusion that emerges from our analysis is that the market sets up well in
advance of an FOMC meeting, This is demonstrated by the significant ‘trading day’ effects
we find up to six months prior to such meetings, as well as the stronger reaction to macro
announcements the longer before the meeting these occur. As noted in the introduction,
because most previous literature has considered much shorter time horizons, it is possible that
the effects of both macro announcements and Fed communications have been underestimated.
To consider this possibility, we re-estimate our baseline model in (2) using only the most
recent 20 business days worth of information. We find that failure to control for the longer
horizon leads to inference that attributes too much weight to the days nearest to the FOMC
meeting. In particular, the estimated trading day fixed effects for the first 20 days of ωj
are smaller and less significant when we consider 124 days before the meeting. There is
no qualitative change to inference regarding the effect of the FOMC meeting itself but the
impact of the unscheduled meetings is much larger (51bps rather than 22bps). In contrast,
the effects of speeches are mitigated for most individuals and none of the testimony variables
is significant, in particular the speeches of then-Governor Bernanke are no longer significant.
In contrast, Governor Gramlich’s speeches are highly significant. In addition to the speeches
and testimony, the macroeconomic surprises are also much less significant; only final GDP
and nonfarm payrolls have a significant effect on the change in the fed funds rate. The
diminished effects of macro surprises is in fact not surprising given the results in Section
4.2.1, which already show that macro economic announcements since the most recent FOMC
meeting generally have small (and mostly insignificant) effects on the expected target rate.
     These results suggest that much of the effect of both macro announcements and Federal
Reserve communications is incorporated much earlier than previously thought; even looking
back up to 20 days prior to the FOMC meeting we find little effect. In contrast, our baseline
specification shows strong effects of anticipatory set-up far in advance.


6     Conclusion
The main contribution of this paper is to examine the anticipatory set-up of financial market
participants during an extensive period of six months before a particular FOMC target
rate decision is made. For the most part previous research only considered the markets

                                              25
expectation immediately prior to these events and the ensuing reaction. As the Federal
Reserve nears the end of the large-scale quantitative easing that it launched in response
to the recent financial crisis, there is renewed interest in the role that Fed communications
and interpretations of other sources of information (such as macro announcements) play in
shaping financial market participants actions.
    We find convincing evidence of financial market set-up well in advance of an FOMC
meeting. Prior FOMC announcements, macro-economic surprises, and the speeches and
testimony of Board members generate large moves in fed funds futures. For both macro
announcements and prior FOMC decisions we find that their impact is larger the farther in
the past they occur, indicating that the set-up effects decline as the meeting approaches.
This is also suggested by the fact that we document a larger proportion of days immediately
preceding the FOMC meeting where the daily change in the futures is zero than in days
farther back, suggesting heightened market convergence relative to those earlier periods. Our
analysis demonstrates the importance of considering the path of macro announcements and
Federal Reserve communications as drivers for the fluctuations in fed funds futures prices.
We find both that inference on the effects of macro announcements is similar whether or not
speeches and testimonies are included and that inference of the effects of the speeches and
testimonies remains the same with or without macro announcements. Taken together these
results suggest that in some sense the information sets may be orthogonal and emphasize
the benefits of including both types of information in the model.


References
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2003): “Mi-
 cro Effects of Macro Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,”
 American Economic Review, 93, 38–62.

        (2007): “Real-time Price Discovery in Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets,”
  Journal of International Economics, 73, 251–277.

Balduzzi, P., E. J. Elton, and T. C. Green (2001): “Economic News and Bond
 Prices: Evidence from the U.S. Treasury Market,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
 Analysis, 36, 523–543.

Beber, A., and M. W. Brandt (2010): “When It Cannot Get Better or Worse: The



                                             26
  Asymmetric Impact of Good and Bad News on Bond Returns in Expansions and Reces-
  sions,” Review of Finance, 14, 119–155.

Bernanke, B. S., and K. N. Kuttner (2005): “What Explains the Stock Market’s
 Reaction to Federal Reserve policy?,” Journal of Finance, 60, 1221–1257.

Bernanke, B. S., V. R. Reinhart, and B. P. Sack (2004): “Monetary Policy Alter-
 natives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment,” Brookings Papers on Economic
 Activity, 2004(2), 1–78.

Blinder, A. S., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. de Haan, and D.-J. Jansen
 (2008): “Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and
 Evidence,” CEPS Working Paper, No. 161.

Bomfim, A. N. (2003): “Pre-Announcement Effects, News, and Volatility: Monetary Policy
 and the Stock Market,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 27, 133–151.

Chulia-Soler, H., M. Martens, and D. van Dijk (2010): “Asymmetric Effects of Fed-
 eral Funds Target Rate Changes on S&P100 Stock Returns, Volatilities and Correlations,”
 Journal of Banking and Finance, 34, 834–839.

Dueker, M. (1999): “Measuring Monetary Policy Inertia in Target Fed Funds Rate
 Changes,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, pp. 3–9.

Dueker, M. J., and R. H. Rasche (2004): “Discrete Policy Changes and Empirical
 Models of the Federal Funds Rate,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, pp.
 61–72.

Ederington, L., and J. Lee (1993): “The Short-run Dynamics of the Price Adjustment
 to New Information,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 30, 117–134.

Ehrmann, M., and M. Fratzscher (2007): “Transparency, Disclosure and the Federal
 Reserve,” International Journal of Central Banking, 3, 179–225.

Faust, J., J. H. Rogers, S.-Y. B. Wang, and J. H. Wright (2007): “The High-
  Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announce-
  ments,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1051–1068.

Gürkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2005): “Do Actions Speak Louder
 Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,”
 International Journal of Central Banking, 1, 55–93.

                                          27
Hamilton, J. D. (2007): “Daily changes in Fed Funds Futures Prices,” NBER working
 paper, # 13122.

         (2008): “Assessing Monetary Policy Effects Using Daily Federal Funds Futures
  Contracts,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August, 377–393.

Hamilton, J. D., and O. Jordà (2002): “A Model of the Federal Funds Rate Target,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1135–1167.

Hamilton, J. D., and T. Okimoto (2011): “Sources of Variation in Holding Returns for
 Fed Funds Futures Contracts,” Journal of Futures Markets, 31(3), 205–229.

Hamilton, J. D., S. Pruitt, and S. C. Borger (2011): “The Market-Perceived Mon-
 etary Policy Rule,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 1–28.

Hayo, B., A. M. Kutan, and M. Neuenkirch (2012): “Financial Market Reaction to
 Federal Reserve Communications: Does the Crisis Make a Difference?,” MAGKS Discus-
 sion Paper No. 08-2008.

Hayo, B., and M. Neuenkirch (2010): “Do Federal Reserve Communications Help Pre-
 dict Federal Funds Target Rate Decisions?,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 32, 1014–1024.

Hu, L., and P. C. B. Phillips (2004): “Dynamics of the Federal Funds Target Rate: A
 Nonstationary Discrete Choice Approach,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19, 851–867.

Jones, C. M., O. Lamont, and R. L. Lumsdaine (1998): “Macroeconomic News and
  Bond Market Volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 315–337.

Kauppi, H. (2010): “Predicting the Direction of the Fed’s Target Rate,” Journal of
 Forecasting, 31, 47–67.

Kim, H., J. Jackson, and R. Saba (2009): “Forecasting the FOMC’s Interest Rate
 Setting Behavior: A Further Analysis,” Journal of Forecasting, 28, 145–165.

Kohn, D. L., and B. P. Sack (2004): “Central Bank Talk: Does It Matter and Why?,” in
 Macroeconomics, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability, pp. 175–206. Bank of Canada.

Kuttner, K. N. (2001): “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from
 the Fed Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 523–544.



                                          28
Lange, J., B. Sack, and W. Whitesell (2003): “Anticipations of Monetary Policy in
 Financial Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35(6), 889–909.

Love, R., and R. Payne (2008): “Macroeconomic News, Order Flows, and Exchange
 Rates,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 43(2), 467–488.

Lucca, D. O., and F. Trebbi (2009): “Measuring Central Bank Communication: An
 Automated Approach with Application to FOMC Statements,” NBER working paper,
 15367.

Middeldorp, M. (2011): “FOMC Communication Policy and the Accuracy of Fed Funds
 Futures,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 491.

Monokroussos, G. (2011): “Dynamic Limited Dependent Variable Modeling and U.S.
 Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 519–534.

Piazzesi, M. (2005): “Bond Yields and the Federal Reserve,” Journal of Political Economy,
  113, 311–344.

Poole, W., and R. H. Rasche (2003): “The Impact of Changes in FOMC Disclosure
 Practices on the Transparency of Monetary Policy: Are Markets and the FOMC Better
 “Synched”?,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, January/February, 1–10.

Poole, W., R. H. Rasche, and D. L. Thornton (2002): “Market Anticipations of
 Monetary Policy Actions,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August, 65–
 93.

Rudebusch, G. D. (2002): “Term Structure Evidence on Interest Rate Smoothing and
 Monetary Policy Inertia,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 1161–1187.

Söderström, U. (2001): “Predicting Monetary Policy with Federal Funds Futures Prices,”
  The Journal of Futures Markets, 21(4), 377–391.

Taylor, N. (2010): “The Determinants of Future U.S. Monetary Policy: High-Frequency
  Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42, 399–420.

van den Hauwe, S., R. Paap, and D. van Dijk (2013): “Bayesian forecasting of federal
  funds target rate decisions,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 37, 19–40.




                                           29
                               Table 1: FOMC Announcements

                           Meeting                   FOMC target rate
                      Year   Date          Actual   Expected Unexpected (bps)
                      2001    8/21           3.5        3.47             3.5
                              9/17   U       3
                             10/2            2.5        2.46             4.2
                             11/6            2          2.14           −13.8
                             12/11           1.75       1.76            −1.0
                      2002    1/30           1.75       1.73             2
                              3/19           1.75       1.78            −3
                              5/7            1.75       1.76            −1
                              6/26           1.75       1.77            −2
                              8/13           1.75       1.67             8
                              9/24           1.75       1.69             6
                             11/6            1.25       1.46           −21
                             12/10           1.25       1.22             3
                      2003    1/29           1.25       1.23             2
                              3/18           1.25       1.17             8
                              5/6            1.25       1.20             5
                              6/25           1          0.87            13
                              8/12           1          1.00             0
                              9/16           1          1.01            −1
                             10/28           1          1.01            −1
                             12/9            1          1.01            −1
                      2004    1/28           1          1.00             0
                              3/16           1          1.00             0
                              5/4            1          1.02            −2
                              6/30           1.25       1.27            −2
                              8/10           1.5        1.50             0
                              9/21           1.75       1.75             0
                             11/10           2          2.01            −1
                             12/14           2.25       2.25             0
                      2005    2/2            2.5        2.52            −2
                              3/22           2.75       2.77            −2
                              5/3            3          3.03            −3
                              6/30           3.25       3.26            −1
                              8/9            3.5        3.55            −5
                              9/20           3.75       3.73             2
                             11/1            4          4.01            −1
                             12/13           4.25       4.28            −3
                      2006    1/31           4.5        4.50             0
                              3/28           4.75       4.76            −1
                              5/10           5          5.06            −6
                              6/29           5.25       5.28            −3
                              8/8            5.25       5.30            −5
                              9/20           5.25       5.25             0
                             10/25           5.25       5.25             0
                             12/12           5.25       5.23             2
                      2007    1/31           5.25       5.25             0
                              3/21           5.25       5.25             0
                              5/9            5.25       5.24             1
                              6/28           5.25       5.25             0
                              8/7            5.25       5.22             3
                              8/17   U       5.25       4.88            37
                              9/18           4.75       4.60            15
                             10/31           4.5        4.52            −2
                             12/11           4.25       4.12            13
                      2008    1/22   U       3.5        4.13           −63
                              1/30           3          3.06            −6
                              3/18           2.25       1.89            36
                              4/30           2          2.05            −5
                              6/25           2          2.03            −3
                              8/5            2          2.02            −2
                              9/16           2          1.83            17
Note: This table provides an overview of the FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 -
September 2008. For each FOMC decision, we list the actual fed funds target rate as announced after the
meeting and the expected post-FOMC meeting target rate. This expected post-FOMC meeting target
rate is based on the closing price of the fed fund futures contracts on the day preceding the meeting.
‘Unexpected’ is defined as the difference between the actual and expected post-FOMC meeting rates. A
“U” following the date denotes that the FOMC announcement was unscheduled.
                         Table 2: Macroeconomic Announcements

                                                         Number of     Average        Average
                                     Time (EST)        announcements   Surprise   Absolute Surprise
Quarterly
1    GDP advance                        8:30 a.m.            19         −0.67            0.96
2    GDP preliminary                    8:30 a.m.            19          0.07            0.75
3    GDP final                          8:30 a.m.            18         −0.21            0.64
Monthly
Real Activity
4    Nonfarm payroll employment         8.30 a.m.            85         −0.29            0.78
5    Retail sales                       8.30 a.m.            85          0.05            0.63
6    Industrial production              9.15 a.m.            84         −0.16            0.82
7    Capacity utilization               9.15 a.m.            84         −0.13            0.80
8    Personal income                    8.30 a.m.            85          0.12            0.58
9    Consumer credit                    3.00 p.m.            81          0.01            0.76
Consumption
10 Personal consumption exp.            8.30 a.m.            85         −0.20            0.68
11 New home sales Investment           10.30 a.m.            93          0.09            0.75
Investment
12 Durable goods orders                 8.30   a.m.          85         −0.06            0.71
13 Construction spending               10.00   a.m.          86         −0.10            0.76
14 Factory orders                      10.00   a.m.          85          0.03            0.73
15 Business inventoriesa               10.00   a.m.          83          0.13            0.77
Goverment Purchases
16 Government budget deficit            2.00 p.m.            80          0.03            0.51
Net Exports
17 Trade balance                        8.30 a.m.            86         −0.02            0.79
Prices
18 Producer price index                 8.30 a.m.            83          0.08            0.76
19 Consumer price index                 8.30 a.m.            85         −0.11            0.76
Forward-looking
20 Consumer confidence index           10.00   a.m.          85         −0.04            0.76
21 NAPM indexb                         10.00   a.m.          86          0.25            0.83
22 Housing starts                       8.30   a.m.          85          0.15            0.81
23 Index of leading indicators         10.00   a.m.          84         −0.18            0.71
Weekly
24 Initial unemployment claims          8.30 a.m.           367         −0.05            0.73
Notes: This table provides an overview of the scheduled macroeconomic announcements that are included
in the analysis. For each macro variable, the table shows the time of the announcement (EST=Eastern
Standard Time), the number of observations during the period July 2001 - September 2008, the average
surprise (defined as the actual release minus the consensus estimate) and average absolute surprise. All
surprises are standardized using their sample standard deviation.
a
  : Earlier part of sample (before 2005) often at 8:30 a.m.
b
  : Latest part of sample at 9:45 a.m. (since January 2007).




                                                  31
                               Table 3: Results - baseline specification


Dummy variables                                             Continuous variables
                              Coeff.       Std.Err.                                                          Coeff.        Std.Err.
FOMC meetings (θm )                                         Macro announcements (γn )
Current              2.170∗∗∗                   0.577       GDP (advance)                                  0.124               0.234
Previous             1.600∗∗∗                   0.510       GDP (preliminary)                             −0.258               0.213
2nd previous         2.160∗∗∗                   0.541       GDP (final)                                   −0.507∗∗∗            0.130
3rd previous         2.470∗∗∗                   0.625       Nonfarm payrolls                               2.554∗∗∗            0.252
4th previous         3.920∗∗∗                   0.880       Retail sales                                   0.665∗∗∗            0.188
Unscheduled (θu )   22.840∗∗∗                   7.583       Industrial Production                         −0.113               0.229
                                                            Capacity Utilization                          −0.098               0.261
Speeches (κk )                                              Personal Income                                0.088               0.183
Greenspan                 −0.049                0.144       Consumer Credit                               −0.245∗              0.148
Bernanke (Governor)       −0.348∗∗              0.165       Pers. Consump. Exp.                           −0.188               0.163
Bernanke (Chair)           0.383                0.248       New Home Sales                                −0.013               0.144
Ferguson                  −0.302∗               0.162       Durable Goods                                  0.730∗∗∗            0.217
Kohn (Governor)           −0.389∗               0.201       Constr. Spending                              −0.024               0.158
Kohn (Vice-Chair)          1.446∗∗∗             0.327       Factory Orders                                −0.272∗∗             0.134
Meyer                      5.546∗∗∗             1.894       Business Inventories                           0.207               0.162
Gramlich                  −0.095                0.264       Government Purchases                           0.105               0.175
Olson                     −0.189                0.184       Trade Balance                                  0.006               0.177
Bies                      −0.426∗∗∗             0.123       Producer Price Index                           0.791∗∗∗            0.246
Mishkin                    1.693∗∗∗             0.551       Consumer Price Index                           0.488               0.306
Kroszner                   0.567∗               0.322       Consumer Confidence                            0.466∗∗∗            0.174
Warsh                     −0.084                0.462       ISM Manufacturing (NAPM)                       0.693∗∗∗            0.182
                                                            Housing Starts                                 0.023               0.120
Testimony (λl )                                             Leading Indicators                             0.202               0.168
Humphrey-Hawkins           0.788∗∗              0.322       Initial Unemployment                           0.314∗∗∗            0.105
Testimony - Chair          0.682∗∗∗             0.229
Testimony - Others        −0.248                0.159
  Note: The table shows coefficient estimates in the baseline regression model given by:
                              K
                              X                 L
                                                X                 M
                                                                  X                              N
                                                                                                 X
                                        S                 T                 F
          |∆Efi,j,t | = α +         κk Dk,t +         λl Dl,t +         θm Dm,i,t + θu DtF U +         γn |Sn,t | + εi,j,t ,
                              k=1               l=1               m=0                            n=1

  where Efi,j,t is the expected fed funds target rate after FOMC decision i at the close of day t, which is
                                                                                             S
  j trading days prior to the announcement, and ∆ is the first-difference operator. Dk,t         is a dummy that
  is equal to 1 if there was a speech by Fed official k on day t (and zero otherwise), k = 1, 2, . . . , K = 17.
     T
  Dl,t , l = 1, 2, 3, is a dummy that is equal to 1 if there was a testimony of type l on day t. Three types
  of testimony are distinguished: (i) the so-called Humphrey-Hawkins testimony to Congress by the Fed
  chairman related to the semi-annual Monetary Policy Report, (ii) other testimony by the Fed chairman,
                                                         F
  and (iii) testimony by other Board members. Dm,i,t         , m = 0, 1, . . . , M = 4 are equal to 1 if the m-th
  scheduled FOMC meeting prior to meeting i occurred on day t. DtF U is a dummy variable for unscheduled
  FOMC meetings. |Sn,t | is the absolute surprise of macro announcement k (k = 1, 2 . . . , K = 24) on day
  t (and 0 if there is no such announcement). The regression is combined with the error specification
  εi,j,t = ωj + ηi,j,t , which includes ‘fixed effects’ ωj for each day j prior to announcement i. The model
  is estimated using the 54 FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 - September 2008,
  with j = 1, 2, . . . , 124 indicating the j-th trading day prior to an FOMC announcement day (excluding
  weekends and holidays). Reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent.
  The superscripts ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                     Table 4: Time-varying effects of macro surprises

                                  m:      −5         −4           −3          −2           −1
GDP (advance)                           4.698∗∗∗ −0.130         0.116       0.377       −0.140
GDP (preliminary)                                 −0.453       −0.205      −0.120       −0.263
GDP (final)                            −1.170∗∗∗ −0.585∗∗∗     −0.176      −0.389∗      −0.516∗∗∗
Nonfarm payrolls                        6.482∗∗∗ 4.127∗∗∗       2.887∗∗∗    2.007∗∗∗     0.572∗∗∗
Retail sales                            1.822      0.732∗∗      0.831∗∗     0.722∗∗∗     0.135
Industrial Production                  −1.570     −0.100       −0.191      −0.234        0.160
Capacity Utilization                    0.937     −0.435       −0.271       0.140        0.033
Personal Income                         1.223      0.187        0.222       0.217       −0.148
Consumer Credit                         0.547     −0.245       −0.430      −0.136       −0.242∗
Pers. Consump. Exp.                    −0.073     −0.337       −0.267      −0.235        0.021
New Home Sales                          1.793      0.009       −0.143      −0.086       −0.053
Durable Goods                          −1.406      1.082∗∗      1.090∗∗     0.622∗∗     −0.040
Constr. Spending                       −1.469      0.112        0.000      −0.038       −0.123
Factory Orders                         −1.375     −0.329       −0.356      −0.157       −0.180
Business Inventories                    0.071      0.503        0.647∗∗     0.232       −0.320
Government Purchases                    0.736∗∗    0.185       −0.026       0.096        0.110
Trade Balance                          −0.399     −0.128        0.218       0.014       −0.066
Producer Price Index                    4.917∗∗∗ 1.207∗∗        0.733       0.636        0.462
Consumer Price Index                    0.311      0.988        0.486       0.165        0.427
Consumer Confidence                     0.675      1.022∗∗      0.637       0.347        0.005
ISM Manufacturing (NAPM)                2.033 ∗∗∗  1.187∗∗      0.728∗      0.484        0.268
Housing Starts                          0.551      0.320        0.053       0.064       −0.358∗∗
Leading Indicators                      0.310      0.348        0.287       0.198       −0.007
Initial Unemployment                    1.150∗     0.483∗       0.367∗∗     0.287∗       0.090
Note: The table shows estimation results from the baseline specification in (2)-(3) but with the coeffi-
cients on the absolute macro surprises allowed to differ depending on how many FOMC meetings ago
the macro announcement occurred. Coefficients reported in the column labeled m, m = −5, −4, . . . , −1
correspond to macro surprises that occurred between the |m|-th and |(m − 1)|-th FOMC meeting prior
to meeting i (where the 0-th previous meeting is meeting i itself). The model is estimated using the 54
FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 - September 2008, using 124 trading day prior to
an FOMC announcement day (excluding weekends and holidays). The superscripts ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                33
                                               Table 5: Macro surprises during blackout periods

           Dummy variables                                  Continuous variables                Blackout              Not Blackout
                                      Coeff.     Std.Err.                                     Coeff.  Std.Err.       Coeff.  Std.Err.
           FOMC meetings                                    Macro announcements
           Current                   2.170∗∗∗       0.579   GDP (advance)                  −0.324         0.439     0.223        0.266
           Previous                  1.580∗∗∗       0.512   GDP (preliminary)              −1.650∗∗∗      0.439    −0.169        0.220
           2nd previous              2.140∗∗∗       0.543   GDP (final)                    −0.809∗∗∗      0.303    −0.426∗∗∗     0.122
           3rd previous              2.500∗∗∗       0.640   Nonfarm payrolls                4.240∗∗∗      1.371     2.370∗∗∗     0.244
           4th previous              3.680∗∗∗       0.859   Retail sales                    3.739∗∗       1.762     0.622∗∗∗     0.193
           Unscheduled              22.840∗∗∗       7.588   Industrial Production          −0.761         1.052    −0.103        0.231
                                                            Capacity Utilization            0.175         1.119    −0.059        0.265
           Speeches                                         Personal Income                −1.008         0.967     0.161        0.194
           Greenspan               −0.078           0.145   Consumer Credit                 0.095         1.003    −0.329∗∗      0.131
           Bernanke (Governor)     −0.323∗          0.165   Pers. Consump. Exp.             0.347         1.296    −0.179        0.164
           Bernanke (Chair)         0.362           0.242   New Home Sales                  0.607         0.530    −0.105        0.148
           Ferguson                −0.281∗          0.164   Durable Goods                  −0.006         0.736     0.759∗∗∗     0.223
           Kohn (Governor)         −0.360∗          0.200   Constr. Spending                0.395         1.090    −0.047        0.156




34
           Kohn (Vice-Chair)        1.422∗∗∗        0.323   Factory Orders                 −1.281∗∗∗      0.409    −0.196        0.136
           Meyer                    5.471∗∗∗        1.910   Business Inventories            1.190         1.610     0.178        0.152
           Gramlich                −0.119           0.257   Government Purchases           −0.100         0.566     0.105        0.180
           Olson                   −0.204           0.180   Trade Balance                   0.919         1.287    −0.015        0.178
           Bies                    −0.444∗∗∗        0.123   Producer Price Index            2.475∗∗       1.172     0.714∗∗∗     0.248
           Mishkin                  1.685∗∗∗        0.549   Consumer Price Index            2.183         2.398     0.376        0.286
           Kroszner                 0.575∗          0.322   Consumer Confidence             0.113         0.397     0.504∗∗∗     0.184
           Warsh                   −0.065           0.463   ISM Manufacturing (NAPM)        1.069         0.657     0.651∗∗∗     0.189
                                                            Housing Starts                 −0.196         0.682     0.021        0.117
           Testimony                                        Leading Indicators              0.511         0.686     0.185        0.176
           Humphrey-Hawkins         0.843∗∗∗        0.319   Initial Unemployment            0.868         0.614     0.281∗∗∗     0.105
           Testimony - Chair        0.664∗∗∗        0.228
           Testimony - Others      −0.231           0.151
     Note: The table shows estimation results from the baseline specification in (2)-(3) but with the coefficients on the absolute macro surprises
     allowed to differ to differ during blackout periods versus non-blackout periods. The blackout period is defined as the period of ten weekdays
     leading up to an FOMC announcement. The model is estimated using the 54 FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 -
     September 2008, using 124 trading day prior to an FOMC announcement day (excluding weekends and holidays). Reported standard errors
     are heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent. The superscripts ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
     respectively.
                                         Table 6: Macro surprises and speeches and testimony

           Dummy variables                                 Continuous variables                  No S&T                   S&T
                                      Coeff.    Std.Err.                                      Coeff.  Std.Err.       Coeff.  Std.Err.
           FOMC meetings                                   Macro announcements
           Current                   2.180∗∗∗     0.573    GDP (advance)                    0.186         0.237    −1.857∗       0.985
           Previous                  1.600∗∗∗     0.503    GDP (preliminary)                0.051         0.445    −0.454∗∗∗     0.153
           2nd previous              2.190∗∗∗     0.535    GDP (final)                     −0.509∗∗∗      0.135    −0.528        0.587
           3rd previous              2.500∗∗∗     0.620    Nonfarm payrolls                 2.796∗∗∗      0.315     2.020∗∗∗     0.400
           4th previous              3.960∗∗∗     0.866    Retail sales                     0.832∗∗∗      0.161     0.151        0.582
           Unscheduled              22.830∗∗∗     7.594    Industrial Production            0.005         0.318     0.260        0.431
                                                           Capacity Utilization             0.378         0.312    −1.447∗∗      0.597
           Speeches                                        Personal Income                  0.075         0.208     0.456        0.510
           Greenspan               −0.073         0.136    Consumer Credit                 −0.423∗∗∗      0.162     0.075        0.250
           Bernanke (Governor)     −0.288         0.180    Pers. Consump. Exp.             −0.274         0.200    −0.077        0.212
           Bernanke (Chair)         0.500∗∗       0.233    New Home Sales                   0.032         0.208    −0.245        0.185
           Ferguson                −0.268         0.177    Durable Goods                    1.097∗∗∗      0.229    −0.265        0.205
           Kohn (Governor)         −0.342         0.214    Constr. Spending                 0.064         0.171    −0.483        0.484




35
           Kohn (Vice-Chair)        1.604∗∗∗      0.353    Factory Orders                  −0.166         0.224    −0.495∗∗∗     0.123
           Meyer                    5.307∗∗∗      1.910    Business Inventories            −0.153         0.157     1.009∗∗      0.431
           Gramlich                 0.036         0.263    Government Purchases             0.161         0.193    −1.214∗∗      0.475
           Olson                   −0.170         0.184    Trade Balance                   −0.485∗∗∗      0.168     1.405∗∗      0.577
           Bies                    −0.343∗∗       0.138    Producer Price Index             0.934∗∗∗      0.276     0.381        0.538
           Mishkin                  1.756∗∗∗      0.517    Consumer Price Index            −0.295         0.238     1.362∗       0.699
           Kroszner                 0.653∗∗       0.318    Consumer Confidence             −0.017         0.150     1.579∗∗∗     0.362
           Warsh                   −0.138         0.452    ISM Manufacturing (NAPM)         0.888∗∗∗      0.193     0.573        0.459
                                                           Housing Starts                   0.011         0.172     0.295        0.237
           Testimony                                       Leading Indicators               0.396∗        0.204    −0.267        0.254
           Humphrey-Hawkins         0.891∗∗       0.354    Initial Unemployment             0.387∗∗∗      0.134     0.191        0.131
           Testimony - Chair        0.670∗∗∗      0.236
           Testimony - Others      −0.213         0.174
     Note: The table shows estimation results from the baseline specification in (2)-(3) but with the coefficients on the absolute macro surprises
     allowed to differ depending on whether or not the macro announcement coincided with Fed communication. Columns headed S&T (No
     S&T) show coefficient (estimates and standard errors) on macro surprises announced on days with (without) a speech or testimony by an
     FOMC member. The model is estimated using the 54 FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 - September 2008, using 124
     trading day prior to an FOMC announcement day (excluding weekends and holidays). Reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity and
     autocorrelation consistent. The superscripts ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                         Table 7: Speeches and testimony and macro surprises

           Dummy variables                                                        Continuous variables
                                     Coeff.     Std.Err.    Coeff.     Std.Err.                                    Coeff.    Std.Err.
           FOMC meetings                                                          Macro announcements
           Current                   2.170∗∗∗     0.578                           GDP (advance)                   0.138        0.234
           Previous                  1.597∗∗∗     0.511                           GDP (preliminary)              −0.314        0.221
           2nd previous              2.158∗∗∗     0.542                           GDP (final)                    −0.508∗∗∗     0.130
           3rd previous              2.470∗∗∗     0.625                           Nonfarm payrolls                2.535∗∗∗     0.255
           4th previous              3.935∗∗∗     0.882                           Retail sales                    0.676∗∗∗     0.184
           Unscheduled              22.862∗∗∗     7.586                           Industrial Production          −0.134        0.235
                                                                                  Capacity Utilization           −0.093        0.263
           Speeches                     No MA                     MA              Personal Income                 0.085        0.183
           Greenspan               −0.219         0.139     0.165        0.222    Consumer Credit                −0.290∗       0.150
           Bernanke (Governor)     −0.444∗∗       0.212    −0.345∗       0.207    Pers. Consump. Exp.            −0.195        0.163
           Bernanke (Chair)         0.321         0.283     0.413        0.362    New Home Sales                 −0.031        0.144
           Ferguson                −0.015         0.165    −0.437∗       0.231    Durable Goods                   0.735∗∗∗     0.219
           Kohn (Governor)         −0.204         0.229    −0.553∗       0.295    Constr. Spending               −0.040        0.158




36
           Kohn (Vice-Chair)       −0.175         0.300     1.579∗∗∗     0.329    Factory Orders                 −0.264∗       0.139
           Meyer                   11.950∗∗∗      2.150     4.138∗∗      1.778    Business Inventories            0.240        0.162
           Gramlich                −1.149∗∗∗      0.280     0.172        0.318    Government Purchases            0.103        0.174
           Olson                   −0.352         0.222    −0.107        0.257    Trade Balance                   0.000        0.168
           Bies                    −0.067         0.167    −0.563∗∗∗     0.151    Producer Price Index            0.764∗∗∗     0.244
           Mishkin                  0.428         0.358     2.585∗∗∗     0.756    Consumer Price Index            0.492∗       0.299
           Kroszner                 0.600∗        0.350     0.682∗       0.414    Consumer Confidence             0.463∗∗∗     0.174
           Warsh                   −1.486∗∗∗      0.254     2.531∗∗∗     0.567    ISM Manufacturing (NAPM)        0.693∗∗∗     0.180
                                                                                  Housing Starts                  0.044        0.118
           Testimony                                                              Leading Indicators              0.217        0.168
           Humphrey-Hawkins        −0.376         0.450     0.856∗∗      0.382    Initial Unemployment            0.291∗∗∗     0.108
           Testimony - Chair        0.551         0.455     0.768∗∗∗     0.258
           Testimony - Others       0.014         0.273    −0.405∗∗      0.182
     Note: The table shows estimation results from the baseline specification in (2)-(3) but with the coefficients on the speeches and testimony
     dummies allowed to differ depending on whether or not the Fed communication coincided with macro announcements. Columns headed MA
     (No MA) show coefficients (estimates and standard errors) on speeches and testimony given on days with (without) macro announcements.
     The model is estimated using the 54 FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 - September 2008, using 124 trading day prior
     to an FOMC announcement day (excluding weekends and holidays). Reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
     consistent. The superscripts ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
               Figure 1: Expected target rate for the FOMC announcement on June 30, 2004

                                       1.35

                                        1.3
                                                Jan 28, 2004 FOMC
                                       1.25
  Expected FOMC rate




                                        1.2

                                       1.15                                 Mar 16, 2004 FOMC

                                        1.1

                                       1.05                                                          May 4, 2004 FOMC

                                          1
                                               -120   -110 -100 -90       -80    -70   -60    -50  -40   -30  -20  -10   0
                                                        Trading days leading up to June 30, 2004 FOMC announcement


                                                                     (a) Expected target rate

                                        0.1
                                                                    Jan 28, 2004 FOMC
        Change in Expected FOMC rate




                                       0.05


                                          0


                                       -0.05

                                                                            Mar 16, 2004 FOMC
                                        -0.1
                                                                                                     May 4, 2004 FOMC

                                       -0.15
                                               -120   -110 -100 -90       -80    -70   -60    -50  -40   -30  -20  -10   0
                                                        Trading days leading up to June 30, 2004 FOMC announcement


                                                                (b) Change in expected target rate
Note: This figure shows the market’s expectation of the fed funds target rate after the FOMC an-
nouncement on June 30, 2004 on the 124 trading days (excluding weekends and holidays) before the
announcement. At the June 30, 2004 meeting, the FOMC decided to increase the target rate from 1
to 1.25 percent. The expected target rate on each day prior is obtained from the closing price of fed
funds futures contract for July 2004. Panel (a) shows the expected target rate, panel (b) shows the daily
change in the expected target rate.




                                                                               37
          Figure 2: Changes in expected target rate on pre-announcement days

  0.045
       0.04
  0.035
       0.03
  0.025
       0.02
  0.015
       0.01
  0.005
         0
              -120 -110 -100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20                                         -10   0
                       Trading days leading up to FOMC announcement


                                      (a) Average absolute change


                      Past 25 trading days   -26 to -50    -51 to -75   -76 to -100   -101 to -125
  80

  70

  60

  50

  40

  30

  20

  10

   0
        10/28/03




        11/10/04
        12/14/04




        12/13/05




        10/25/06
        12/12/06




        10/31/07
        12/11/07
         1/30/02
         3/19/02
          5/7/02
         6/26/02
         8/13/02
         9/24/02
         11/6/02
         12/9/02
         1/29/03
         3/18/03
          5/6/03
         6/25/03
         8/12/03
         9/16/03

         12/8/03
         1/28/04
         3/16/04
          5/4/04
         6/30/04
         8/10/04
         9/21/04


          2/2/05
         3/22/05
          5/3/05
         6/30/05
          8/9/05
         9/20/05
         11/1/05

         1/31/06
         3/28/06
         5/10/06
         6/29/06
          8/8/06
         9/20/06


         1/31/07
         3/21/07
          5/9/07
         6/28/07
          8/7/07
         9/18/07


         1/30/08
         3/18/08
         4/30/08
         6/25/08
          8/5/08
         9/16/08




                                       FOMC announcement date



                                 (b) Number of days with no change
Note: Panel (a) shows the average absolute change in the expected target rate in event-time for the
period of 124 trading days prior to an FOMC announcement day (excluding weekends and holidays).
Panel (b) shows the number of days on which the expected target rate did not change in the period of
124 trading days prior to an FOMC announcement. The number of no-change days is shown separately
for each FOMC announcement during the period January 2002 - September 2009. The period of 124
trading days prior to an announcement is divided into five sub-periods of 25 days each.



                                                      38
    Figure 3: Trading volume fed funds futures preceding FOMC announcements
  45000
  40000
  35000
  30000
  25000
  20000
  15000
  10000
    5000
        0
            -120 -110 -100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20                             -10     0
                     Trading days leading up to FOMC announcement

Note: The figure shows the average trading volume in Fed Funds futures in event-time for the 124 trading
days prior to an FOMC announcement day (excluding weekends and holidays).




                                                39
              Figure 4: Board members’ terms, speeches and testimonies

                                                                           Greenspan (Chair)
                                                                           Bernanke (Chair)
                                                                           Ferguson (VC)
                                                                           Kohn (VC)
                                                                           Bernanke
                                                                           Kohn
                                                                           Meyer
                                                                           Gramlich
                                                                           Olson
                                                                           Bies
                                                                           Mishkin
                                                                           Kroszner
                                                                           Warsh




                                    (a) Board membership




                                                                                       2002

   35                                                                                  2003
   30
                                                                                       2004
   25

   20                                                                                  2005
   15
                                                                                       2006
   10

    5                                                                                  2007

    0
                                                                                       2008




                                 (b) Speeches and testimonies
Note: Panel (a) shows the composition of the Federal Reserve Board during the period January 2002 -
September 2008. Panel (b) shows the number of speeches and testimonies given by each of the Board
members, by year.

                                              40
Figure 5: Number of macro announcements, speeches, testimonies, and prior FOMC meet-
ings
     60
                     Announcements                   Speeches
                     Testimonies                     FOMC meetings
     50

     40

     30

     20

     10

       0
           -120 -110 -100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20                           -10     0
                     Trading Days Leading up to FOMC announcement

   Note: The figure shows the number of macroeconomic announcements, speeches, testimonies, and prior
   FOMC meetings in event-time for the 124 trading days prior to an FOMC announcement day (excluding
   weekends and holidays).




                                                41
                                    Figure 6: Trading day effects
   5


   4


   3


   2


   1


   0


  -1
       -120    -110   -100    -90      -80   -70     -60    -50     -40    -30     -20    -10     0
                             Trading days leading up to FOMC announcement

Note: The figure shows the estimates of the trading day effect coefficients ωj in the baseline specification
(2)-(3), estimated using the 54 FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 - September 2008,
with j = 1, 2, . . . , 124 indicating the j-th trading day prior to an FOMC announcement day (excluding
weekends and holidays). The estimates of ωj (solid line) are shown together with two standard error
bands (dashed lines).




                                                   42
          Figure 7: Aggregate setup effects of macroeconomic announcements
                       2.5
                         2
                       1.5
                         1
                       0.5
                         0
                      -0.5
                              -5     -4      -3     -2    -1
Note: The figure shows the coefficients on dummy variables for macro announcements that have occurred:
(i) since the most recent FOMC meeting, (ii) more than one but less than two FOMC meetings ago,
(iii) more than two but less than three meetings ago, (iv) more than three but less than four meetings
ago, and (v) more than four but less than five meetings ago. These correspond to the labels -1, -2, -3,
-4, and -5, respectively, on the horizontal axis. The coefficient estimates (solid line) are shown together
with two standard error bands (dashed lines).




                                                  43
                             Figure 8: Time-varying effects of macro announcements

 7                                                                                                          8
                                   1.0                                    0.4
 6                                                                                                          7
 5                                 0.5                                    0.0                               6
 4                                                                        -0.4                              5
 3                                 0.0                                                                      4
                                                                          -0.8
 2                                                                                                          3
                                   -0.5
 1                                                                        -1.2                              2
 0                                 -1.0                                                                     1
                                                                          -1.6
-1
                                                                                                            0
-2                                 -1.5                                   -2.0
       -5    -4    -3   -2   -1            -5    -4   -3   -2   -1                -5    -4   -3   -2   -1         -5   -4   -3   -2   -1



     (a) GDP (advance)             (b) GDP (preliminary)                         (c) GDP (final)                (d) Nonfarm payrolls

12                                  2                                      6                                8

                                    1                                                                       6
  8                                                                        4
                                    0                                                                       4
  4
                                   -1                                      2                                2
  0
                                   -2                                      0                                0
 -4
                                   -3                                                                       -2
                                                                          -2
 -8                                -4                                                                       -4
-12                                -5                                     -4                                -6
       -5    -4    -3   -2   -1           -5    -4    -3   -2   -1               -5    -4    -3   -2   -1         -5   -4   -3   -2   -1



       (e) Retail sales            (f) Industrial produc-                 (g) Capacity utilization               (h) Personal income
                                   tion

                                    8                                      5                                3
2.0
                                    6                                                                       2
1.5                                                                        4
                                    4                                                                       1
1.0                                                                        3
                                    2                                                                       0
0.5
                                    0                                      2                                -1
0.0
                                   -2                                                                       -2
                                                                           1
-0.5                               -4                                                                       -3
-1.0                                                                       0
                                   -6                                                                       -4
-1.5                               -8                                     -1                                -5
        -5    -4   -3   -2   -1           -5    -4    -3   -2   -1               -5    -4    -3   -2   -1         -5   -4   -3   -2   -1



     (i) Consumer credit           (j) Personal consump-                       (k) New home sales           (l) Durable goods or-
                                   tion exp.                                                                ders




                                                                     44
                   Figure 8: (continued) Time-varying effects of macro announcements
 2
                                  0.5                                    2.0                               1.6
 1                                0.0                                    1.5
                                                                                                           1.2
                                  -0.5                                   1.0
 0                                                                                                         0.8
                                  -1.0                                   0.5
-1                                -1.5                                   0.0                               0.4

-2                                -2.0                                   -0.5
                                                                                                           0.0
                                  -2.5                                   -1.0
-3                                                                                                         -0.4
                                  -3.0                                   -1.5
-4                                -3.5                                   -2.0                              -0.8
       -5    -4    -3   -2   -1           -5    -4   -3   -2   -1                -5    -4   -3   -2   -1          -5   -4   -3   -2     -1



(m)      Construction                  (n) Factory orders                (o) Business inventories          (p) Government budget
spending                                                                                                   deficit

 3                                 8                                      3
                                                                                                           2.5
 2                                 7
                                                                          2                                2.0
                                   6
 1                                                                                                         1.5
                                   5                                      1
 0                                 4                                                                       1.0
                                                                          0
-1                                 3                                                                       0.5
                                   2                                     -1
-2                                                                                                         0.0
                                   1
-3                                                                       -2                                -0.5
                                   0
-4                                -1                                     -3                                -1.0
       -5    -4    -3   -2   -1          -5    -4    -3   -2   -1               -5    -4    -3   -2   -1          -5   -4   -3   -2     -1



       (q) Trade balance          (r) Producer price in-                 (s) Consumer price in-            (t) Consumer               confi-
                                  dex                                    dex                               dence index

                                   3                                      3
3.5                                                                                                        3.0
3.0                                                                                                        2.5
                                   2                                      2
2.5                                                                                                        2.0
2.0                                1                                      1
                                                                                                           1.5
1.5
                                   0                                      0                                1.0
1.0
0.5                                                                                                        0.5
                                  -1                                     -1
0.0                                                                                                        0.0
-0.5                              -2                                     -2                                -0.5
        -5    -4   -3   -2   -1          -5    -4    -3   -2   -1               -5    -4    -3   -2   -1          -5   -4   -3   -2     -1



       (u) NAPM index                  (v) Housing starts                (w) Index of leading in-          (x) Initial unemploy-
                                                                         dicators                          ment claims
     Note: The graphs show the coefficients on the absolute surprise in macro announcements, in the speci-
     fication where these are allowed to differ depending on the number of FOMC announcements ago they
     occur. The coefficient estimates (solid line) are shown together with two standard error bands (dashed
     lines).




                                                                    45
                                                                                                                       ‐1
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                        7




     lines).
                                                                                                                 1/30/02
                                                                                                                 3/19/02
                                                                                                                  5/7/02
                                                                                                                 6/26/02
                                                                                                                 8/13/02
                                                                                                                 9/24/02
                                                                                                                 11/6/02
                                                                                                                 12/9/02
                                                                                                                 3/18/03
                                                                                                                  5/6/03
                                                                                                                 6/25/03
                                                                                                                 8/12/03
                                                                                                                 9/16/03
                                                                                                                10/28/03
                                                                                                                 12/8/03
                                                                                                                 1/28/04
                                                                                                                 3/16/04
                                                                                                                  5/4/04
                                                                                                                 6/30/04
                                                                                                                 8/10/04
                                                                                                                 9/21/04
                                                                                                                11/10/04
                                                                                                                12/14/04
                                                                                                                  2/2/05
                                                                                                                 3/22/05
                                                                                                                  5/3/05




46
                                                                                                                 6/30/05
                                                                                                                  8/9/05
                                                                                                                 9/20/05
                                                                                                                 11/1/05
                                                                                                                12/13/05
                                                                                                                 1/31/06
                                                                                                                 3/28/06
                                                                                                                 5/10/06
                                                                                                                 6/29/06
                                                                                                                  8/8/06
                                                                                                                                                            Figure 9: FOMC meeting effects




                                                                                                                 9/20/06
                                                                                                                10/25/06
                                                                                                                12/12/06
                                                                                                                 1/31/07
                                                                                                                 3/21/07
                                                                                                                  5/9/07
                                                                                                                 6/28/07
                                                                                                                  8/7/07
                                                                                                                 9/18/07
                                                                                                                10/31/07
                                                                                                                12/11/07
                                                                                                                 1/30/08
                                                                                                                 3/18/08
                                                                                                                 4/30/08
                                                                                                                 6/25/08
                                                                                                                  8/5/08
                                                                                                                 9/16/08




     2008. The coefficient estimates (solid line) are shown together with two standard error bands (dashed
     with (4), estimated using the 54 FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 - September
     Note: The figure shows the estimates of the FOMC meeting effect coefficients δi in the specification (2)
Appendix A                Trading day fixed effects
                Table A.1: Trading day fixed effects - baseline specification

   j Coeff. Std.Err.           j Coeff. Std.Err.                        j Coeff. Std.Err.                  j Coeff. Std.Err.
    1 0.730    0.342          32 0.874     0.354                       63 1.387     0.307                  94 2.441    0.511
    2 0.633    0.474          33 1.063     0.361                       64 1.440     0.309                  95 2.111    0.348
    3 0.410    0.213          34 0.739     0.244                       65 1.377     0.268                  96 2.741    0.510
    4 0.609    0.266          35 0.935     0.348                       66 1.829     0.409                  97 1.960    0.323
    5 0.843    0.445          36 0.818     0.269                       67 1.711     0.401                  98 2.523    0.506
    6 1.347    0.529          37 1.030     0.271                       68 2.736     0.511                  99 3.174    0.502
    7 0.471    0.338          38 2.046     0.598                       69 1.880     0.443                 100 2.807    0.415
    8 0.597    0.282          39 1.264     0.308                       70 2.588     0.530                 101 2.681    0.561
    9 0.248    0.165          40 1.728     0.543                       71 2.340     0.586                 102 2.583    0.466
  10 0.327     0.218          41 1.196     0.411                       72 1.944     0.400                 103 3.103    0.400
  11 0.787     0.211          42 1.189     0.436                       73 2.063     0.356                 104 3.248    0.590
  12 1.038     0.418          43 1.126     0.258                       74 1.322     0.257                 105 2.612    0.474
  13 0.234     0.183          44 1.139     0.230                       75 1.913     0.452                 106 2.496    0.389
  14 0.248     0.121          45 0.887     0.282                       76 1.764     0.392                 107 2.146    0.281
  15 0.540     0.354          46 0.997     0.331                       77 1.618     0.327                 108 2.814    0.523
  16 0.674     0.186          47 0.545     0.161                       78 1.853     0.319                 109 2.373    0.427
  17 0.452     0.259          48 1.286     0.280                       79 1.675     0.416                 110 3.262    0.582
  18 0.619     0.327          49 1.101     0.285                       80 1.089     0.466                 111 2.987    0.475
  19 0.616     0.322          50 1.356     0.291                       81 2.252     0.430                 112 1.670    0.467
  20 0.666     0.253          51 0.960     0.214                       82 2.601     0.441                 113 3.242    0.486
  21 0.013     0.369          52 0.330     0.448                       83 2.130     0.407                 114 3.481    0.520
  22 0.329     0.250          53 1.398     0.388                       84 1.827     0.326                 115 2.526    0.380
  23 1.044     0.639          54 1.120     0.309                       85 2.178     0.324                 116 2.391    0.399
  24 0.680     0.266          55 1.289     0.239                       86 2.163     0.409                 117 2.873    0.441
  25 0.576     0.199          56 0.784     0.212                       87 1.748     0.306                 118 3.206    0.496
  26 0.618     0.231          57 1.811     0.317                       88 1.587     0.315                 119 2.343    0.377
  27 1.103     0.539          58 1.114     0.354                       89 1.995     0.328                 120 2.164    0.368
  28 0.482     0.232          59 1.647     0.364                       90 2.600     0.489                 121 2.961    0.390
  29 0.681     0.287          60 1.572     0.324                       91 1.925     0.347                 122 3.381    0.414
  30 1.445     0.503          61 1.137     0.258                       92 1.915     0.354                 123 2.963    0.454
  31 0.922     0.460          62 1.090     0.277                       93 2.132     0.451                 124 3.146    0.451
 Note: The table shows estimates of the trading day ’fixed effects’ ωj , j = 1, 2, . . . , 124, in the baseline
 regression model given by:
                              K
                              X                   L
                                                  X                    M
                                                                       X                                 N
                                                                                                         X
                                        S                   T                   F
          |∆Efi,j,t | = α +         κk Dk,t   +         λl Dl,t   +         θm Dm,i,t   +   θu DtU   +         γn |Sn,t | + εi,j,t ,
                              k=1                 l=1                 m=0                                n=1

 with
                                                        εi,j,t = ωj + ηi,j,t ,
 estimated using the 54 scheduled FOMC announcements during the period January 2002 - September
 2008, with j = 1, 2, . . . , 124 indicating the j-th trading day prior to an FOMC announcement day
 (excluding weekends and holidays). Reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
 consistent. See Table 3 for further details.




                                                                  47
