                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ORIGINS OF STOCK MARKET FLUCTUATIONS

                                      Daniel L. Greenwald
                                         Martin Lettau
                                      Sydney C. Ludvigson

                                       Working Paper 19818
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19818


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2014




The authors are grateful to Jarda Borovicka, John Cochrane, Brian Kelly, Eric Swanson, and seminar
participants at the Q Group 2013 fall conference, the Macro-Finance Society Fall 2014 Meeting, NYU,
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, UC Berkeley Haas School, the University of Michigan,
and the University of Texas at Austin, for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daniel L. Greenwald, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Origins of Stock Market Fluctuations
Daniel L. Greenwald, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 19818
January 2014, Revised December 2014
JEL No. G0,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

Three mutually uncorrelated economic disturbances that we measure empirically explain 85% of the
quarterly variation in real stock market wealth since 1952. A model is employed to interpret these
disturbances in terms of three latent primitive shocks. In the short run, shocks that affect the willingness
to bear risk independently of macroeconomic fundamentals explain most of the variation in the market.
In the long run, the market is profoundly affected by shocks that reallocate the rewards of a given level
of production between workers and shareholders. Productivity shocks play a small role in historical
stock market fluctuations at all horizons.


Daniel L. Greenwald                                  Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
New York University                                  New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th floor                        19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012                                   New York, NY 10002
dlg340@nyu.edu                                       and NBER
                                                     sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
Martin Lettau
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu
1        Introduction

Asset pricing theorists have long been concerned with explaining stock market expected re-
turns, typically measured over monthly, quarterly or annual horizons. This is an important
line of study because variation in the stock market price-dividend ratio is driven almost
entirely by expected excess return ‡uctuation (i.e., forecastable movements in the equity
premium).1 Far less attention has been given to understanding the real (adjusted for in-
‡ation) level of the stock market, i.e., stock price variation, or the cumulation of ex-post
returns. To understand the latter, it is necessary to probe beyond the role of stationary risk
factors and short-run expected returns, to study the primitive economic shocks from which
all stock market (and return premia) ‡uctuations originate.
        To illustrate why, note that some economic shocks have tiny innovations but permanent
or near-permanent e¤ects on cash ‡ows. Under rational expectations, permanent cash ‡ow
shocks have no in‡uence on expected returns or the price-dividend ratio, but they can have
a dramatic in‡uence on real stock market wealth as the decades accumulate. On the other
hand, ‡uctuations in expected returns may be associated with movements in risk premia
and can persistently shift the real value of the stock market around its long-term trend. But
because these ‡uctuations are transitory, their impact eventually dies out. Stock market
wealth evolves over time in response to the cumulation of transitory expected return shocks
and both permanent and transitory cash ‡ow shocks. The crucial unanswered questions are,
what are the economic sources of these shocks? And what have been their relative roles in
evolution of the stock market over time?
        The objective of this paper is to address these questions. We begin by identifying three
mutually orthogonal observable economic disturbances that are associated with the vast
majority (over 85%) of ‡uctuations in real quarterly stock market wealth since the early
1950s. Econometrically, these shocks are measured as speci…c orthogonal movements in
consumption, labor income, and asset wealth (net worth), identi…ed from a cointegrated
vector autoregression (VAR) and extracted using a recursive orthogonalization procedure.
    1
        Expected dividend growth and expected short-term interest rates play little role empirically in price-
dividend ratio variation (Campbell (1991); Cochrane (1991); Cochrane (2005); Cochrane (2008)).



                                                        1
   We then address the question of what these observable VAR disturbances represent eco-
nomically. To do so, we provide a theoretical framework with two types of agents, share-
holders and workers, and three primitive shocks. We show that, if the model generated the
data, the observable VAR innovations under a speci…c recursive ordering would e¤ectively
recover three latent primitive shocks. Speci…cally, the consumption innovation in the empir-
ical VAR would recover a total factor productivity (TFP) shock, the labor income innovation
would recover a factors share shock that reallocates the rewards of production without af-
fecting the size of rewards, and the wealth innovation would recover a shock to shareholder
risk aversion that moves the stochastic discount factor pricing assets independently of stock
market fundamentals or real activity such as consumption and labor earnings. We show that
the dynamic responses to these mutually orthogonal VAR innovations produced from model
generated data are remarkably similar to those obtained from historical data.
   With this theoretical interpretation of the observable disturbances in hand, we turn to
the question of how these distinct shocks have a¤ected stock market wealth over time. We
…nd that the vast majority of short- and medium-term stock market ‡uctuations in historical
data are driven by risk aversion shocks, revealed as movements in wealth that are orthogonal
to consumption and labor income both contemporaneously (an identifying assumption), and
at all subsequent horizons (a result). Although transitory, these shocks are quite persistent
and explain 75% of variation in the log di¤erence of stock market wealth on a quarterly basis.
These facts are well explained by the model, in which the orthogonal wealth shocks originate
from independent shifts in investors’willingness to bear risk. At longer horizons, the relative
importance of the shocks changes. Although the factors share shock explains virtually none
of the variation in the real level of the stock market over cycles of a quarter or two, it explains
roughly 40% over cycles two to three decades long. These facts are well explained by the
model economy, which is subject to small but highly persistent innovations that shift the
allocation of rewards between shareholders and workers independently from the magnitude
of those rewards. By contrast, consumption shocks, both in the model and in the data, play
a small role in the stochastic ‡uctuations of the stock market at all horizons. The crucial
aspect of the model that makes it consistent with this …nding is its heterogeneous agent
speci…cation. This …nding contradicts representative agent asset pricing models in which

                                                2
shocks that drive aggregate consumption play a central role in stock market ‡uctuations.
   As an example of the magnitude of these forces for the long-run evolution of the stock
market, we decompose the percent change since 1980 in the deterministically detrended real
value of stock market wealth that is attributable to each shock. The period since 1980 is an
interesting one to consider, in which the cumulative e¤ect of the factor shares shock persis-
tently redistributed rewards away from workers and toward shareholders. (The opposite was
true from the mid 1960s to mid 1980s.) After removing a deterministic trend, the cumulative
e¤ects of the factors share shocks have resulted in a 65% increase in real stock market wealth
since 1980, an amount equal to 110% of the total increase in detrended stock market wealth
over this period. Indeed, without these shocks, today’s stock market would be roughly 10%
lower than it was in 1980. An additional 38% of the increase since 1980, or a rise of 22%, is
attributable to the cumulative e¤ects of risk aversion shocks, while the cumulative e¤ects of
TFP shocks have made a negative contribution, a direct consequence of the large negative
draws for consumption in the Great Recession. Together, the three mutually orthogonal
economic shocks we identify explain almost all of the increase in deterministically detrended
real stock market wealth since 1980. (Speci…cally, they account for 110% of the increase,
with the remaining -10% accounted for by a residual.)
   Our …ndings are also informative about the origins of risk premia ‡uctuations. Share-
holders in the model are close to risk-neutral most of the time but subject to rare “crises”
in their willingness to bear risk, captured in the model by infrequent, large spikes in risk
aversion that generate a “‡ight to safety.” Even though these ‡ights are rare and extreme,
a time-varying expectation that risk tolerance could crash in the future generates plausi-
ble variation in the price-dividend ratio and empirically reasonable predictability in excess
stock market returns. Time-variation in the risk premium, both in the model and the data,
is revealed by the wealth shocks, which are orthogonal to movements in consumption and
labor income. We …nd that these innovations also bear little relation to other traditional
macroeconomic fundamentals such as dividends, earnings, consumption volatility, or broad-
based macroeconomic uncertainty, and none of these other variables forecast equity premia.
These …ndings are hard to reconcile with models in which time-varying risk premia arise from
habits (which vary with innovations in consumption), stochastic consumption volatility, or

                                              3
consumption uncertainty.
    These …ndings have important implications for macroeconomic modeling. The two big
empirical sources of variation that we …nd here are responsible for almost all of stock market
variation play virtually no role in contemporary macroeconomic theories.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses related literature.
Section 3 describes the econometric procedure and data. Section 4 describes the theoretical
model. Section 5 presents our …ndings. Section 6 concludes.


2    Related Literature

The empirical part of this paper builds on Lettau and Ludvigson (2013). That paper provided
empirical evidence in a purely statistical model, studying a rotation of the three VAR inno-
vations described here and their relationship to di¤erent components of household wealth,
consumption and labor income. The contribution of this paper is to provide an economic
interpretation of these innovations and a detailed investigation of their implications for the
stock market. Our model is also related to the work of several recent papers that have
emphasized the weak empirical correlation between stock market behavior and innovations
to consumption growth or its second moments (Du¤ee (2005), Albuquerque, Eichenbaum,
and Rebelo (2012), Lettau and Ludvigson (2013)). An important earlier literature identi…ed
and distinguished cash-‡ow from discount rate “shocks” (e.g., Campbell (1991); Cochrane
(1991)). This work was central to our understanding of how innovations in stock returns
are related to forecastable movements in returns as compared to dividend growth, but it is
silent on the underlying economic mechanisms that drive these forecastable changes. It is
precisely these primitive economic shocks that are the subject of this paper.
    We build on an earlier literature that emphasizes the importance of limited stock market
participation for explaining stock return data (Mankiw and Zeldes (1991); Vissing-Jorgensen
(2002); Guvenen (2009); Lettau and Ludvigson (2009); Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2009)).
    The factors share element of our paper is related to a separate macroeconomic literature
that examines the long-run variation in the labor share (e.g., Karabarbounis and Neiman


                                                4
(2013), and the recent theoretical study of Lansing (2014)). The factors share …ndings in
this paper echo those from previous studies that use very di¤erent methodologies but …nd
that returns to human capital are negatively correlated with those to stock market wealth
(Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008); Lettau and Ludvigson (2009); Chen, Favilukis, and
Ludvigson (2014))). Lettau, Ludvigson, and Ma (2014) focus on cross-sectional asset pricing
and …nd that value and momentum strategies exhibit strong opposite signed exposure to low
frequency ‡uctuations in the capital share, helping to explain why both strategies earn high
average returns but are negatively correlated.
    Our …ndings on the forecastability of excess stock market returns imply that quantita-
tively large component of risk premia ‡uctuations is acyclical, contrasting with classic earlier
studies that emphasized the countercyclicality of risk premia (e.g., Fama and French (1989)).
But our …ndings on risk premia variation are potentially consistent with other theories in
which time-variation in the reward for bearing risk is largely divorced from ‡uctuations
in macroeconomic fundamentals. Examples include the ambiguity aversion framework of
Bianchi, Ilut, and Schneider (2013), models of rare events in which the probability of con-
sumption disaster is a random variable independent of normal-times consumption shocks
(e.g., Gourio (2012);Wachter (2013)), intermediary-based models in which intermediaries’
risk-bearing capacity varies independently of, or in a highly nonlinear way with, macro-
economic state variables (e.g., Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2012); Gabaix and Maggiori
(2013)); He and Krishnamurthy (2013); Muir (2014)). Each of these papers has a mech-
anism for generating acyclical ‡uctuations in risk premia that plays the same role as our
independent risk aversion shock. The econometric evidence presented here contributes to a
growing body that forms the basis of an empirical rationale for such mechanisms.


3    Econometric Analysis: Three Mutually Orthogonal Shocks

We study a cointegrated vector of variables in the data, denoted xt = (ct ; yt ; at )0 , where ct is
log of real, per capita aggregate consumption, yt is log of real, per-capita labor income, and
at is log of real, per-capita asset wealth. Throughout this paper we use lower case letters
to denote log variables, e.g., ln (At )     at : Lettau and Ludvigson (2013) provide updated


                                                 5
evidence of a single cointegrating relation among these variables, which can be motivated by
considering the long-run implications of a standard household budget constraint (see Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2010)).
   The Appendix contains a detailed description of the data used in this study. The log
of asset wealth, at ; is a measure of real, per capita household net worth, which includes all
…nancial wealth, housing wealth, and consumer durables. It is compiled from the ‡ow of
funds accounts by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. Denote the log of real
stock market wealth st : Stock market wealth is a component of total asset wealth. Corporate
equity was 23% of total asset wealth in 2010, and 29% of net worth. For comparison, we
also study stock market variation using as a measure of stock market wealth the Center for
Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) value-weighted stock price index. We denote the log
of the CRSP value-weighted stock price index pt . Our data are quarterly and span the …rst
quarter of 1952 to the third quarter of 2012.
   The model developed below is intended to focus on the implications of the empirical
shocks for stock market wealth. As such, it has just one form of risky capital (equity) and
a risk-free bond in zero net supply. Thus in the model, all wealth is stock market wealth,
which is identically equal to total wealth and net worth: at = st : A question arises as to how
best to connect the empirical wealth innovations in the data (which include nonstock forms
of wealth) to those that arise from the model. Our approach is to construct the empirical
VAR innovations using a system of variables that contains ct , yt and total asset wealth at ,
and then subsequently relate these innovations to stock market wealth. We do not construct
the empirical innovations by restricting analysis to how consumption and labor income move
only with stock market wealth. We do this for two reasons. First, we wish to allow for
the possibility that a standard factor neutral productivity shock could a¤ect the value of
the stock market. But such a shock should a¤ect the value of all productive capital, not
just corporate equity, so a system that identi…es such a shock from the data must include
total wealth. If TFP shocks a¤ect non-stock wealth but these components are omitted from
the system, this could lead to spurious estimates of productivity and its dynamics, which
would also contaminate estimates of the remaining shocks. Second, consumption and labor
income are cointegrated with total wealth, as expected from theory (Lettau and Ludvigson

                                                6
(2001)), but there is no implication that these variables should be (or are) cointegrated
with stock market wealth by itself, a component of total wealth. It is important to control
empirically for these long-run relationships, which requires estimating a cointegrated VAR
for ( ct ; at ; yt ). With these results in hand, the question of how closely related the
identi…ed VAR shocks are to stock market wealth is then an empirical matter, which is the
subject of an extensive investigation below. Although                st may be related to these shocks,
there will be an unexplained residual that in principal could be quite important.
       The three mutually orthogonal empirical disturbances are obtained from cointegrated
VAR (or vector error correction mechanism–VECM) representation of xt taking the form

                                   xt =    + b 0 xt   1   + (L) xt     1   + ut ;                                 (1)

where       xt is the vector of log …rst di¤erences, ( ct ; at ; yt )0 ,            ; and    ( c;   a;   y)
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                  are
(3 1) vectors,        (L) is a …nite order distributed lag operator, and b                  (1; b a ; b y )0 is
the (3 1) vector of previously estimated cointegrating coe¢ cients.2 The term b 0 xt                     1   gives
last period’s equilibrium error, or cointegrating residual, a variable we denote with cayt
b 0 xt 1 . Throughout this paper, we use “hats”to denote the estimated values of parameters.
       The results of estimating a …rst-order speci…cation of (1) are presented in Lettau and
Ludvigson (2013), not reported here to conserve space. An important result is that, although
consumption and labor income are somewhat predictable by lagged consumption and wealth
growth, they are not predictable by the cointegrating residual b 0 xt 1 . Estimates of               c   and        y

are economically small and insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero. By contrast, the cointegrating
error cayt is an economically large and statistically signi…cant determinant of next quarter’s
wealth growth:        a   is estimated to be 0.20, with a t-statistic equal to 2.3. Thus, only wealth
exhibits error-correction behavior. Wealth is mean reverting and adapts over long-horizons
to match the smoothness in consumption and labor income.
       The individual series involved in the cointegrating relation can be represented as a
   2                                                                                                         0
       Standard errors do not need to be adjusted to account for the use of the “generated regressor,”           xt in
(1) because estimates of the cointegrating parameters converge to their true values at rate T , rather than at
               p
the usual rate T (Stock (1987)) . We estimate b = (1; 0:18; 0:70)0 :




                                                       7
reduced-form multivariate Wold representation:

                                           xt =      +    (L)ut ;                                    (2)

where ut is an n 1 vector of innovations, and where            (L)     I+    1 L+   2 L+   3 L+   . The
                                                     0
parameters      and , both of rank r, satisfy            (1) = 0 and    (1) = 0 (Engle and Granger,
1987). The “reduced form” disturbances ut are not necessarily mutually uncorrelated. To
specify shocks that are mutually uncorrelated, we employ a recursive orthogonalization.
Speci…cally, let H be a lower triangular matrix that accomplishes the Cholesky decomposition
of Cov(ut ), and de…ne
                                    e H 1 ut ;       C(L)       (L)H:

We may re-write the decomposition of             xt = ( ct ; yt ; at )0 as

                                             xt = +C(L)et ;                                          (3)

which is now a function of a vector of mutually uncorrelated innovations et . Denote the
individual consumption, labor income and wealth disturbances as ec;t ; ey;t ; and ea;t . Note
that these shocks are i.i.d. We study a particular orthogonalization by restricting the order-
ing of the variables as follows:      c is …rst,    y second, and      a last in    xt . These empirical
disturbances are (i) consumption shocks ec;t : unforecastable movements in             ct that may con-
temporaneously a¤ect        y and     a (ii) labor income shocks ey;t : unforecastable movements in
  yt holding …xed      ct contemporaneously, (iii) wealth shocks ea;t : unforecastable movements
in    at holding …xed both      ct and    yt contemporaneously.
     We refer to the mutually orthogonal et shocks as “structural”disturbances. The ordering
of variables determines the speci…c orthogonalization, however, so providing a theoretical
interpretation of these disturbances requires a theoretical rationale for the ordering, as well
as a mapping between each empirical disturbance and a set of primitive economic shocks
implied by theory. We use the model of the next section to provide such a theoretical
rationale. We show there that, if the proposed model were true, the particular ordering
chosen would be the right one for uncovering the three primitive shocks of the model.
     To relate stock market wealth to the structural disturbances ec;t , ey;t , and ea;t , we estimate


                                                     8
empirical relationships taking the form

                          st =   0   +        c   (L) ec;t +               y   (L) ey;t +          a   (L) ea;t +         t;                               (4)

where st represents the log level of the stock market wealth,                                                      c   (L) ;           y   (L) ; and   a   (L)
are polynomial lag operators, and                      t    is a residual that represents the component of stock
wealth unexplained by the mutually orthogonal empirical disturbances ec;t , ey;t , and ea;t .
We estimate the same type of relationship for the CRSP value-weighted stock price index,
replacing st with pt on the left-hand-side. Since ec;t , ey;t and ea;t are mutually uncorrelated
and i.i.d., we estimate these equations separately by OLS with L = 16 quarters.
   We also decompose the log levels of stock market wealth into components driven by each
structural disturbance. To do so, rewrite the decomposition of growth rates as

                         st =        0   +        c   (L) ec;t +               y   (L) ey;t +          a   (L) ea;t +          t

                                     0   +         sct +           syt +           sat +      t;                                                           (5)

where    sct    c   (L) ec;t , and analogously for the other terms. The e¤ect on the log levels of
stock wealth of each disturbance is obtained by summing up the e¤ects on the log di¤erences,
so that the log level of stock wealth may be decomposed into the following components:

                                                      X
                                                      t
                     st = s0 +           0t   +                   sk
                                                      k=1
                                                      Xt                       X
                                                                               t                   X
                                                                                                   t                   X
                                                                                                                       t
                         = s0 +          0t   +                   sck   +               syk   +              sak   +               k
                                                      k=1                      k=1                 k=1                 k=1
                                                                                       X
                                                                                       t
                             s0 +        0t   +       sct   +    syt   +   sat     +          k;                                                           (6)
                                                                                       k=1

where s0 is the initial level of stock market wealth, sct , syt , and sat , are the components of the
level attributable to the (cumulation of) the consumption shock, the labor income shock,
                                             P
and the wealth shock, respectively. The term tk=1 k is the component of st attributable to
the unexplained residual. Note that                         0t   is the deterministic trend in stock market wealth,
which in the model below is attributable to steady state technological progress. Expressions
analogous to (5) and (6) are also computed for the log stock price index pt .


                                                                           9
    This completes our description of the empirical disturbances. Before turning to the
theoretical model used to interpret these disturbances, Table 1 shows why they are good
ones to consider for investigating the origins of stock market ‡uctuations. Taken together,
these three observable disturbances explain 87% of the quarterly growth in stock market
wealth and 84% of quarterly stock price growth. Thus they account for almost all of the
variation. As we show below, they also explain the vast bulk of ‡uctuations in stock market
wealth at lower frequencies, but the relative importance of the shocks changes dramatically
with the horizon over which the growth in the market is measured. The next section provides
a parsimonious model with which to interpret these disturbances and empirical patterns.


4    The Model

Aggregate output Yt is assumed to be governed by a constant returns to scale process:

                                      Yt = At Nt Kt1      ;                                 (7)

where At is a factor neutral TFP shock, and Nt and Kt are inputs of labor and capital,
respectively. We assume that labor supply is …xed and that there is no capital accumulation,
so that both Nt and Kt are constant over time and normalized to unity. Thus Yt = At is
driven entirely by technological change.
    The economy is populated by two types of representative households, each of whom
consume an income stream. The …rst type, shareholders, own a claim to shares of the
dividend income stream (equity) generated from aggregate output Yt . There is no saving
and no new shares are issued. Shareholders consume the dividend stream. The second type,
workers, own no assets, inelastically supply labor to produce Yt , and consume their labor
income every period. Dividends, Dt , are equal to output minus a wage bill

                                       Dt = Yt     W t Nt ;                                 (8)

where Wt is the wage rate paid to workers. With labor supply …xed at Nt = 1, log labor
income, which equals ln (Wt Nt ) = ln (Wt ), is alternatively denoted yt , to be consistent with
the notation above. The total number of shares is normalized to unity.

                                              10
   The wage rate Wt is given by marginal product of labor, multiplied by a time-varying
function f (Zt ):
                                          1        1
                          Wt =    At Nt       Kt        f (Zt ) = At f (Zt ) :               (9)

The random variable Zt over which the function is de…ned is referred to as a factors share
shock. We specify f (Zt ) to be a logistic function

                                                    1
                                 f (Zt ) =                   + ;
                                              1 + exp ( Zt )

where      is a constant parameter. The calibration we choose insures that the real wage is
equal to its competitive value on average, but can be shifted away from this value by a
multiplicative scale factor f (Zt ) with f (Zt ) = 1 in the non-stochastic steady state. The
logistic function insures that the level labor income is never negative and bounded above
and below. A shock of this sort is required to explain the low frequency behavior of the
stock market, as show below.
   Although not modeled explicitly as such, f (Zt ) could be interpreted as the time-varying
bargaining parameter resulting from some underlying wage-bargaining problem that creates
deviations from competitive equilibrium. Possible sources for such a shift could include
changes in reliance on o¤shoring, outsourcing, part-time or temporary workers, or the preva-
lence of unionization. At a more basic level, it is a reduced-form way of capturing shifts in the
allocation of rewards between shareholders and workers while holding …xed the size of those
rewards that could occur for any number of reasons, including a change in competitiveness,
a change in how labor intensive production is, factor speci…c technological change.
   With this speci…cation for wages, log dividends are given by

                                  dt = at + ln (1           f (Zt )) ;

where at     ln At . Log dividends are a non-linear function of the factors share shock. Aggre-
gate consumption, Ct ; is the sum of shareholder consumption (total dividends) and worker
consumption (total labor income), driven solely by the TFP shock:

                             Ct = Dt + Wt = Yt            Wt + Wt = At :



                                                   11
     The log di¤erence in the TFP shock,                at ; is assumed to follow a …rst-order autoregressive
(AR(1)) stochastic process given by

                       at    a   =   a   ( at     1      a)   +   a "a;t ;     "a;t    i:i:d: (0; 1) :   (10)

The factors share shock Zt is assumed to follow a mean-zero AR(1) processes:

                             Zt =        z Zt 1   +   z "z;t ;    "z;t       i:i:d: (0; 1) :             (11)

Note that in a non-stochastic steady state, Zt is identically zero, f (Zt ) = 1, and dividends
are proportional to productivity: Dt = At (1                      ). The above speci…cation implies that the
economy grows non-stochastically in steady state at the gross rate of At , given by 1 +                    a,

the deterministic rate of technological progress.
     Worker preferences play no role in asset pricing since they hold no assets. We assume
that the economy is populated by a large number of identical shareholders, leading to a
representative shareholder model. This should be distinguished from the more common
approach of modeling a representative household in which aggregate consumption is the
source of systematic risk. The representative shareholder in this model is akin to a large
institutional investor or wealthy individual who earns income only from investments. For
this representative shareholder, dividends are the appropriate source of systematic risk.
     Let Cits denote the consumption of an individual stockholder indexed by i at time t. Let

 t   be a time-varying subjective discount factor. Identical shareholders maximize the function

                                                      X
                                                      1 Y
                                                        t
                                                                         s
                                           U =E                    k u (Cit )                            (12)
                                                      t=0 k=0

with
                                                          (Cits )1 xt 1
                                            u (Cits )   =               ;                                (13)
                                                           1 xt 1
and where     0   = 1. An important aspect of these preferences is that the parameter xt is not
constant but instead varies stochastically over time. As we show below, this shifter must
have low (or zero) correlation with consumption and labor income ‡uctuations, in order
to match evidence that movements in risk premia are divorced from traditional economic
fundamentals such as consumption and wage income.

                                                           12
      Shareholder preferences are also subject to an externality in the subjective discount factor

 t,   which is assumed to vary over time in a manner dependent on aggregate shareholder
consumption (which in equilibrium equal dividends) as follows:
                                                     exp ( rf )
                                             t                   x
                                                                        ;                                    (14)
                                                              Dt+1t
                                                    Et          xt 1
                                                          Dt

where rf is a parameter. Aggregate shareholder consumption, given by Dt ; is taken as given
by individual shareholders and is therefore not internalized in the individual optimization
problem. The speci…cation for the subjective time discount factor in (14) is essential for
obtaining a stable risk-free rate along with a volatile equity premium. If instead the subjec-
tive time discount factor were itself a constant (as is common), shocks to xt and dividend
growth would generate counterfactual volatility in the risk-free rate. The calibration above
makes the risk-free rate is constant, given by the exponentiation of the parameter rf .3 In
equilibrium, identical individuals choose the same level of consumption, equal to per capita
aggregate dividends Dt : We therefore drop the i subscript and simply denote the consumption
of a representative shareholder Cts = Dt from now on.
      The intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of stockholder consumption is the sto-
chastic discount factor (SDF) given by:
                                                                             xt
                                                                     Dt+1
                                                 exp ( rf )           Dt
                                     Mt+1 =                             xt
                                                                                  :                          (15)
                                                              Dt+1
                                                   Et          Dt


This can be written

                        Mt+1 = exp [ rf          ln Et exp ( xt dt+1 )                xt dt+1 ] :            (16)

The return on a risk-free asset whose value is known with certainty at time t is given by
                           1
Rf;t+1      (Et [Mt+1 ])       :
      We specify the stochastic risk aversion variable xt so that it is always non-negative and
bounded from above. Speci…cally, let xt be speci…ed as a logistic function of a stochastic
  3
      While this adjustment to the time-discount factor        may seem unusual, it is in fact a generalization to
non-lognormal functions of a familiar compensating Jensen’s term that appears in lognormal models of the
stochastic discount factor (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (1999)) and (Lettau and Wachter (2007)).

                                                         13
         e that itself can take unbounded values:
variable x

                                      xt = +                          ;
                                                          et )
                                                1 + exp ( x
                    et
                    x      e
                           x   =   e (e
                                   x  xt 1    e)
                                              x    +    e "x
                                                        x  e;t ;   "xe;t    i:i:d: (0; 1) :                    (17)

In the above,     and     are parameters that controls the maximum and minimum values,
respectively, of xt : The autoregressive parameter is restricted to 0 <                e
                                                                                       x   < 1:
    As a benchmark, we specify the three shocks in the model "a;t , "z;t ; and "xe;t to be uncor-
related. We show below that this speci…cation allows the model to closely correspond with
the empirical evidence.
    We use the dividend claim to model the stock market claim. Let Pt denote the ex-dividend
price of a claim to the dividend stream measured at the end of time t. The gross return from
the end of period t to the end of t + 1 is de…ned Rt+1 = (Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) =Pt : We denote the log
                                                                                                     ex
return on equity as ln (Rt+1 )     rt+1 , and the log excess return ln (Rt+1 =Rf;t+1 )              rt+1 : From
the shareholder’s …rst-order condition for optimal consumption choice, the price-dividend
ratio satis…es
                  Pt                                               Pt+1
                     (st ) = Et exp mt+1 +         dt+1 + ln            (st+1 ) + 1           ;                (18)
                  Dt                                               Dt+1
where st is a vector of state variables, st        ( at ; Zt ; xt )0 : There is no closed-form solution
                                                                      Pt
to the functional equation (18). We therefore solve the               Dt
                                                                           (st ) function numerically on an
n   n    n dimensional grid of values for the state variables, replacing the continuous time
processes with a discrete Markov approximation following the approach in Rouwenhorst
(1995). Further details are given in the Appendix.
    The computation of risk aversion in the full stochastic model is quite complicated nu-
merically. However, it is straightforward to calculate risk aversion along a non-stochastic
                                                                                                  At Et V 00 (At+1 )
balanced growth path. De…ne the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion RRAt                         Et V 0 (At+1 )
                                                                                                                     ,
where V (At+1 ) is the representative shareholder’s value function associated with optimal
consumption choice, and At is this shareholder’s asset wealth. Following the derivation
in Swanson (2012), we show in the Appendix that risk aversion along the non-stochastic
balanced growth path, RRA, is equal to
                                       Cts: u00 Ct+1
                                                 s:
                          RRA =                s
                                                     = E (xt ) = (1 +           a) ;
                                        u0 Ct+1

                                                   14
where E (xt ) is the unconditional mean of xt and 1 +          a   is the non-stochastic gross growth
rate of the economy driven by steady state technological progress At . We refer to xt as a
risk aversion shock.


4.1         Calibration

The Appendix contains a table that lists all parameters and their calibrated values. The
parameter        is set to 0.667, a value that is standard in real business cycle modeling. The
constant value for the quarterly log risk-free rate is set to match the mean of the quarterly
log 3-month Treasury bill rate. We set          a   = 0 so that the log level of TFP, at ; follows a
unit root stochastic process with drift. The mean and standard deviation of productivity
 at is set to roughly match the mean and standard deviation of the quarterly log di¤erence
of consumption in the data. The factor share shock Zt is set to be very persistent yet
stationary, with     z   = 0:995; in order to match the extreme persistence of the empirical labor
income shock found in the data. The parameter              in f (Zt ) is set to   = 0:5 so f (Zt ) lies
in the interval [0:5; 1:5] and equals unity in the non-stochastic steady state. The symmetry
of the (normal) distribution for Zt insures that the mean of the factor’s share shifter is
also unity E (f (Zt )) = 1. This calibration, along with the calibration of the volatility of
Zt , allow the model to roughly match the standard deviation of dividend growth, which
is over ten times that of aggregate consumption growth. Matching evidence for a volatile
dividend growth process also has important implications for the model’s ability to match the
frequency decomposition of stock price changes. The parameters of the risk aversion process
 e,
 x     e;
       x    and , are set so as to come as close as possible to simultaneously matching (i) the
mean equity premium, (ii) the forecastability of the equity premium and the average level of
the price-dividend ratio. An interesting result is that, matching (i) and (ii) simultaneously
requires a risk-aversion process that is very low most of the time but highly skewed to the
right, characterized by the expectation of rare states in which the market’s risk tolerance
implodes, leading to a “‡ight to safety”and a market crash.
      To understand why, observe that shareholders who consume out of dividends are exposed
to much greater systematic risk than would be the case for one who consumes the stable


                                                    15
aggregate consumption stream. With dividend growth this volatile, shareholder risk aversion
must be close to zero in most states or the model generates a counterfactually high equity
premium. But matching evidence for a time-varying equity premium requires risk aversion
to ‡uctuate. With risk aversion bounded below at zero, ‡uctuations must be skewed upward.
If the upper bound on risk aversion is too restrictive, however, the model generates too little
variation in risk premia and overshoots the mean price-dividend ratio. The density of our
risk aversion process therefore has most of its mass close to zero, with the median and mode
equal to unity. The mean of 30 is reached far more infrequently and there is a small amount
of mass near the maximum value for risk-aversion, set to 450.4
        The risk aversion process in the model should be thought of as an externality–the market’s
willingness to bear risk. One interpretation of such independent variation is that it is driven
by intangible information. Changing expectations of an rare spike in risk aversion generate
‡uctuations in the price-dividend ratio that are far less non-linear in the state than are the
risk aversion dynamics itself (though ‡uctuations in pt                  dt are naturally largest in crisis
times).


5        Results

Table 2 presents summary asset pricing statistics of the model and compares them to those
in post-war data. The model closely matches the mean and standard deviation of the eq-
uity premium and price-dividend ratio. By construction, the model exactly matches the
mean risk-free rate. The model also does a good job of matching the volatility of dividend
growth. Because dividends are subject to the factors share shock, they are more volatile
than aggregate consumption. While the model is broadly consistent with these benchmark
asset pricing moments, it is limited in matching the data in one way. Although the model
correctly implies that labor income growth is more volatile than consumption growth, the
standard deviation is too high: 5% annually compared to 2% in the data. In the simpli…ed
    4
        This highly skewed distribution for risk aversion is not an artifact of the logistic function chosen for
f (Z). A truncated Normal distribution of Z that generates similar equilibrium allocations also requires low
risk aversion most of the time with infrequent extreme values.



                                                        16
model environment here, it not possible to simultaneously match evidence for both a volatile
dividend growth process and a stable labor income growth process, since the two are tied
together by the volatility of the factor shares shock. Future work could explore extensions
of the model to incorporate wage smoothing or stickiness (e.g., Favilukis and Lin (2013)).
    Table 3 reports the model’s implications for the dynamic relationship between the log
                                                                             P
price dividend ratio, pt dt , and future long horizon excess equity returns, hj=0 rt+j+1
                                                                                    ex
                                                                                         ,
                       Ph                                   Ph
consumption growth,     j=0   ct+j+1 , and dividend growth,  j=0   dt+j+1 . The log price-
dividend ratio predicts future excess returns with statistically signi…cant negative coe¢ cients
in the model, while the coe¢ cients for consumption and dividend growth are statistically
indistinguishable from zero. These implications are consistent with the data. The adjusted
R2 statistics for forecasting excess returns are comparable between model and data. Thus the
model is consistent with the well known “excess volatility”property of stock market returns,
namely that ‡uctuations in stock market valuation ratios are informative about future equity
risk premia, but not about future fundamentals on the stock market (i.e., dividend or earnings
growth, LeRoy and Porter (1981), Shiller (1981)), or future consumption growth (Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001); Lettau and Ludvigson (2004)).
       We next investigate the connection in the model between the observable VAR shocks
and the latent primitive shocks. To do so, we take model simulated data, compute the VAR
disturbances implied by the model, and compare them to the primitive shocks. Figure 1
shows two sets of cumulative dynamic responses of            ct ,   at , and   yt . The left column shows
the cumulative responses of these variables to the three primitive shocks in the model. These
responses are calculated by applying, for each shock one at a time, a one standard deviation
change in the direction that increases         at at time t = 0; and then simulating forward using
the solved policy functions. Thus we plot the responses to a one standard deviation increase
in "a;t , and decrease in "z;t and "xe;t . The right column uses model simulated data to calculate
the mutually orthogonal VAR innovations et (3) and plots dynamic responses to one standard
deviation change in each et shock, again in the direction that increases               at .5
   5
       For this plot we rid the VAR responses of small sample estimation biases by computing them from a
single simulation of the model with very long length (238,000 quarters). The size of the primitive shocks are
normalized so that they are the same as the empirical shocks in the right column.


                                                     17
         The key result shown in Figure 1 is that the dynamic responses of aggregate consumption,
labor earnings, and asset wealth to the VAR innovations in the right column are almost
identical to the theoretical responses of the same variables to the productivity, factors share,
and risk aversion shocks, respectively, in the left column. The small deviations that do exist
from perfect correlation for some responses are attributable to nonlinearities in the model
not captured by the linear VAR. But these deviations are small. The responses of                            ct ,     yt
and          at to the consumption shock, ec;t , are all perfectly correlated with the responses of
these variables to the TFP shock "a;t ; the response of                ct to the labor income shock ey;t is
perfectly correlated with the response of             ct to the factors share shock "z;t , and the responses
of        ct ,    yt , and   at to the wealth shock ea;t are all perfectly correlated with the responses
of        ct ,    yt , and   at to the risk aversion shock "xe;t .6 We verify, from a long simulation of the
model, that the correlation between the consumption shock ec;t and the productivity shock
"a;t is unity, the correlation between labor income shock ey;t and …rst di¤erence of the factors
share shifter            ln f (Zt ) is unity, and the correlation between the wealth shock ea;t and the
innovation in            at attributable only to risk aversion shocks "xe;t is 0.97.7
         In presenting the above, we do not claim that the mutually uncorrelated VAR shocks
(ec;t ; ey;t ; ea;t ) exactly equal the primitive shocks ("a;t ; "z;t ; "xe;t ), respectively. Exact equality
is impossible because the endogenous variables in the model are nonlinear functions of the
primitive shocks, while the VAR imposes a linear relation between these variables and the
VAR shocks. Moreover the comparable innovations are in di¤erent units so a rescaling
is necessary. What the above does show is that, if the model generated the data, the
VAR disturbances would, to a very close approximation, serve as the observable empirical
counterparts to the innovations originated from the latent primitive shocks.


5.1              Origins of Quarterly Stock Market Fluctuations

With this theoretical interpretation of the VAR disturbances in hand, we now study the role
of the empirical disturbances for historical stock market data, beginning with their role in
     6
         These correlations are sample correlations over the paths of IRFs of length 20Q. Perfect correlation is
equivalent to the IRFs being identical up to a normalization.
   7
     The innovation in at attributable to risk aversion shocks is computed as        at   E [ at jst   1 ; Zt ;    at ] :


                                                         18
quarterly ‡uctuations.
   Figure 2 shows two sets of cumulative dynamic responses of            ct ,   at , and   yt . The
Appendix shows 90% error bands for these responses using a bootstrap procedure. The
left column uses model simulated data to calculate model-based responses to the mutually
orthogonal VAR innovations (3). These are the same responses that are shown in the right
panel of Figure 1, except that the responses in Figure 2 are averages across 1000 samples
of size 238 quarters, rather than over one very long sample. The right column of Figure 2
shows the cumulative dynamic responses of      ct ,   at , and   yt in historical data to the VAR
innovations (3) estimated from historical data. A positive innovation in the consumption ec
shock leads to an immediate increase in ct , at , and yt , both in the data and the model. The
model responses of c, y, and a, to the consumption shock lie on top of each other because
the levels of these variables are all proportional to TFP, so the log responses are the same.
Because the TFP shock in the model is the innovation to a random walk, in simulated data
all three variables move immediately to a new, permanently higher level. In historical data,
full adjustment does not happen entirely within one quarter, but it is still relatively fast and
occurs within 3 quarters or less, close to what would occur as the result of an innovation
to a random walk. Cochrane (1994) makes the same observation when studying a bivariate
cointegrated VAR for consumption and GNP and argues that consumption is su¢ ciently
close to a random walk so as to e¤ectively de…ne the stochastic trend in GNP.
   The second rows of Figure 2 displays the dynamic responses of ct , at , and yt to the labor
income shock ey;t . Observe that, in both the model and the data, the response of consumption
to this shock is economically negligible at all horizons. The zero response on impact occurs
by construction as a result of our identifying assumption. But it is also true in all subsequent
periods, a key …nding that is not part of our identifying assumption. Instead, this shock
is purely redistributive and drives at and yt in opposite directions. The e¤ect on labor
earnings is large and immediate: labor income jumps to a new lower level within the quarter.
The a¤ect on wealth is also large but takes time to adjust. This sluggishness is puzzling
because it suggests that the information revealed in the innovation is incorporated slowly
into asset prices. Composition e¤ects could play a role in this if, for example, an increasing
fraction of …rms going public over the sample employ labor-saving technologies. It could

                                              19
also re‡ect imperfect observability of factors share shocks by shareholders who own shares
in many independently managed …rms and have to learn over time about the pervasiveness
and persistence across the broader economy of the ultimate sources of such shocks. These
possibilities are outside of the scope of the model. Future research is needed to formally
investigate these and other possibilities.8
       The third row of Figure 2 shows the e¤ects of a positive wealth shock, ea;t , driven in the
model by a decline in risk aversion. In both the data and the model, this shock leads to a
sharp increase in asset wealth, but has no impact on consumption and labor earnings at any
future horizon. The zero responses of ct and yt on impact are the result of our identifying
assumptions, but the …nding that this shock has no subsequent in‡uence on consumption or
labor income at any future horizon is a result that is central to understanding why the risk
aversion shock must be modeled as independent of consumption and labor earnings shocks.
Although transitory, this disturbances’s in‡uence on at has a half-life of over four years in
historical data.
       Figure 3 shows the cumulative dynamic responses of stock market wealth               st in historical
data to a one-standard deviation innovation in each VAR disturbance, along with 90% error
bands computed from the bootstrap procedure described in the Appendix. The responses
are constructed using the OLS estimates of (4) for stock wealth. It is clear that the responses
of stock wealth to the wealth and labor income shocks mimic those of asset wealth to these
same shocks, indicating that they are primarily shocks to shareholder wealth, not other forms
of wealth. This is consistent with the evidence in Lettau and Ludvigson (2013) which …nds
that other forms of wealth are not closely related to these two disturbances.
       Returning to Table A.1, we see that the wealth shock ea explains the largest fraction of
quarterly stock wealth growth           st and accounts for 76% of its quarterly variation (75% of
   8
       The left column of Figure 2 shows that, even in the model, there is slight sluggish response of stock
market wealth to the factors share shock, although it is less pronounced than in the data. This is a …nite
sample e¤ect: the responses in Figure 2 for the model are averages over 1000 simulations of size 238 quarters
(the same size as our historical dataset). In many samples of this size, the estimated response is sluggish,
even though the population response displays no sluggishness. This can be seen via a comparison with Figure
1, which, unlike the response in Figure 2, is computed from one very long simulation of the model, rather
than from averages over many short ones.


                                                      20
the quarterly variation in           pt ). The two other shocks account for very small amounts, 4%
and 6% for the labor income and consumption shocks, respectively. The model implications
in the third row are broadly comparable with the data along these lines: the vast bulk
of quarterly ‡uctuations in stock wealth in the model are attributable to the wealth/risk
aversion shock, with much smaller roles for the consumption/TFP and labor income/factors
share shocks. By construction, there is no “residual” in the model version of equation (4),
since the productivity, factors share, and risk aversion shocks explain 100% of the variability
in stock market wealth. But note that, both in the model and in the data, aggregate
consumption shocks play a very small role in quarterly stock market ‡uctuations. In the
model, this occurs because labor’s greater average role in the production process (steady
state labor share is two-thirds) means that most gains and losses from TFP shocks accrue to
workers rather than shareholders, so these shocks are less important for asset pricing than
are the other two. This …nding is di¢ cult to reconcile with representative agent models
where aggregate consumption shocks play the key role in asset price ‡uctuations. As an
illustration, the last row of Table 1 gives the corresponding variance decomposition numbers
for the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habit model (with no labor income), in which 84%
of quarterly stock price growth is driven by consumption shocks.9


5.2          Origins of Long-Run Stock Market Wealth

We now turn to the question of how the sources of stock market ‡uctuation vary with the time
horizon. To do so we …rst decompose the variance of the stock wealth by frequency, using
a spectral decomposition. This decomposition tells us what proportion of sample variance
in        st is attributable to cycles of di¤erent lengths. We estimate the population spectrum
for the deterministically detrended log di¤erence in stock wealth                   st     0   (5). Noting that
  st         0   in (5) is a function of three components,      sct ;   syt ;   sat , plus an i.i.d. residual   t,

and using the fact that the spectrum of the sum is the sum of the spectra, we estimate the
fraction of the total variance in stock market wealth that is attributable to each component
     9
         The fraction of variance explained by consumption shocks is less than 100% only because the Campbell
Cochrane model is non-linear, while the variance decomposition is computed from a linear VAR.



                                                       21
at cycles of di¤erent lengths, in quarters. The Appendix provides additional details.
   Figure 4 exhibits these decompositions for the model (top panel), and for the data using
stock market wealth (bottom panel). The horizontal axis shows the length of the cycle in
quarters. The vertical axis gives the frequency decomposition of variance. Consider the line
marked “a”in the middle panel for historical stock market wealth. This line shows that, for
short cycles (i.e., periods of a few quarters), the fraction of variance in stock wealth that is
attributable to the wealth shocks is very high, close to 80%. As these cycles become longer,
the fraction of variance in stock wealth explained by this shock declines and asymptotes to
roughly 40%. Note that the high frequency, short horizon, variability of the stock market
in post-war data is virtually unrelated to the labor income/factors share shocks. But as the
cycle become longer, the fraction of variance in stock wealth explained by the factors share
shock steadily rises and asymptotes to roughly 40%, equal in importance to the risk aversion
shocks. By contrast, both in the model and the data, no matter what the length of the cycle,
the fraction of variance in stock wealth that is attributable to the TFP/consumption shock
is very low, close to zero. The line marked “residual”shows the contribution of component of
stock market ‡uctuations that is unexplained by these three mutually orthogonal innovations
is less than 20% of the variability in the stock market at all frequencies, and asymptotes to
around 10% as the horizon extends. The model captures this frequency decomposition well.
   Next, we study the role each disturbance has played in driving stock market wealth at
speci…c points in our sample using the levels decomposition of stock market wealth (6). To
do so, we remove the deterministic trend and normalize the initial observation s0 to zero
in the quarter before the start of our sample. Figure 5 plots the levels decomposition for
stock wealth (left column) and stock price (right column) over our sample, which are very
similar. The top panels of each column shows the sum of all components, which equals the
log level of the variable (stock wealth or stock price) after removing the deterministic trend.
The panels below show to the component attributable to the cumulation of each shock and
the residual.
   It is immediately clear from Figure 5 that the TFP component contributes relatively little
to the variation in stock market wealth consistently throughout the sample. This component
does take a noticeable drop at the end of the sample during and after the recession of 2007-

                                              22
2009, but it is still quite modest compared to the variation in other components. The bottom
panel shows that the variation attributable to the unexplained residual is also small. Instead,
the big movers of stock market wealth are the factors share shock and the risk aversion shock.
The low frequency movements in the level of stock market wealth are well tracked by the
cumulative swings in the factor shares component, while shorter-lived peaks and troughs in
the stock market accord well with spikes up or down in the risk aversion component.
   Figure 5 also shows that the cumulative e¤ect of the factors share shock has persistently
boosted stock market wealth over the last twenty …ve years. By contrast, from the mid 1960s
to the mid 1980s, the cumulative e¤ect of this shock persistently boosted labor earnings and
lowered stock market wealth. Figure 6 shows that there is a stark inverse relationship
over time between labor earnings and the stock market that is the result of the cumulative
reallocative outcomes of the factors share shock.
   As an example of the quantitative importance of such shocks over long-horizons, we use
this levels decomposition to calculate the percentage change since 1980 in the deterministi-
cally detrended real value of stock market wealth that is attributable to each shock. The
cumulative a¤ects of the factors share shock have resulted in a 65% increase in the deter-
ministically detrended real value of the stock market since 1980, an amount that exceeds
100% of the total increase. (Precisely, these shocks account for 110.5% of the increase.) An
additional 38% of the increase since 1980, or a rise of 22%, is attributable to the cumula-
tive e¤ects of risk aversion shocks. The TFP shocks have made a negative contribution to
change in stock market wealth since 1980, a direct consequence of the string of unusually
large negative draws for the consumption/productivity shock in the Great Recession years
from 2007-2009. These shocks accounted for -38% of the total increase since 1980. The
residual accounts for the remaining -10.5% of the increase. These …ndings underscore the
extent to which the long-term value of the stock market has been far more in‡uenced by
forces that redistribute the rewards of production, rather than raise or lower all of them.
   The calculations above removed a deterministic trend. As for any series that determinis-
tically trends upward over time (stock market, GDP, consumption, etc.,) most of the increase
over long periods is attributable to a deterministic trend. We can assess the quantitative
importance of stochastic shocks for long-term growth inclusive of the deterministic trend by

                                              23
“shutting o¤” the shock and studying where the level of the stock market would be today
under that counterfactual that the shocks had been zero over some period. Doing so for the
period since 1980, we …nd that the stock market would be 47% lower today than it currently
is at the end of our sample had the factors share shock been set to zero.


5.3        Origins of Stock Market Predictability

Our last subject is stock market predictability. A large and well known body of evidence
…nds that excess stock returns are forecastable over longer horizons, suggesting that the
reward for bearing risk changes over time.10 Several theories have been put forth to explain
this forecastability, including habit formation (Campbell and Cochrane (1999)), or stochastic
consumption volatility (Bansal and Yaron (2004)). This section provides evidence on the
question of why excess returns are predictable by investigating sources of variation in common
predictor variables such as the price-dividend ratio or the consumption-wealth variable cayt
(Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)). The results are presented in Table 4, with the top half
showing results from historical data, and the bottom half showing results from the model.
       Table 4 has several panels. The left panel reports regression results of one through three
year log excess equity returns on the lagged price-dividend ratio alone. Moving rightward,
the next panel reports regression results of one through three year log excess equity returns
on lagged cayt alone. We will also discuss the predictability of equity premia by measures of
stochastic consumption volatility and uncertainty–the next panel reports regression results
of log excess returns on a measure of stochastic consumption volatility. The panel to the
right of this one, headed “ea only,” reports regression results of one through three year log
excess equity returns on multiple lags of the i.i.d. wealth disturbances ea;t and its lags. The
table reports the sum of the coe¢ cients on all lags. The next two columns show results when
returns are predicted either by the component of the price-dividend ratio that is unrelated
to the wealth shocks, pdorth ; (movements in pd that are orthogonal to ea;t and its lags), or
by the component of cayt that is driven only by the wealth shocks, denoted caya .
  10
       For extensive reviews of this evidence see Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997), Cochrane (2005), Lettau
and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), and Lettau and Ludvigson (2010).



                                                      24
       In both the model and the data, the log price-dividend ratio and cayt predict future
excess returns with statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients and sizable adjusted R2 statistics. By
contrast, time-varying stochastic consumption volatility has no predictive power for equity
premia at any horizon.11 These results provide no evidence that stock return predictability
is driven by time-varying second moments of consumption growth or broad-based macroeco-
nomic uncertainty.
       By comparison with pd or cay, lags of the ea;t wealth shocks exhibit greater forecasting
power than either of these variables. A Wald test strongly rejects the hypothesis that the
sum of squared coe¢ cients on the lags of these shocks is zero.12 There is no horizon at which
the wealth shocks are not strongly statistically marginally signi…cant. A positive innovation
for the wealth shock increases asset wealth, so the negative coe¢ cients in this forecasting
regression imply that increases in wealth holding …xed consumption and labor income are
transitory and forecast lower future returns.
       But the next columns show that the predictive content for long horizon excess stock
market returns contained in the pdt and cayt is subsumed by the information in lags of the
wealth shocks. The pd residual components pdorth that are orthogonal to the wealth shocks
have no statistically signi…cant forecasting power for equity premia. Similarly, the component
of cayt that is driven solely by the orthogonal wealth shocks, ea;t ; is responsible for all the
forecasting power of cayt . The adjusted R2 statistic is, if anything, higher when using caya;t
rather than cayt as a predictor variable to forecast equity premia. This evidence is di¢ cult
to reconcile with models in which risk premia vary with consumption shocks (e.g., Campbell
  11                                                                                      2
       A stochastic volatility model is used to estimate Et [   ln Ct+h   Et [   ln Ct+h ]]   , for di¤erent horizons
h. The estimate is taken from Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2014). These results are robust to using additional
lags of the stochastic volatility measure, to using …rst di¤erences of the stochastic volatility measure, to
using GARCH measures of consumption growth volatility, and to using measures of stochastic consumption
growth volatility looking out over horizons greater than one quarter. In addition, broad-based measures
of macroeconomic uncertainty developed in Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2014) also exhibit no forecasting
power for equity premia at any horizon. These results are omitted to conserve space but are available upon
request.
  12
     Wald tests similarly reject the hypothesis that the coe¢ cients are jointly zero, and that the sum of
coe¢ cients is zero.



                                                        25
and Cochrane (1999)), since the wealth shocks that “explain”most of the forecastability of
excess returns are orthogonal to movements in consumption. The opposite would be true in
models with habit formation.
    We have also computed the correlation between the wealth/risk aversion shocks we iden-
tify and stock market dividend growth in our sample. We …nd that they are contemporane-
ously unrelated, with a close-to-zero correlation of 0.06. The contemporaneous correlation
with earnings growth is only slightly higher, 0.127. These results provide little evidence that
the wealth/risk aversion shocks we identify that are, by construction, uncorrelated with con-
sumption and labor income instead originate from shocks to measures of fundamental stock
market value such as dividends or earnings. In summary, changes in the reward for bearing
stock market risk are found to be attributable to sources that are unrelated to traditional
macroeconomic fundamentals, including aggregate consumption, labor income, measures of
uncertainty or stochastic consumption volatility, dividend growth, or earnings growth.


6    Conclusion

No comprehension of stock market behavior can be complete without understanding the
origins of its ‡uctuations. Surprisingly little research has been devoted to this question. As
a consequence, we have only a dimly lit view of why the real value of stock market wealth
has evolved to its current level compared to …ve, or ten, or thirty years ago.
    The starting point of this paper is to decompose real stock market ‡uctuations into
components attributable to three mutually orthogonal observable economic disturbances that
explain the vast majority of ‡uctuations since the early 1950s. We then propose a model to
interpret these disturbances and show that they are the observable empirical counterparts
to three latent primitive shocks: a total factor productivity shock that bene…ts both workers
and shareholders, a factors share shock that shifts the rewards of production between workers
and shareholders without a¤ecting the size of those rewards, and an independent risk aversion
shock that shifts the stochastic discount factor pricing equities but is unrelated to aggregate
consumption, labor earnings, or measures of fundamental value in the stock market.
    The results show that there are two big drivers of stock market wealth over time. One


                                              26
is a discount rate shock driven by ‡uctuations in investors’ willingness to bear risk that
is unrelated to real economic activity, including consumption, labor income, stock market
dividends and earnings.13 The other is a cash-‡ow innovation that redistributes the rewards
of production between shareholders and workers with no change in aggregate consumption.
The independent discount rate shock dominates stock market volatility over periods of several
quarters and a few years, while the factors share shock plays an increasingly important
role as the time horizon extends. Technological progress that raises aggregate consumption
and bene…ts both workers and shareholders plays a small role in historical stock market
‡uctuations at all horizons.
       A particularly striking example of the long-run implications of these economic shocks is
provided by examining the period since 1980. After removing a deterministic trend, we …nd
that factors share shocks have resulted in a 65% increase in real stock market wealth since
1980, an amount that exceeds 100% of the total increase in stock market wealth over this
period. Indeed, without these shocks, today’s stock market would be about 10% lower than
it was in 1980. The shocks responsible for big historical movements in stock market wealth
are not those that raise or lower aggregate rewards, but are instead ones that redistribute a
given level of rewards between workers and shareholders. We also show that predictability of
excess stock market returns must be understood as originating from sources largely unrelated
to aggregate consumption, labor income, stock market earnings or dividends, measures of
stochastic consumption volatility, or broad-based macroeconomic uncertainty. We argue
that these …ndings have important implications for macroeconomic modeling: the two big
sources of variation that we …nd here are responsible for almost all of stock market ‡uctuation
presently play virtually no role in contemporary macroeconomic theory.
       The model presented here is deliberately stylized on the quantity side of the economy,
abstracting from capital accumulation and ‡uctuations in employment. We have taken
this approach in order to embed our analysis into an empirically plausible stock market
  13
       One real variable that in the data is related to the wealth shock is investment (Lettau and Ludvigson
(2013)). But this is theoretically consistent with a discount rate shock, which should a¤ect the present
discounted value of marginal pro…ts and therefore the optimal rate of investment (e.g., Abel (1983); Cochrane
(1996)).



                                                      27
environment. In future work, we plan to examine a richer model of the production side, with
close attention to how important changes in the labor market over the last 30 years may
have contributed to our …ndings on factors share shifts. Our results in this paper imply that
these forces for redistribution between shareholders and workers–whatever their cause–have
had a profound e¤ect on stock market wealth over longer periods of time.

References

Abel, A. B. (1983): “Optimal Investment under Uncertainty,”American Economic Review,
  73(1), 228–233.

Albuquerque, R., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2012): “Valuation Risk and Asset
  Pricing,”Unpublished Paper, Northwestern University.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of
  Asset Pricing Puzzles,”Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481–1509.

Bianchi, F., C. Ilut, and M. Schneider (2013): “Uncertainty Shocks, Asset Supply and
  Pricing Over the Business Cycle,”Unpublished paper, Duke University.

Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov (2012): “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
  Sector,”American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Campbell, J. Y. (1991): “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,”Economic Jour-
  nal, 101, 157–179.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
  Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
  107, 205–251.

Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and C. MacKinlay (1997): The Econometrics of Financial
  Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Chen, X., J. Favilukis, and S. C. Ludvigson (2014): “An Estimation of Economic
  Models with Recursive Preferences,”Quantitative Economics, forthcoming.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991): “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 5(2), 243–280.

                                             28
          (1994): “Permanent and Transitory Components of GDP and Stock Prices,”Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 109(1), 241–65.

            (1996): “A Cross-Sectional Test of an Investment-Base Asset Pricing Model,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 104, 572–621.

          (2005): Asset Pricing, Revised Edition. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

          (2008): “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability,”Review
  of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1533–1575.

Duffee, G. R. (2005): “Time Variation in the Covariances Between Stock Returns and
  Consumption Growth,”Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1673–1712.

Engle, R. F., and C. W. J. Granger (1987): “Co-integration and Error Correction
  Representation, Estimation and Testing,”Econometrica, 55, 251–276.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1989): “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on
  Stocks and Bonds,”Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 23–49.

Favilukis,       J.,    and    X.    Lin     (2013):     “Does    Wage     Rigidity   Make
  Firms      Riskier?         Evidence     From    Long-Horizon   Return    Predictability,”
  http://personal.lse.ac.uk/FAVILUKI/WageRigidEmpirical.pdf.

Gabaix, X., and M. Maggiori (2013): “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dy-
  namics,”Unpublished paper, New York University.

Gonzalo, J., and S. Ng (2001): “A Systematic Framework for Analyzing the Dynamic
  E¤ects of Permanent and Transitory Shocks,”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
  25(10), 1527–1546.

Gourio, F. (2012): “Disaster Risk and Business Cyclesl,” American Economic Review,
  102(6).

Guvenen, M. F. (2009): “A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing,”
  Econometrica, 77(6), 1711–1740.

Hamilton, J. D. (1994): Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NY.



                                              29
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2013): “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 103(2), 732–770.

Heathcote, J., F. Perri, and G. L. Violante (2010): “Unequal We Stand: An Empiri-
  cal Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States: 1967-2006,”Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 13(1), 15–51.

Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2014): “Measuring Uncertainty,”The Amer-
  ican Economic Review, forthcoming.

Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2013): “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.

Lansing, K. J. (2014): “Asset Pricing with Concentrated Ownership of Capital and Dis-
  tribution Shocks,”Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2011-07.

LeRoy, S., and R. Porter (1981): “The Present Value Relation: Tests Based on Variance
  Bounds,”Econometrica, 49, 555–557.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Ex-
  pected Stock Returns,”Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.

         (2004): “Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset Values: Reevaluating the Wealth
  E¤ect on Consumption,”American Economic Review, 94(1), 276–299.

         (2009): “Euler Equation Errors,” The Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(2), 255–
  283.

         (2010): “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-Return Tradeo¤,”in Hand-
  book of Financial Econometrics, ed. by Y. Ait-Sahalia, and L. P. Hansen, vol. 1, pp. 617–90.
  Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland, Amsterdam.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2013): “Shocks and Crashes,”in National Bureau of
  Economics Research Macroeconomics Annual: 2013, ed. by J. Parker, and M. Woodford,
  vol. 28, pp. 293–354. MIT Press, Cambridge and London.




                                             30
Lettau, M., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ma (2014): “Capital Share Risk and Shareholder
  Heterogeneity in U.S. Stock Pricing,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper No. w20744.

Lettau, M., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008): “Reconciling the Return Predictabil-
  ity Evidence: In-Sample Forecasts, Out-of-Sample Forecasts, and Parameter Instability,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1607–1652.

Lettau, M., and J. A. Wachter (2007): “Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A
  Duration Based Explanation of the Value Premium,”Journal of Finance, LXII(1), 55–92.

Lustig, H., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008): “The Returns on Human Capital: Good
  News on Wall Street is Bad News on Main Street,” Review of Financial Studies, 21,
  2097–2137.

Malloy, C. J., T. J. Moskowitz, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2009): “Long-run
  Stockholder Consumption Risk and Asset Returns,”Journal of Finance, 64, 2427–2479.

Mankiw, N. G., and S. P. Zeldes (1991): “The Consumption of Stockholders and Non-
  stockholders,”Journal of Financial Economics, 29(1), 97–112.

Muir, T. (2014): “Financial Crises and Risk Premia,”Unpublished paper, Yale University.

Rouwenhorst, K. G. (1995): “Asset Pricing Implications of Equilibrium Business Cycle
  Models,” in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by T. F. Cooley, pp. 294–330.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.

Shiller, R. J. (1981): “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justi…ed by Subsequent
  Changes in Dividends?,”American Economic Review, 71, 421–436.

Stock, J. H. (1987): “Asymptotic Properties of Least Squares Estimators of Cointegrating
  Vectors,”Econometrica, 55, 113–144.

Swanson, E. T. (2012): “Risk Aversion and the Labor Margin,” American Economic
  Review, 102, 1663–1691.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and Intertemporal
  Substitution,”Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825–853.


                                           31
Wachter, J. (2013): “Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock
  Market Activity?,”Journal of Finance, 68, 987–1035.


Figures and Tables

          Variance Decomposition of Quarterly Log Di¤erence in Stock Wealth
                                c Shock        y Shock        a Shock     Residual
   Data (Stock Wealth)           0.062          0.044           0.759       0.134
                             (0.042, 0.135) (0.024, 0.101) (0.690, 0.815)
   Data (Stock Price)            0.060          0.042           0.743       0.155
                             (0.043, 0.129) (0.025, 0.101) (0.678, 0.803)
   Model                         0.018          0.038           0.942       0.002
                             (0.002, 0.052) (0.006, 0.098) (0.865, 0.985)
   Campbell-Cochrane Habit        0.86            —              0.14       0.000

Table 1: Variance Decomposition of Quarterly Log Di¤erence in Stock Wealth. See Table 2.
This table reports a variance decomposition of the quarterly log di¤erence in stock market wealth using.
The numbers reported represent the fraction of the h = 1 step-ahead forecast error in the log di¤erence of
stock wealth that is attributable to the shock named in the column heading. Model results are calculated
as averages over 1,000 simulations of 238 observations each. The numbers in parentheses represent the 5th
and 95th percentiles of these statistics from bootstrapped samples using the procedure described in the
Appendix. The historical sample spans the period 1952:Q2 - 2012:Q4.



                            Simulated and Data Moments
           Variable Data Mean Data St. Dev. Model Mean Model St. Dev.
                 ct   0.018        0.014         0.023     0.018
                 yt   0.021        0.021         0.023     0.053
                dt    0.019        0.120         0.022     0.123
              rte     0.064        0.169         0.066     0.169
                f
              rt      0.015        0.022         0.015     0.000
              rtex    0.049        0.165         0.051     0.169
            pt dt     3.564        0.382         3.239     0.301

Table 2: Simulated and Data Moments.              ct and dt are log di¤erences of real consumption and
dividends; rte is the cum-dividend value-weighted CRSP return; rtf is the constant-maturity 1-year T-bill
rate. rtex rte rtf . Data for pt dt are obtained from CRSP. All variables are at annual frequency. The
sample is 1953:4 - 2012:6.
            Long Horizon Predictability Regressions: Yt;t+h = a + b(pt dt ) + et;t+h
                                           DATA
                       Ph                  Ph                       Ph ex
            Yt;t+h :      j=1 ct+j           j=1   dt+j               j=1 rt+j
                                   2                    2
               h       pdt      R          pdt       R           pdt         R2
               4       0:125 -0.003        0:012 0.001           0:130      0.068
                     ( 0:248)            ( 0:502)              ( 2:856)
               8       0:875   0.013       0:034 0.010           0:226      0.120
                     ( 0:776)            ( 0:780)              ( 2:777)
              12       1:423   0.022       0:055 0.019           0:272      0.144
                     ( 0:849)            ( 0:857)              ( 3:043)

                                                  MODEL
                         Ph                       Ph                            Ph      ex
            Yt;t+h :        j=1   ct+j                j=1   dt+j                   j=1 rt+j
               h         pdt        R2             pdt        R2            pdt            R2
               4        0:006      0.011          0:076      0.034          0:266         0.139
                       (0:007)                   (1:545)                  ( 3:600)
               8        0:028       0.024         0:144       0.067         0:369         0.195
                       (0:026)                   (1:699)                  ( 3:953)
              12        0:024       0.036         0:206       0.096         0:422         0.223
                       (0:035)                   (2:146)                  ( 4:145)

Table 3: Long Horizon Predictability Regressions. Regressions from actual and simulated data of the
variable Yt;t+h on pt dt (the log price-dividend ratio at time t) and a constant: Yt;t+h = a+b(pt dt )+et;t+h .
                                                                              Ph
The variable Yt;t+h is alternately equal to h-quarter consumption growth j=1 ct+j , h-quarter dividend
        Ph                                                          Ph     ex
growth j=1 dt+j , or h-quarter excess stock market returns, j=1 rt+j          . The regression coe¢ cient b is
reported along with its t -statistic, obtained as averages over 1,000 simulated regressions of 238 observations
each. The t-statistics are calculated using Newey-West standard errors, with number of lags equal to the
regression horizon, and the R2 statistic is adjusted for the number of explanatory variables. Coe¢ cients that
are statistically signi…cant at 5% level appear in bold.
                                                                                                Ph    ex             0
                                                     Long Horizon Return Regressions:            j=0 rt+j+1     =        Xt + ! t+1;t+h
                                                                                        DATA
                  Xt :          pd                     cay                       U3C                       ea                             pdorth                 caya
                                        2                      2           C              2                              2
                   h       pdt        R           cayt        R           U3;t          R               ea;t         R             pdorth
                                                                                                                                     t              R2      caya;t    R2
                   4       0:130     0.068       2:722       0.074        0:037        0.003           0:401        0.137          0:083           0.023    7:357 0.128
                         ( 2:856)               (2:936)                ( 1:030)                       (7:739)                    ( 1:571)                  (3:684)
                   8       0:226     0.120       4:864       0.133        0:018        -0.004          0:673        0.262          0:118           0.029   13:736 0.261
                         ( 2:777)               (3:326)                ( 0:299)                      (12:686)                    ( 1:363)                  (5:575)
                  12       0:272     0.144       6:667       0.197       0:014         -0.005          0:678        0.314          0:135           0.031   16:423 0.310
                         ( 3:043)               (4:098)                 (0:169)                       (8:419)                    ( 1:276)                  (7:052)

                                                                                       MODEL
                  Xt :          pd                     cay                                                 ea                             pdorth                 caya
                                        2                      2                                                         2
                   h       pdt        R           cayt        R                                        ea;t          R             pdorth
                                                                                                                                     t              R2      caya;t    R2
                   4       0:266     0.139       0:693       0.084                                     0:283        0.273          0:070           0.015    1:459 0.274
                         ( 3:600)               (3:593)                                              (13:363)                    ( 0:164)                  (6:279)
                   8       0:369     0.195       0:984       0.119                                     0:399        0.351          0:111           0.026    2:026 0.358
                         ( 3:953)               (3:643)                                              (16:236)                    ( 0:252)                  (7:185)
                  12       0:422     0.223       1:114       0.129                                     0:445        0.372          0:143           0.034    2:277 0.383
                         ( 4:097)               (3:526)                                              (17:649)                    ( 0:337)                  (7:365)
                                                                                                                              Ph     ex
                                                                                                                                                                    Ph      ex
Table 4: Long Horizon Return Regressions. Regressions from actual and simulated data of the variable j=0 rt+j+1                            on Xt and a constant:       j=0 rt+j+1 =
  0                                                                 C        orth
    Xt + ! t+1;t+h . The variable Xt is alternately pd, cay, U3 , ea , pd         , and caya . pd is the log price-dividend ratio (source: CRSP). cay is the consumption-wealth
                                                                                                                         C
variable from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), while caya is the component of cay driven by shocks to ea;t . U3;t              is the square root of the conditional expectation of the
squared consumption innovation ct+1 Et ct+1 , one quarter ahead, computed using a stochastic volatility model in Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2013). The VAR
innovation ea;t is a shock that raises at , holding …xed ct and yt . The variable pdorth           t    is the …tted residual from a regression of pd on contemporaneous and 19
                                                                                                                                          P19
lagged values of ea;t . For ea;t = (ea;t ; :::; ea;t 19 ), the coe¢ cient reported is the sum of the individual regression coe¢ cients j=0 ea ;j , where ea ;j is the coe¢ cient
                                                                                                                                                          P23 2
on ea;t j , and the statistic reported in parentheses is a Wald statistic for the null hypothesis that the squared coe¢ cients sum to zero:                 j=0 ea ;j = 0. For the
variables pdt and cayt , the statistics reported in parentheses are t-statistics for the null hypothesis that the regression coe¢ cient is zero. A constant is included in
each regression even though it is not reported in the table. Bolded coe¢ cients indicate signi…cance at the 5 percent or better level. Test statistics are corrected for
serial autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity using a Newey-West estimator with 24 lags. R2 is the adjusted R2 statistic. For the U3;t             C
                                                                                                                                                      regression, the sample spans
1960:Q4 : 2012:Q1. For all other regressions, the sample spans 1952:Q4 - 2012:Q3.
                             Response to TFP Shock                           Response to dln c Shock
                  0.01                                                0.01
                                                           c                                           c
                                                           y                                           y
                 0.005                                     a         0.005                             a



                    0                                                   0



                −0.005                                              −0.005



                 −0.01                                               −0.01
                            5         10        15             20            5        10        15         20



                         Response to Factor Share Shock                      Response to dln y Shock
                  0.03                                     c          0.03                             c
                                                           y                                           y
                  0.02                                     a          0.02                             a
                  0.01                                                0.01

                    0                                                   0

                 −0.01                                               −0.01

                 −0.02                                               −0.02

                 −0.03                                               −0.03
                            5         10        15             20            5        10        15         20



                         Response to Risk Aversion Shock                     Response to dln a Shock
                  0.04                                                0.04
                                                           c                                           c
                                                           y                                           y
                  0.02                                     a          0.02                             a



                    0                                                   0



                 −0.02                                               −0.02



                 −0.04                                               −0.04
                            5         10        15             20            5        10        15         20




Figure 1: Model-Based Responses: Primitive vs. VAR Shocks.               The left column plots the cumulated
                                                                    Student Version of MATLAB
model impulse responses of the log di¤erences of c, y, and a to the primitive shock named in the sub-graph
title. The right column plots the cumulative impulse responses implied by the model from a VAR in the
log di¤erences of c, y , and a to the orthogonalized VAR shocks using data simulated from the model (right
column). Impulse responses to primitive shocks are obtained by applying at t = 0 a one-standard deviation
change in the direction that increases at , and simulating the model forward with all other shocks set to
zero. Impulse responses to the VAR shocks are obtained by simulating the model over one very long sample
(equal to 238,000 observations), estimating a cointegrated VAR in the log di¤erenced data, inverting to
Wold representation and computing the responses to orthogonalized c, y, and a shocks equal to one standard
deviation changes in the direction that increases at with that ordering in the VAR. The size of the shocks
are normalized so that the initial response of a variable to its own shock in the right panel is the same as
the response of that variable to the corresponding primitive shock in the left panel.
                    Response to dln c Shock (Model)                    Response to dln c Shock (Data)

                                                      c                                                 c
            0.02                                      y         0.02                                    y
                                                      a                                                 a
            0.01                                                0.01


               0                                                  0


           −0.01                                               −0.01


           −0.02                                               −0.02

                       5         10        15             20             5         10         15            20



                    Response to dln y Shock (Model)                    Response to dln y Shock (Data)

            0.05                                      c         0.05                                    c
                                                      y                                                 y
                                                      a                                                 a



               0                                                  0




           −0.05                                               −0.05
                       5         10        15             20             5         10         15            20



                    Response to dln a Shock (Model)                    Response to dln a Shock (Data)

             0.1                                      c          0.1                                    c
                                                      y                                                 y
                                                      a                                                 a
            0.05                                                0.05


               0                                                  0


           −0.05                                               −0.05


            −0.1                                                −0.1

                       5         10        15             20             5         10         15            20




Figure 2: VAR Impulse Responses (Model vs. Data). The …gure plots impulse response functions
to the VAR shocks in both the model (left column) and data (right    Student Versiontrue
                                                                       column).      of MATLAB
                                                                                         structural shocks to
the orthogonalized shocks obtained from the VECM regression using data simulated from the model (left
column), and actual data (right column). In both cases, impulse responses are obtained by estimating a
cointegrated VAR in the log di¤erenced data, inverting to Wold representation and computing the responses
to orthogonalized c, y, and a shocks equal to one standard deviation changes in the direction that increases
  at with that ordering in the VAR. Model results are calculated as averages over 1,000 simulations of 238
observations each. The historical sample spans the period 1952:Q2 - 2012:Q4.
                                    Response of Stock Wealth to dln c Shock

             0.1

           0.05

              0

          −0.05

           −0.1

                   2        4       6       8       10      12       14       16    18      20


                                    Response of Stock Wealth to dln y Shock

             0.1

           0.05

              0

          −0.05

           −0.1

                   2        4       6       8       10      12       14       16    18      20


                                    Response of Stock Wealth to dln a Shock

             0.1

           0.05

              0

          −0.05

           −0.1

                   2        4       6       8       10      12       14       16    18      20



Figure 3: Stock Market Impulse Responses. The …gure plots impulse responses of stock wealth to the
                                                                   Student
shocks obtained from the VECM regression. Dotted lines are 90% error  bandsVersion of MATLAB
                                                                             obtained   using the bootstrap
procedure described in the Appendix. The historical sample spans the period 1952:Q2 - 2012:Q4.
                                            Spectrum of Stock Wealth (Model)
               1
                                                                                            c
             0.9                                                                            y
                                                                                            a
             0.8                                                                            residual

             0.7

             0.6

             0.5

             0.4

             0.3

             0.2

             0.1

               0
                      20      40       60       80         100        120      140   160   180     200
                                                     Cycles in Quarters




                                            Spectrum of Stock Wealth (Data)
               1
                                                                                            c
             0.9                                                                            y
                                                                                            a
             0.8                                                                            residual

             0.7

             0.6

             0.5

             0.4

             0.3

             0.2

             0.1

               0
                      20      40       60       80         100        120      140   160   180     200
                                                     Cycles in Quarters



Figure 4: Decomposition of Spectrum (Model vs. Data). The …gure shows the decomposition of
                                                                       Student Version of
spectra at di¤erent frequencies into components driven by each of the orthogonalized      MATLAB
                                                                                       shocks of the consump-
tion, labor income and wealth VAR. Results for the model are computed from averages over 1,000 simulations
of 238 observations. Results from historical data appear in the two bottom panels. The historical sample
spans the period 1952:Q2 - 2012:Q4.
                          Detrended Log Stock Wealth                        Detrended Log Stock Price
              1                                                 1

             0.5                                               0.5

              0                                                 0

            −0.5                                              −0.5

             −1                                                −1
                   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010          1960   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010

                    Stock Wealth: Contribution of c Shock              Stock Price: Contribution of c Shock
              1                                                 1

             0.5                                               0.5

              0                                                 0

            −0.5                                              −0.5

             −1                                                −1
                   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010          1960   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010

                    Stock Wealth: Contribution of y Shock              Stock Price: Contribution of y Shock
              1                                                 1

             0.5                                               0.5

              0                                                 0

            −0.5                                              −0.5

             −1                                                −1
                   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010          1960   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010

                    Stock Wealth: Contribution of a Shock              Stock Price: Contribution of a Shock
              1                                                 1

             0.5                                               0.5

              0                                                 0

            −0.5                                              −0.5

             −1                                                −1
                   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010          1960   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010

                    Stock Wealth: Contribution of Residual             Stock Price: Contribution of Residual
              1                                                 1

             0.5                                               0.5

              0                                                 0

            −0.5                                              −0.5

             −1                                                −1
                   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010          1960   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010




Figure 5: Level Decomposition (Data). See Table 2. The …gure shows the decomposition of the log
level of stock wealth into components driven by the orthogonalized c,Student
                                                                        y, andVersion of MATLAB
                                                                                a shocks   obtained from the
VECM regression. A deterministic trend is removed from the log level of stock wealth by removing the mean
in log di¤erences before cumulating. The components plus the residual sum to the log level of detrended
stock wealth and detrended stock price in the left and right panels, respectively. Each component and the
sum are normalized so that the value in 1952:Q1 is zero. The sample spans the period 1952:Q2 - 2012:Q4.
                                                             Effect of Factor Shares Shock on Labor Income and Stock Market Wealth
                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                    labor
                                                                                                                                                    SW
                                                 2



                                                1.5



                                                 1
          Log level component (standardized)




                                                0.5



                                                 0



                                               −0.5



                                                −1



                                               −1.5



                                                −2
                                                      1960        1970                 1980                 1990                2000               2010

                                                                                                                                       Student Version of MATLAB


Figure 6: Decomposition of Labor Income and Stock Market Wealth. The …gure shows the
component of the log levels of stock market wealth and labor income that is attributable to the factor shares
shock over time. The e¤ect of the factors share shock ey;t on the log level of each series is obtained by
summing up the estimated e¤ects of ey;t on the log di¤erences over time. Both series are demeaned and
divided by their standard deviations. The sample spans the period 1952:Q2 - 2012:Q4.
Appendix: For Online Publication

Data Description

CONSUMPTION
   Consumption is measured as either total personal consumption expenditure or expen-
diture on nondurables and services, excluding shoes and clothing. The quarterly data are
seasonally adjusted at annual rates, in billions of chain-weighted 2005 dollars. The com-
ponents are chain-weighted together, and this series is scaled up so that the sample mean
matches the sample mean of total personal consumption expenditures. Our source is the
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   LABOR INCOME
   Labor income is de…ned as wages and salaries + transfer payments + employer contri-
butions for employee pensions and insurance - employee contributions for social insurance -
taxes. Taxes are de…ned as [ wages and salaries/(wages and salaries + proprietors’income
with IVA and CCADJ + rental income + personal dividends + personal interest income)]
times personal current taxes, where IVA is inventory valuation and CCADJ is capital con-
sumption adjustments. The quarterly data are in current dollars. Our source is the Bureau
of Economic Analysis.
   POPULATION
   A measure of population is created by dividing real total disposable income by real per
capita disposable income. Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   WEALTH
   Total wealth is household net worth in billions of current dollars, measured at the end of
the period. A break-down of net worth into its major components is given in the table below.
Stock market wealth includes direct household holdings, mutual fund holdings, holdings
of private and public pension plans, personal trusts, and insurance companies. Nonstock
wealth includes tangible/real estate wealth, nonstock …nancial assets (all deposits, open
market paper, U.S. Treasuries and Agency securities, municipal securities, corporate and
foreign bonds and mortgages), and also includes ownership of privately traded companies
in noncorporate equity, and other. Subtracted o¤ are liabilities, including mortgage loans
and loans made under home equity lines of credit and secured by junior liens, installment
consumer debt and other. Wealth is measured at the end of the period. A timing convention
for wealth is needed because the level of consumption is a ‡ow during the quarter rather
than a point-in-time estimate as is wealth (consumption data are time-averaged). If we
think of a given quarter’s consumption data as measuring spending at the beginning of the
quarter, then wealth for the quarter should be measured at the beginning of the period.
If we think of the consumption data as measuring spending at the end of the quarter,
then wealth for the quarter should be measured at the end of the period. None of our
main …ndings discussed below (estimates of the cointegrating parameters, error-correction
speci…cation, or permanent-transitory decomposition) are sensitive to this timing convention.
Given our …nding that most of the variation in wealth is not associated with consumption,
this timing convention is conservative in that the use of end-of-period wealth produces a
higher contemporaneous correlation between consumption growth and wealth growth. Our
source is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. A complete description of
these data may be found at http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z1/Current/.
   STOCK PRICE, RETURN, DIVIDENDS
   The stock price is measured using the Center for Research on Securities Pricing (CRSP)
value-weighted stock market index covering stocks on the NASDAQ, AMEX, and NYSE.
The data are monthly. The stock market price is the price of a portfolio that does not
reinvest dividends. The CRSP dataset consists of vwretx(t) = (Pt =Pt 1 )      1, the return on
a portfolio that doesn’t pay dividends, and vwretdt = (Pt + Dt ) =Pt       1, the return on a
portfolio that does pay dividends. The stock price index we use is the price Ptx of a portfolio
that does not reinvest dividends, which can be computed iteratively as

                                   x
                                 Pt+1 = Ptx (1 + vwretxt+1 ) ;

where P0x = 1. Dividends on this portfolio that does not reinvest are computed as

                               Dt = Ptx 1 (vwretdt   vwretxt ) :

The above give monthly returns, dividends and prices. The annual log return is the sum of
the 12 monthly log returns over the year. We create annual log dividend growth rates by
summing the log di¤erences over the 12 months in the year: dt+12              dt = dt+12    dt+11 +
dt+11    dt+10 +     + dt+1     dt : The annual log price-dividend ratio is created by summing
dividends in levels over the year to obtain an annual dividend in levels, DtA , where t denotes
a year hear. The annual observation on Ptx is taken to be the last monthly price observation
of the year, PtAx . The annual log price-dividend ratio is ln PtAx =DtA . The variables          dt ,
rtf , rte , and rtex are adjusted for in‡ation by subtracting the log di¤erence of realized CPI (all
urban consumers) obtained from FRED.
   PRICE DEFLATOR
   The nominal after-tax labor income and wealth data are de‡ated by the personal con-
sumption expenditure chain-type de‡ator (2005=100), seasonally adjusted. In principle, one
would like a measure of the price de‡ator for total ‡ow consumption here. Since this variable
is unobservable, we use the total expenditure de‡ator as a proxy. Our source is the Bureau
of Economic Analysis.
   ANNUALIZATION
   For    ct and    yt , annual observations are created by summing log di¤erences at quar-
terly frequency over the year. For         dt , annual observations are obtained by summing log
di¤erences at monthly frequency over the year. For rte , rtf , and rtex , annual observations are
obtained by summing log levels at monthly frequency over the year. For the ratio pt              dt ,
annual observations are created by …rst summing dividends in levels over the year to obtain
an annual dividend in levels. dt is then taken to be the log of the annual dividend. pt is taken
to be the last price observation of the year (at monthly frequency). Annual observations are
de…ned over years ending in June so that the most recent data can be included.

Risk Aversion Along a Balanced Growth Path

The budget constraint for the representative shareholder can be written

                                        At =   t   (Pt + Dt ) + Bt                             (19)

                                     Cts + Bt+1 qt +    t+1 Pt   At ;                          (20)

where At are period t assets,    t   are shares held in equity, Pt is the ex-dividend price of these
shares, Bt is the beginning of period value of bonds held, and qt = 1= (1 + Rf ) is the risk-free
rate paid on bonds. Along the non-stochastic balanced growth path, the equity return is
equal to the risk-free bond rate. Rewrite (19) as
                                                   Pt+1 + Dt+1
                           At+1 = Pt            t+1             + Bt+1
                                                        Pt
                                        = Pt t+1 Rt+1 + Bt+1 =>
                                          At+1 Bt+1
                         Pt   t+1       =              :                                                (21)
                                          Rt+1 Rt+1
Plugging (21) into (20) and evaluating (20) at the equilibrium value of equality, we obtain
                                                               At+1           Bt+1
                              At = Cts + Bt+1 qt +
                                                               Rt+1           Rt+1
                                            At+1
                                    = Cts +
                                            Rt+1
                                            At+1
                                    = Cts +
                                             Rf
where the last equality follows because qt = 1=Rf = 1=Rt+1 along the equilibrium balanced
growth path. Thus we have a beginning of period assets:

                                          At+1 = Rf (At            Cts )

or solving forward
                                                X
                                                1
                                                         1
                                                               i
                                                                    s
                                         At =                      Ct+i :                               (22)
                                                i=0
                                                         Rf
   The value function is de…ned

                           V (At ) = max
                                      s
                                         fu (Cts ) +               t Et V   (At+1 )g
                                           Ct

or using (20)

                V (At ) = max fu (At             Bt+1 qt +         t+1 Pt )   +   t Et V   (At+1 )g :
                         Bt+1 ;   t+1


Following the derivation in Swanson (2012), the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion RRAt is
                                                      At Et V 00 (At+1 )
                                        RRAt =                           :                              (23)
                                                      Et V 0 (At+1 )
It can be shown (see below) that

                                                      s
                                  V 0 (At+1 ) = u0 Ct+1   )                                             (24)
                                                            s
                                                          @Ct+1
                                                       s
                                  V 00 (At+1 ) = u00 Ct+1       ;                                       (25)
                                                          @At+1
                                                                   s
where the notation “*”denotes the shareholder’s optimal choice of Ct+1 .
   Swanson (2012) derives a relative risk aversion coe¢ cient for dynamic models at a non-
stochastic steady state or along a balanced growth path. We use G = 1 +                             a   to denote
steady state growth. Along a balanced growth path where for z 2 fA; C s ; D; C; Y g we have
zt+k = Gk zt ;where G 2 (0; Rf ) we have the following derivation in this setting. Note that
                                 exp( rf )
the steady state value of t       "
                                    D
                                      xt
                                           # is given by
                                                    t+1
                                          Et        xt 1
                                               Dt



                                                               exp ( rf )
                                                           =              ;
                                                                  Gx

where the mean of xt is denoted x. Using the …rst order condition for optimal consumption
choice in steady state:

                          u0 (Cts )            =           s
                                                  Rf u00 Ct+1 =>
                                                                 s
                              @Cts                            @Ct+1
                   u00 (Cts )                              s
                                               = Rf u00 Ct+1        =>
                              @At                              @At
                             @Cts                exp ( rf ) h                       i @C s
               x (Cts ) x 1                    =           Rf   x (GCts )     x 1        t+1
                                                                                               =>
                              @At                   Gx                                @At
                             @Cts                    @C s
                                               = G 1 t+1 :                                                   (26)
                              @At                     @At

Applying the same transformation to the …rst order condition at time t + 1 we have
                                             s                 s
                              00    s      @Ct+1       00  s @Ct+2
                          u        Ct+1          = Rf u Ct+2       =>
                                            @At               @At
                                             s
                                           @Ct+1      @C s
                                                 = G 1 t+2                                                   (27)
                                            @At        @At

and combining (26) and (27) we obtain

                                            @Cts      @C s
                                                 = G 2 t+2 =>
                                            @At        @At
                                              s
                                           @Ct+2     @C s
                                                 = G2 t ;
                                            @At      @At

and iterating obtain
                                                        s        s
                                                     @Ct+i   i @Ct
                                                           =G      :
                                                      @At      @At
Now di¤erentiate (22) evaluated along the balanced growth path with respect to At :

                               X
                               1
                                            1
                                                 i      s
                                                     @Ct+i
                     1 =
                               i=0
                                           Rf         @At
                                           "                                                             #
                                                                             2                  3
                         @Cts                  G                        G                  G
                     1 =                    1+    +                                  +              +
                         @At                   Rf                       Rf                 Rf
                               @Cts             Rf
                        =                                           ;
                               @At          Rf        G

implying
                                                @Cts   Rf G
                                                     =      :                                                       (28)
                                                 At      Rf
Assets At along a non-stochastic balanced growth path are
                                                          X
                                                          1
                                                                        1
                                                                                 i
                                                                                      s
                                           At                                        Ct+i
                                                              i=0
                                                                        Rf
                                                          X
                                                          1
                                                                        G
                                                                                 i
                                                 =                                   Cts
                                                              i=0
                                                                        Rf
                                                               Rf Cts
                                                 =                    :                                             (29)
                                                              (Rf G)

Plugging (24), (25), (28), and (29) into (23), we obtain a value for risk aversion along a
balanced growth path equal to
                                                                    s
                                                          Cts u00 Ct+1
                                     RRAt =                       s
                                                                       = x=G:
                                                          u0 Ct+1

   Derivation of (24). First-order condition for Bt+1 :

                                                                                 @At+1
                               u0 (Cts ) qt +         tV
                                                               0
                                                                   (At+1 )              = 0:                        (30)
                                                                                 @Bt+1
                                                                                 | {z }
                                                                             =1 from (19)


First-order condition for    t+1 :


                            u0 (Cts ) Pt +           tV
                                                          0
                                                              (At+1 ) (Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) = 0:                           (31)

Di¤erentiate the value function

                V (At ) = max fu (At                          Bt+1 qt +          t+1 Pt )   +   t Et V   (At+1 )g
                            Bt+1 ;   t+1
with respect to At , keeping in mind

                                 Cts = At       Bt+1 qt +        t+1 Pt


and
                             At+1 =     t+1   (Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) + Bt+1 :

We have
                                       2                                                 3
                                      6 0 s                                       @At+1 7
              V 0 (At ) = u0 (Cts ) + 6                             0                      7 @Bt+1
                                      4 u (Ct ) qt +           tV       (At+1 )
                                                                                  @B 5 @At
                                                                                  | {zt+1}
                                                                                    =1
                                                                                         @ t+1
                           + [ u0 (Cts ) Pt +     tV
                                                       0
                                                           (At+1 ) (Pt+1 + Dt+1 )]             :
                                                                                          @At

Evaluating at the optimum using (30) and (31), the terms in brackets are zero, leaving

                                       V 0 (At ) = u0 (Cts ) :

Economic Inequality

The causes and consequences of the upward trend in economic inequality over the last 30
years are hotly debated (see for example, Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010)). The model
above has strong implications for this debate and indicates that ‡uctuations in economic
inequality should be closely related to movements in the factors share shock. Figure A.4
provides suggestive evidence that the cumulative e¤ects of the factors share shock since 1980
may be associated with the observed rise in consumption inequality over this period. Figure
A.4 plots the consumption Gini coe¢ cient from Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010), which
uses data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) over the period 1980 to 2006. Along
with this series, we plot the cumulated factors share shock from the empirical VAR, and the
model-implied consumption Gini obtained by feeding the observed sequence of factors share
shocks from 1980 to 2006 into the model. (The Appendix gives the mapping between the
consumption Gini and the cumulated factors share shocks in the model.) In the model, the
consumption Gini is almost perfectly correlated with the cumulated factors share shocks,
both of which rise over the 1980-2006 period as rewards shifted away from workers and
toward shareholders.14 This is not surprising since, in the model, all inequality is between
group inequality across shareholders and workers, which is driven by the factors share shock.
But there is also a striking low frequency correlation shown in Figure A.4 between the rise
in consumption inequality in the CEX data and the observed cumulated factors share shock,
suggesting that the shift in rewards away from workers and toward shareholders over the
last thirty years could be a driving force behind the rise in consumption inequality.

Numerical Solution

The price-dividend ratio satis…es
                     Pt                            Pt+1             Dt+1
                        (st ) = Et Mt+1                 (st+1 ) + 1
                     Dt                            Dt+1              Dt
                                                                    Pt+1
                              = Et exp mt+1 +             dt+1 + ln      (st+1 ) + 1       ;
                                                                    Dt+1
where st is a vector of state variables, st            ( ln at ; Zt ; xt )0 : We therefore solve the function
numerically on an n           n      n dimensional grid of values for the state variables, replacing
the continuous time processes with a discrete Markov approximation following the approach
                                                              Pt
in Rouwenhorst (1995). The continuous function                Dt
                                                                   (st ) is then replaced by the n    n    n
            Pt
functions   Dt
                 (i; j; k) ; i; j; k = 1; :::; N; each representing the price-dividend ratio in state
  ln ai ; Zj ; and xk , where the functions are de…ned recursively by
P             XXXn    n   n
                                                                                         P
  (i; j; k) =                     i;l k;n j;m   exp m (l; m; n) +     d (l; m; n) + ln     (l; m; n) + 1    ;
D             l=1 m=1 n=1
                                                                                         D

where m (l; m; n) refers to the values mt+1 can take on in each of the states, and analogously
for the other terms. We set N = 35.

Estimating Population Spectrum for the Level of Stock Market
Wealth

Here we discuss the level decomposition of variance based on a spectral decomposition. The
reference for this procedure is Hamilton (1994), chapter 6. The procedure may be summa-
rized as follows. First, we estimate (4) and plug the estimated parameters into formulas
  14
    This calculation makes the (empirically relevant) assumption that equity holders’ share of aggregate
consumption is greater than their share in the population so that a shift in rewards toward shareholders
increases rather than decreases consumption inequality.
for the population spectrum for each component in (5)                                               sct ;   syt ;    sat ; and i.i.d. residual

 t.       Since     st      0       =        sct +   syt +       sat +          t,   the sum of the estimated spectra for each
component gives the estimated spectrum for                                            st       0,   denoted S       s    (!) as a function of
cycles of frequency !. Notice that we remove the deterministic trend from the log level
of stock market wealth by subtracting                                 0   from         st on the right-hand-side. Thus we have
S     s   (!) = S   sc   (!) + S        sy   (!) + S   sa   (!) + S (!), where these right hand terms are the spec-
tra for the individual components of                             st         0.       Roughly speaking, the proportion of sample
variance in          st         0   attributable to cycles with frequency near ! is given by S                                      s   (!) 4 =T ,
where T is the sample size. The fraction of the variance in the                                                     st       0   at cycles with
frequency near ! that is attributable to the consumption shock is

                                                                      S    sc(!)
                                                                                 ;                                                           (32)
                                                                      S    s (!)

and fraction of the variance in the                         st        0   at cycles with frequency ! that is attributable to
the other components are de…ned analogously. Recalling that, if the frequency of the cycle
is !, the period of the cycle is 2 =!. Thus we plot (32), which is a function of frequencies
! j = 2 j=T , against periods 2 =! j = T =j (here in units of quarters), where T is the sample
size.

Bootstrap Procedure for Error Bands

Con…dence intervals for parameters of interest are generated from a bootstrap following
Gonzalo and Ng (2001). The procedure is as follows. First, the cointegrating vector is
estimated, and conditional on this estimate, the remaining parameters of the VECM and
subsequent regressions are estimated. The …tted residuals from the system

                                        x t = ^ + ^ ^ 0 xt       1   + ^ (L) xt            1
                                                                                                 ^ t
                                                                                               + He
                                                                                                                                             (33)
                                        st = ^ 0 + ^ c (L)ec;t + ^ y (L)ey;t + ^ a (L)ea;t +                        t;


denoted (^
         ec;t ; e^y;t ; e^a;t ; ^t ) are obtained and a new sample of data is constructed (conditional
on our initial observations x 1 ; x0 and s0 ,) using the initial VECM and stock wealth OLS
parameter estimates by random sampling of (^
                                           ec;t ; e^y;t ; e^a;t ; ^t ) with replacement. Denote the
new randomly sampled (via block bootstrap) values for the residuals (~
                                                                     ec;t ; e~y;t ; e~a;t ; ~t ) for
t = 1; : : : ; T . The new bootstrapped sample of observable data, (~
                                                                    xt ; s~t ), is constructed from

                         ~ t = ^ + ^ ^ 0 xt
                         x                    1   + ^ (L) xt   1
                                                                    ^ e~t
                                                                   +H

                         s~t = ^ 0 + ^ c (L)~
                                            ec;t + ^ y (L)~
                                                          ey;t + ^ a (L)~
                                                                        ea;t + ~t :

Given this new sample of data, all parameters in (33) (as well as the cointegrating coe¢ cients)
are re-estimated, and the impulse responses, variance decompositions, and other statistics
of interest stored. This is repeated 5,000 times. The empirical 90% con…dence intervals
are evaluated from these 5,000 samples of the bootstrapped parameters. The bands for the
impulse responses in Figure 2 are reported in Figure A.2. The bands are reasonably tight for
most responses except for the response of at to a labor income shock ey;t . However, Figure
2 shows that the response of stock wealth st (rather than net worth) to an ey;t shock is
estimated much more precisely, re‡ecting the fact that the factors share shock a¤ects the
stock wealth component of net worth almost exclusively, but shows little relation to other
forms of wealth included in net worth.

Consumption Gini

We explain how the model-implied consumption Gini coe¢ cient is computed over the same
sample period as in the empirical consumption Gini series of Heathcote, Perri, and Violante
(2010). In the model, inequality is entirely attributable to the division of consumption
between shareholders and workers (agents in each group are identical, so there is no within-
group inequality). The level of inequality in the model is measured, as in the data, using
the Gini coe¢ cient for consumption. To calculate inequality in the model, we assume that
the fraction of shareholders is smaller than their share of aggregate consumption, so that
shareholders consume a disproportionately large fraction of aggregate consumption. This
assumption ensures that a shift of income away from workers toward shareholders (i.e., a
negative "z shock) has the e¤ect of increasing consumption inequality. The share of aggregate
consumption that accrues to workers is             f (Zt ). If we denote q to be the fraction of the
population in the shareholder group, then we assume q < 1                   f (z) for all z.
   Under these assumptions, the Gini coe¢ cient takes the simple form

                                        G=1           q    f (z):                              (34)
To see this, it is helpful to consider Figure A.4, which shows the consumption distribution
in the model. The Gini coe¢ cient is de…ned to be the ratio A=(A + B), where A and B are
the areas of the relevant labeled areas in Figure A.4. The area B is the sum of the areas of
a triangle with base 1    q and height f (z), a rectangle with base q and height f (z), and
a triangle with base q and height 1       f (z). Basic geometry then implies that

                                          1
                                       B = (q + f (z)):
                                          2

A + B is a triangle with base 1 and height 1, so A + B = 1=2. Combining results, we obtain
that
                                        1
                                     A = (1       q        f (z)):
                                        2
Since G = A=(A + B), this completes the derivation of (34).
   Given this form for the Gini coe¢ cient, it is clear that in the model, the Gini coe¢ cient
can be determined up to the constant q given values for f (z). In the model, the ey shock is
nearly perfectly correlated with     ln f (Zt ), so that

                                          ln f (Zt ) ' b1 ey;t                             (35)

for some constant b1 . The constant is estimated by running the relevant regression using
long time series simulated from the model.
   Using our estimates e^y;t from the empirical VAR, we can now construct an implied series
for the Gini coe¢ cient in the model. Note from (35), we have

                                                              X
                                                              t
                               ln f (Zt ) = ln f (Z0 ) + b1          ey;i :                (36)
                                                               i=1

The consumption Gini data from Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010) are annual and run
from 1980 to 2006. We therefore set t = 1 to 1980 and normalize ln f (Z0 ) to zero. We take
the average quarterly value of ey;t within a year as the annual observation for ey;t . Iterating
forward on (36) and applying the exponential function to the left-hand-side yields an implied
series for f (zt ). Finally, plugging this value into (34) yields a model-implied series for G.
Because we normalize the Gini series in the plot to have zero mean, the parameter q doesn’t
play a role in the plotted series.
Decomposition of cay

This section describes how to decompose the cayt series obtained from a VECM regression
into components attributable to each of the three orthogonalized shocks. The cay series is
de…ned by
                                                                             0
                                                          cayt                   xt

where xt = (ct ; at ; yt )0 ,   = (1;            a;       y)
                                                            0
                                                                 is the cointegrating vector, and                  is a constant.
    Assume that the stochastic process for xt has a VECM representation

                                                                0
                                           xt =       +             xt   1   +        xt       1   + Het                      (37)

where et = (ec;t ; ea;t ; ey;t )0 are the orthogonalized shocks. Inverting the VECM, we obtain
the Wold decomposition
                                                          xt = + D(L)et                                                       (38)

where D(L) is an in…nite-order lag polynomial.

Theoretical Decomposition

If we let Dc (L) be the column of D(L) relating to the ec shock, then we obtain the decom-
position
                                xt = + Dc (L)ec;t + Da (L)ea;t + Dy (L)ey;t :                                                 (39)

If we de…ne

                                                          xc;t           Dc (L)ec;t

                                                          xa;t           Da (L)ea;t                                           (40)

                                                          xy;t           Dy (L)ey;t

then, cumulating up, we obtain an additive decomposition for xt

                                                xt = t + xc;t + xa;t + xy;t :                                                 (41)

                                0
Premultiplying (41) by              , and subtracting , we obtain a decomposition for cayt :

                                       0                    0                0             0            0
                          cayt =           xt         =         t+               xc;t +        xa;t +       xy;t              (42)
If we de…ne

                                                         0
                                            cayc;t           xc;t
                                                         0
                                           caya;t            xa;t
                                                         0
                                           cayy;t            xy;t



then (42) becomes
                                    0
                           cayt =       t + cayc;t + caya;t + cayy;t    :                    (43)

Note that unlike cayt , the components (e.g., cayc;t ) are detrended and demeaned.

Practical Decomposition

Unfortunately, we cannot fully implement (43) in practice. From our estimation procedure,
                            ^ We also obtain estimates e^t , but only for t = 1; : : : ; T . If we
we obtain estimates ^ , and D.
had estimates of all e^t for t = T; T      1; : : : ; 1, then we could evaluate estimates of each
xc ; xa and xy term using (40) and form an additive decomposition. However, we do not,
so if we estimate these terms using only the shocks from 1; : : : ; T , then the decomposition
will no longer hold exactly, as we cannot decompose what shocks were responsible for the
initial conditions   x0 and x0 , which will have a persistent e¤ect on the series xt through
(37). However, since the e¤ect of initial conditions becomes smaller as time goes on, the
approximate decomposition using only shocks from t = 1 forward may still be of interest.
   Our approximate decomposition begins with the quantities

                                                 X
                                                 t 1
                                         x~c;t         Dc;j e^c;t   j
                                                 j=0

                                                 X
                                                 t 1
                                         x~a;t         Da;j e^a;t   j
                                                 j=0

                                                 X
                                                 t 1
                                         x~y;t         Dy;j e^y;t   j
                                                 j=0


where e^t represents the estimates of the orthogonalized shocks. This decomposes the in‡uence
of the orthogonalized shocks from t = 1 on the various states. Cumulating these series leads
to the series x~c ; x~a ; x~y . In practice, these series can be calculated by running the VECM (37)
forward (without the constant term) starting from initial condition                        x0 = x0 = (0; 0; 0)0 and
applying shocks that include only the relevant entry of the estimated shocks.
   An example will clarify these instructions. To evaluate                         x~c;t , begin by setting   x~c;0 =
x~c;0 = (0; 0; 0)0 . Given   x~t   1   and x~t   1   for t         0, we can obtain         x~c;t by applying (37)
without the constant term , and allowing only the ec;t shock to be nonzero, so that we
obtain                                                                           2 3
                                                                                  e
                                                                                 6 c;t 7
                                                                                 6 7
                              x~c;t = ^ ^ 0 x~c;t    1   + ^ x~c;t         1 + H 6 0 7:                         (44)
                                                                                 4 5
                                                                                   0
Proceeding in this fashion, we can compute the entire series for x~c;t .
   To decompose the e¤ect of the shocks on cayt , we can simply apply the cointegrating
vector to the cumulated x~ series to obtain

                                                               0
                                                 cg
                                                  ay c;t           x~c;t
                                                               0
                                                 cg
                                                  ay a;t           x~a;t
                                                               0
                                                 cg
                                                  ay y;t           x~y;t



Because this decomposition cannot account for shocks prior to t = 1, (42) will not hold, and
we will instead end up with a “residual”term cayt , such that

                               cayt = cg
                                       ay c;t + cg
                                                 ay a;t + cg
                                                           ay y;t + cayt                                        (45)

This completes the instructions for generating the decomposition. A full derivation of the
decomposition, including instructions for calculating the residual term, can be found below.

Full Derivation

In order to derive (45), an additive decomposition without estimates of e0 ; e 1 ; : : :, we can
take advantage of the fact that the in‡uence of e0 ; e 1 ; : : : is contained in the initial conditions
  x0 and x0 . The …rst step is to de…ne a series that represents only the e¤ects of these
unobserved shocks. To this end, de…ne
                                                    8
                                                    >
                                                    <et        for t        0
                                       et
                                                    >
                                                    :0         for t > 0

so that et is equivalent to et for t     0, but is zero for t > 0. Next, de…ne
                                                                           X
                                                                           1
                                xt       + D(L)et = +                            Dj et j :
                                                                           j=t

In other words,    xt is what    xt would be had all shocks from time t = 1 on been equal to
zero. For examples, we have

                                     x1 = + D1 e0 + D2 e1 + : : :

                                     x2 = + D2 e0 + D3 e1 + : : : :

To compute these series, we can easily obtain this series by running the VECM forward with
all shocks from t = 1 onward set to zero. Speci…cally, use the initial conditions                             x0 =    x0
and x0 = x0 , as in the standard VECM. Then, given                           xt       1   and xt 1 , we can compute   xt
using
                                                          0
                                     xt =           +         xt   1   +         xt   1


which is just the standard VECM (including the constant term nu) but with the shocks et
set to zero. In practice of course the coe¢ cients of the VECM will be the estimated “hat”
versions.
   Next, de…ne

                                                        X
                                                        t 1
                                            x~c;t              Dc;j ec;t     j
                                                         j=0

                                                        X
                                                        t 1
                                         x~a;t                 Da;j ea;t     j
                                                         j=0

                                                        X
                                                        t 1
                                         x~y;t                 Dy;j ey;t     j
                                                         j=0

so that each series corresponds to the cumulated e¤ects of the di¤erent shocks from time
t = 1 onward. Note that these series can be obtained by running the VECM forward (without
adding the constant ) starting from initial condition x~0 =                                 x~0 = (0; 0; 0)0 and applying the
relevant shock components one at a time, as in (44) of the previous section.
      Under this de…nition, we have

                                                                             X
                                                                             t 1
                                  x~c;t +         x~a;t +       x~y;t =                Dj et   j
                                                                             j=0


and since
                                                            X
                                                            1
                                             xt = +                       Dj et    j
                                                                j=t

we obtain
                                                                                   X
                                                                                   1
                        x~c;t +   x~a;t +     x~y;t +       xt = +                       Dj et          j   = xt :
                                                                                   j=0

Since all of these components depend only on the estimated coe¢ cients, the initial condition
x0 , and the estimated shocks e^1 ; : : : ; e^T , we can calculate this decomposition using only the
output from the VECM regression.
      Cumulating, and applying the           vector, we obtain

                                     0        0             0                 0                0
                        cayt = t         +        x~c;t +       x~a;t +           x~y;t +          xt

                              = cg
                                 ay c;t + cg
                                           ay a;t + cg
                                                     ay y;t + cayt

for

                                                                 0
                                             cg
                                              ay c;t                 x~c;t
                                                                 0
                                             cg
                                              ay a;t                 x~a;t
                                                                 0
                                             cg
                                              ay y;t                 x~y;t
                                                                 0
                                                  cayt               xt

which is the desired additive decomposition.
      A few …nal notes are in order. First, since we want an additive decomposition, it is
important not to triple-count various constants. This means not including the                                        constant
when calculating the various x~ series, as well as not normalizing the various cg
                                                                                ay series by
(although these constant terms should be used when calculating cayt ).
Additional Figures and Tables

                         Parameter List and Calibration
         No. Parameter                Description               Calibration
          1            exponent on labor in production function   0.667
          2                    constant term in f (Zt )             0.5
                   f
          3      r                 log risk-free rate             0.0038
          3                       minimum value xt                   1
          4                      maximum value xt                   455
          5       a             mean (quarterly) at               0.0057
          6    f (Z)                  mean f (Zt )                   1
          7        a             autocorrelation at                  0
          8        z              autocorrelation   Z t           0.995
          9        e
                   x              autocorrelation   e
                                                    x t            0.85
         10        a           standard deviation "a;t            0.0091
         11        z           standard   deviation   " z;t        0.12
         12        e
                   x           standard deviation "xe;t            6.01

Table A.1: Parameter List and Calibration. This table lists the parameters of the model and their
baseline calibrated values.
Figure A.1: Consumption Shocks and TFP. The T F P shock series is di¤erenced Business Sector TFP
(source: Fernald). The consumption shock series is taken from the VECM. The sample spans the period
1947:Q2 - 2013:Q3.
                                             3
                                                                                                                          dTFP
                                                                                                                          dLS
                                                          Quarterly correlation of dTFP, dLS = −0.43


                                             2
          16Q Moving Average of dTFP, dLS




                                             1




                                             0




                                            −1




                                            −2




                                            −3
                                                 1960   1970            1980             1990          2000              2010

                                                                                                              Student Version of MATLAB


Figure A.2: 16Q Moving Averages of Labor Share and TFP. The series are 16Q moving averages
of each series in log di¤erences. T F P is Business Sector TFP (source: Fernald). LS is Nonfarm Business
Sector Labor Share (source: BLS). The sample spans the period 1947:Q2 - 2013:Q3.
                          c Shock                             y Shock                             a Shock

               0.03                      c         0.03                      c         0.03                      c

               0.02                                0.02                                0.02

               0.01                                0.01                                0.01

                 0                                   0                                   0

              −0.01                               −0.01                               −0.01

              −0.02                               −0.02                               −0.02

              −0.03                               −0.03                               −0.03
                      5    10       15       20           5    10       15       20           5    10       15       20



                          c Shock                             y Shock                             a Shock

               0.03                      y         0.03                      y         0.03                      y

               0.02                                0.02                                0.02

               0.01                                0.01                                0.01

                 0                                   0                                   0

              −0.01                               −0.01                               −0.01

              −0.02                               −0.02                               −0.02

              −0.03                               −0.03                               −0.03
                      5    10       15       20           5    10       15       20           5    10       15       20



                          c Shock                             y Shock                             a Shock

               0.03                      a         0.03                      a         0.03                      a

               0.02                                0.02                                0.02

               0.01                                0.01                                0.01

                 0                                   0                                   0

              −0.01                               −0.01                               −0.01

              −0.02                               −0.02                               −0.02

              −0.03                               −0.03                               −0.03
                      5    10       15       20           5    10       15       20           5    10       15       20




Figure A.3: VAR Impulse Responses with Error Bands. The …gure plots impulse response functions
                                                                   Student Version of MATLAB
to the VAR shocks obtained from the VECM regression using data. Impulse responses are obtained by esti-
mating a cointegrated VAR, inverting to Wold representation and computing the responses to orthogonalized
c, y, and a shocks with that ordering in the VAR. The dotted lines are 90% error bands obtained using the
bootstrap procedure described in the Appendix. The historical sample spans the period 1952:Q2 - 2012:Q4.
              2
                     Consumption Gini (Data)
                     Cumulated y Shock
                     Implied Consumption Gini (Model)

             1.5




              1




             0.5




              0




            −0.5




             −1




            −1.5




             −2
              1980               1985                   1990   1995        2000                2005


                                                                                  Student Version of MATLAB
Figure A.4: Gini Coe¢ cient and Cumulated ey Shock. The consumption Gini (data) series is the Gini
coe¢ cient of inequality for nondurable consumption (source: Heathcote,PPerri and Violante (2010)). The
                                                                            t
cumulated y shock series is the running total of all the ey shocks to date: j=1 ej . The implied consumption
Gini (model) series uses the model to calculate the implied Gini coe¢ cient for consumption based on the
observed sequence of y shocks (see appendix for details). All series are presented at annual frequency. For
the cumulated y shock and model-implied Gini series, annual observations are averages over the calendar
year. All three series are normalized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation in the sample.
                               1


                              0.9


                              0.8


                              0.7
                                                                                         (1 − q, α f (z))
                              0.6
          Consumption Share




                              0.5

                                                                  A
                              0.4


                              0.3


                              0.2
                                                                  B

                              0.1


                               0
                                0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4       0.5        0.6   0.7   0.8          0.9         1
                                                        Consumption Quantile
                                                                                             Student Version of MATLAB


Figure A.5: Model Gini Coe¢ cient. This diagram plots the distribution of consumption in the model.
q is the proportion of shareholders. The Gini coe¢ cient of consumption is de…ned by G = A=(A + B), where
A and B are the areas of the relevant regions.
