                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MICROCREDIT IMPACTS:
EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED MICROCREDIT PROGRAM PLACEMENT EXPERIMENT
                      BY COMPARTAMOS BANCO

                                           Manuela Angelucci
                                              Dean Karlan
                                            Jonathan Zinman

                                          Working Paper 19827
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19827


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2014


 Approval from the Yale University Human Subjects Committee, IRB #0808004114 and from the Innovations
 for Poverty Action Human Subjects Committee, IRB #061.08June-008. Thanks to Tim Conley for
 collaboration and mapping expertise. Thanks to Innovations for Poverty Action staff, including Kerry
 Brennan, Ellen Degnan, Alissa Fishbane, Andrew Hillis, Hideto Koizumi, Elana Safran, Rachel Strohm,
 Braulio Torres, Asya Troychansky, Irene Velez, Glynis Startz, Sanjeev Swamy, Matthew White, and
 Anna York, for outstanding research and project management assistance. Thanks to Dale Adams, Abhijit
 Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Jake Kendall, Melanie Morten, David Roodman and participants in seminars
 at Berkeley ARE, M.I.T./Harvard, Institute for Fiscal Studies- London, IPA Microfinance Conference-Bangkok,
 Georgetown-Qatar, University of Warwick, University of Stockholm, and NYU for comments. Thanks
 to Compartamos Banco, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the National Science Foundation
 for funding support to the project and researchers. All opinions are those of the researchers, and not
 of the donors, Compartamos Banco, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The research team
 has retained complete intellectual freedom from inception to conduct the surveys and estimate and
 interpret the results.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2014 by Manuela Angelucci, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections
 of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
 credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Microcredit Impacts: Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment
by Compartamos Banco
Manuela Angelucci, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 19827
January 2014
JEL No. D12,D22,G21,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

Theory and evidence have raised concerns that microcredit does more harm than good, particularly
when offered at high interest rates. We use a clustered randomized trial, and household surveys of
eligible borrowers and their businesses, to estimate impacts from an expansion of group lending at
110% APR by the largest microlender in Mexico. Average effects on a rich set of outcomes measured
18-34 months postexpansion suggest no transformative impacts.


Manuela Angelucci                               Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Michigan                          Dartmouth College
Lorch Hall, 611 Tappan St.                      314 Rockefeller Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                        Hanover, NH 03755
mangeluc@umich.edu                              and NBER
                                                jzinman@dartmouth.edu
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
I. Introduction

The initial promise of microcredit, including such accolades as the 2006 Nobel Peace
Prize, has given way to intense debate about if and when it is actually an effective
development tool. Expanded access to credit may improve the welfare of its recipients by
lowering transaction costs and mitigating information asymmetries. Yet theories and
empirical evidence from behavioral economics raise concerns about overborrowing at
available rates, and microcredit debt traps have drawn much media and political attention
in India, Bolivia, the United States, Mexico, and elsewhere. The possibility of positive or
negative spillovers from borrowers to non-borrowers adds to the possibility of large net
impacts in either direction.

Using a large-scale clustered randomized trial that substantially expanded access to group
lending in north-central Sonora, Mexico, we provide evidence on impacts of expanded
access to microcredit on credit use and a broad set of more-ultimate outcomes measured
from household surveys. Compartamos Banco (Compartamos) implemented the
experiment. Compartamos has been both widely praised (for expanding access to group
credit for millions of people) and widely criticized (for being for-profit and publicly
traded, and for charging higher interest rates than similar lenders do in other countries).2
It is the largest microlender in Mexico, and targets working-age women who operate a
business or are interested in starting one.3

In early 2009 we worked with Compartamos to randomize its rollout into an area it had
not previously lent, north-central Sonora State (near the Arizona border). Specifically, we
randomized loan promotion—door-to-door for treatment, none for control—across 238
geographic “clusters” (neighborhoods in urban areas, towns or contiguous towns in rural
areas). Compartamos also verified addresses to maximize compliance with the
experimental protocol of lending only to those who live in treatment clusters.

The randomized program placement design used here (see also Attanasio et al. 2011;
Banerjee et al. 2013; Crepon et al. 2011; Tarozzi, Desai, and Johnson 2013) has
advantages and disadvantages over individual-level randomization strategies (e.g., Karlan
and Zinman 2010; Karlan and Zinman 2011; Augsburg et al. 2012). Randomized program
placement effectively measures treatment effects at the community level (more precisely:
at the level of the unit of randomization). Measuring treatment effects at the community
level has the advantage of incorporating any within-community spillovers. These could in
theory be positive (due, e.g., to complementarities across businesses) or negative (due,
e.g., to zero-sum competition). Our estimated effects on the treatment group, relative to
control, are net of any within-treatment group spillovers from borrowers to non-
borrowers. Capturing spillovers with individual-level randomization is more difficult. But
individual-level randomization can be done at lower cost because it typically delivers a
larger take-up differential between treatment and control, thereby improving statistical
power for a given sample size.


2
  The rates, to be clear, are actually below average compared to both for-profit and non-profit microcredit
market in Mexico; they are only high when compared to other countries and continents.
3
  See http://www.compartamos.com/wps/portal/Grupo/InvestorsRelations/FinancialInformation for annual
and other reports from 2010 onward.
                                                    2
Treatment assignment strongly predicts the depth of Compartamos penetration: during
the study period, according to analysis from merging our survey data with Compartamos
administrative data, 18.9% (1563) of those surveyed in the treatment areas had taken out
Compartamos loans, whereas only 5.8% (485) of those surveyed in the control areas had
taken out Compartamos loans. Treatment assignment also predicts greater total/net
borrowing, with effects of five percentage points (10%) on the likelihood of having any
debt, and of 1,260 pesos (19%) on outstanding debt. The likelihood of informal
borrowing also increases modestly (by one percentage point on a base of 0.05).

This increased borrowing could plausibly produce mixed impacts in our setting. The
market rate for microloans is about 100% APR, making concerns about overborrowing
plausible. But existing evidence suggests that returns to capital in Mexico are about 200%
for microentrepreneurs (D. J. McKenzie and Woodruff 2006; D. McKenzie and Woodruff
2008), and other studies find evidence suggesting high returns on investment in other
household activities (Karlan and Zinman 2010; Dupas and Robinson 2013), making the
hypothesis of business growth plausible.

Our outcome data come from 16,560 detailed business/household follow-up surveys of
potential borrowers during 2011 and 2012 (see Section III for a description of the sample
frame). The average respondent was surveyed 26 months after the beginning of
Compartamos operations in her neighborhood, with a range of 0 to 34 months. Surveyors
worked for an independent firm with no ties to Compartamos or knowledge of the
experiment. We estimate average intention-to-treat effects on 35 more-ultimate outcomes
spanning 6 outcome families: self-employment/microentrepreneurship (7 outcomes),
income (4 outcomes), labor supply (3 outcomes), consumption (7 outcomes), social (6
outcomes about school attendance, female decision power, trust, and informal savings
group participation), and subjective well-being (8 outcomes).

The results suggest that Compartamos’ expansion had modest effects on downstream
outcomes. 12 of the 35 estimated average treatment effects, adjusted for multiple
hypothesis testing, are statistically significant with at least 90% confidence. We find
evidence that households in treatment areas grow their businesses (both revenues and
expenses increase), but no evidence of effects on profits, entry, or exit. Household income
appears unaffected, although we do find a 17% reduction in government aid (on a
relatively small base compared to total household income). We find no evidence of
significant treatment effects on labor supply, except for a small (and not statistically
significant) reduction in child labor and increase in school attendance. Treatment effects
on most measures of spending are not statistically significant (albeit nosily estimated),
although we do find some evidence that asset and temptation purchases decline. This is
consistent with lumpy investment in businesses that requires additional financing beyond
that provided by the marginal loan(s) (the increase in informal borrowing is also
consistent this), and/or with a reduction in asset “churn”.4 We find evidence of modest
increases in female intra-household decision power, and no effects on intra-household
conflict.




4
 Indeed, we find some evidence of a reduction in asset sales to service debt, suggesting that microcredit
enables households to avoid costly fire sales.
                                                   3
Our results come with several caveats. Many of the null results have confidence intervals
that include economically meaningful effect sizes, particularly if one were to scale up our
intent-to-treat estimates to infer treatment-on-the-treated effects. Cross-cluster spillovers
could bias our estimates in an indeterminate direction. Focusing on mean impacts ignores
the potential for heterogeneous effects of expanded credit access: our null results may be
consistent with the hypothesis that some people benefit, while others are hurt, from
access to loans. External validity to other settings and lending models is uncertain: theory
and evidence do not yet provide much guidance on whether and how a given lending
model will produce different impacts in different settings (with varying demographics,
competition, etc.)

II. Background on the Lender, Loan Terms, and Study Setting

A.      Compartamos and its Target Market
The lender, Compartamos Banco, is the largest microlender in Mexico with 2.3 million
borrowers.5 Compartamos was founded in 1990 as a nonprofit organization, converted to
a commercial bank in 2006, went public in 2007, and had a market capitalization of
US$2.2 billion as of November 16th, 2012. As of 2012, 71% of Compartamos clients
borrowed through Crédito Mujer, the joint liability microloan product studied in this
paper.

Crédito Mujer nominally targets women who have a business or self-employment activity
or intend to start one. Empirically, 100% of borrowers are women but we estimate that
only about 51% are “microentrepreneurs”.6 Borrowers tend to lack the income and/or
collateral required to qualify for loans from commercial banks and other “upmarket”
lenders. Below we provide additional information on marketing, group formation, and
screening.

B.      Loan Terms
Crédito Mujer loan amounts during most of the study range from M$1,500-M$27,000
pesos (12 pesos, denoted M$, = $1US), with amounts for first-time borrowers ranging
from M$1,500 - M$6,000 pesos ($125-$500 dollars) and larger amounts subsequently
available to members of groups that have successfully repaid prior loans.7 The mean loan
amount in our sample is M$6,462 pesos, and the mean first loan is M$3,946 pesos. Loan
repayments are due over 16 equal weekly installments, and are guaranteed by the group
(i.e., joint liability). Aside from these personal guarantees there is no collateral. Loans
cost about 110% APR during our study period. For loans of this size, these rates are in the
middle of the market for Mexico (nonprofits charge similar, sometimes higher, sometimes
lower, rates than Compartamos).8




5
  According to Mix Market, http://www.mixmarket.org/mfi/country/Mexico, accessed 8/22/2012.
6
  We define microenterpreneurshp here as currently or ever having owned a business, and use our endline
survey data, including retrospective questions, to measure it.
7
  Also, beginning in weeks 3 to 9 of the second loan cycle, clients in good standing can take out an
additional, individual liability loan, in an amount up to 30% of their joint liability loan.
8
   See http://blogs.cgdev.org/open_book/2011/02/compartamos-in-context.php for a more detailed
elaboration of market interest rates in 2011 in Mexico.
                                                  4
C.     Targeting, Marketing, Group Formation, and Screening
Crédito Mujer groups range in size from 10 to 50 members. When Compartamos enters a
new market, as was the case in this study, loan officers typically target self-reported
female entrepreneurs and promote the Credito Mujer product through diverse channels,
including door-to-door promotion, distribution of fliers in public places, radio,
promotional events, etc. In our study, Compartamos conducted only door-to-door
promotion, only in randomly assigned treatment areas (see Section III). As loan officers
gain more clients in new areas, they promote less frequently and rely more on existing
group members to recruit other members.

When a group of about five women – half of the minimum required group size –
expresses interest, a loan officer visits the partial group at one of their homes or
businesses to explain loan terms and process. These initial women are responsible for
finding the rest of the group members. The loan officer returns for a second visit to
explain loan terms in greater detail and complete loan applications for each individual.
All potential members must be older than 18 years and also present a proof of address
and valid identification to qualify for a loan. Business activities (or plans to start one) are
not verified; rather, Compartamos relies on group members to screen out poor credit
risks. In equilibrium, potential members who express an interest and attend the meetings
are rarely screened out by their fellow members, since individuals who would not get
approved are neither approached nor seek out membership in the group.

Compartamos reserves the right to reject any applicant put forth by the group but relies
heavily on the group’s endorsement. Compartamos does pull a credit report for each
individual and automatically rejects anyone with a history of fraud. Beyond that, loan
officers do not use the credit bureau information to reject clients, as the group has
responsibility for deciding who is allowed to join.

Applicants who pass Compartamos’ screens are invited to a loan authorization meeting.
Each applicant must be guaranteed by every other member of the group to get a loan.
Loan amounts must also be agreed upon unanimously. Loan officers moderate the group’s
discussion, and sometimes provide information on credit history and assessments of
individuals’ creditworthiness. Proceeds from authorized loans are disbursed as checks to
each client.

D.     Group Administration, Loan Repayment, and Collection Actions
Each lending group decides where to meet, chooses the channel of repayment (e.g., local
convenience store, or agent bank), creates a schedule of fines for late payments, and
elects leadership for the group, including a treasurer, president, and secretary. In an
attempt to promote group solidarity, Compartamos requires groups to choose a name for
themselves, keep a plant to symbolize their strength, and take a group pledge at the
beginning of each loan.

The treasurer collects payments from group members at each weekly meeting. The loan
officer is present to facilitate and monitor but does not touch the money. If a group
member does not make her weekly payment, the group president (and loan officer) will
typically encourage “solidarity” pooling to cover the payment and keep the group in good
standing. All payments are placed in a plastic bag that Compartamos provides, and the
                                              5
treasurer then deposits the group’s payment at either a nearby bank branch or
convenience store.9

Beyond the group liability, borrowers have several other incentives to repay. Members of
groups with arrears are not eligible for another loan until the arrears are cured. Members
of groups that remain in good standing qualify for larger subsequent loan amounts, and
for interest rates as low as 2.9% monthly (compared to 3.89% on first loans).10
Compartamos also reports individual repayment history for each borrower to the Mexican
Official Credit Bureau. Loans that are more than 90 days in arrears after the end of the
loan term are sent to collection agencies. Nevertheless, late payments are common:
Karlan and Zinman (2013), using data from Compartamos throughout the country, finds a
90-day group delinquency rate of 9.8%. However, the ultimate default rate is only about
1%.

Compartamos trains all of its employees in an integrated model of personal development,
known as FISEP. Under FISEP, Compartamos employees are encouraged to strive for six
values in their physical, intellectual, social-familiar, spiritual, and professional lives.
Loan officers share this philosophy with Compartamos clients to promote their personal
development and help build group solidarity. Each client also receives a magazine from
Compartamos with financial advice, tips for personal development, and entertainment.


E.      Study Setting: North-Central Sonora, 2009-2012
We worked with Compartamos to identify an area of Mexico that it planned to enter but
had not yet done so. The bank selected the north-central part of the State of Sonora:
Nogales, Caborca and Agua Prieta and surrounding towns. The study area borders
Arizona to the north, and its largest city, Nogales (which is on the border), has about
200,000 people. The area contains urban, peri-urban, and rural settlements. The study
began in 2009, and concluded in 2012.

To understand the market landscape, we examine data from our endline survey. 54% of
respondents in the control group report having any outstanding loans. For them, 75% of
all loan funds come from a bank or financial institution, including other microlenders.
The average size of all loans is 8,262 pesos, or roughly $689. The most prevalent lenders
are all considered close competitors of Compartamos: Bancoppel (12.0% of all loan
funds, average loan size of 5,024 pesos), Banco Azteca (9.3%, 6,764 pesos) and
Financiera Independencia (5.4%, 4,828 pesos). Moneylenders (0.7%, 4,123 pesos) and
pawnshops (0.4%, 1,876 pesos) make up a small fraction of the market. Besides financial
institutions, the other two prevalent sources are the government (8.3%, 45,997 pesos) and
trade credit (11.7%, 5,315 pesos).




9
   Compartamos has partnerships with six banks (and their convenience stores) and two separate
convenience stores. The banks include Banamex (Banamexi Aquí), Bancomer (Pitico), Banorte (Telecomm
and Seven Eleven), HSBC, Scotiabank, and Santander. The two separate convenience stores are Oxxo and
Chedraui.
10
   To determine the exact interest rate, Compartamos considers the number of group members, punctuality,
willingness to pay, and group seniority.
                                                   6
III. Research Design, Implementation, and Data

A. Design Overview
Our analysis uses a randomized cluster encouragement design, with randomization of
access to credit assigned by neighborhoods (for urban areas) and by community (for rural
areas), and two sample frames. One “panel” sample frame, containing 33 clusters in the
outlying areas of Nogales, has baseline and follow-up surveys. The second, “endline-
only” sample frame contains the remaining 205 clusters and only has follow-up surveys.
Figure 1 depicts the timeline of surveying and treatment.

Both baseline and endline surveys were administered to potential borrowers: women 18
or older, who answered yes to any of three questions: (1) “Do you have an economic
activity or a business? This can be, for example, the sale of a product like cosmetics,
clothes, or food, either through a catalogue, from a physical location or from your home,
or any activity for which you receive some kind of income”; (2) “If you had money to
start an economic activity or a business, would you do so in the next year?”; (3) “If an
institution were to offer you credit, would you consider taking it?”

The endline survey was administered approximately 2-3 years after Compartamos’ entry,
to 16,560 respondents. We make only limited use of the baseline survey in this paper,
using it to control for baseline outcomes when data is available (while controlling for
missing values of the baseline outcome variable).11


B. Experimental Design and Implementation
The research team divided the study area into 250 geographic clusters, with each cluster
being a unit of randomization (see below for explanation of the reduction from 250 to
238 clusters). In rural areas, a cluster is typically a well-defined community (e.g., a
municipality). In urban areas, we mapped clusters based on formal and informal
neighborhood boundaries. We then further grouped the 168 urban clusters (each of which
are located within the municipal boundaries of Nogales, Caborca, or Agua Prieta) into
“superclusters” of four adjacent clusters each.12 Then we randomized so that 125 clusters
were assigned to receive direct promotion and access of Crédito Mujer (treatment group),
while the other 125 clusters would not receive any promotion or access until study data
collection was completed (control group). This randomization was stratified on
superclusters for urban areas, and on branch offices in rural areas (one of three offices
had primary responsibility for each cluster).13

Violence prevented both Compartamos and IPA surveyors from entering some
neighborhoods to promote loans and conduct surveys, respectively. We set up a decision
rule that was agnostic to treatment status and strictly determined by the survey team with
respect to where they felt they could safely conduct surveys. The survey team dropped 12

11
   We will use the baseline more extensively in a companion paper on distributional and heterogeneous
effects.
12
   We plan to use these superclusters to estimate spillovers from treatment to control in a companion paper,
by examining whether treatment versus control differences are smaller in high-intensity than low-intensity.
13
   In urban areas branches are completely nested in superclusters; i.e., any one supercluster is only served
by one branch.
                                                     7
clusters (five treatment and seven control), producing a final sample frame of 238
geographic clusters (120 treatment and 118 control).

Table 1 verifies that our endline survey respondents are observably similar across
treatment and control clusters, focusing on variables unlikely to have changed due to
treatment, such as age and adult educational attainment. Column 2 presents tests of
orthogonality between each variable and treatment status. Only one of the six variables is
significantly different across treatment and control and that difference is economically
small, just one-half of a year in respondent age. Column 3 reports the result of an F-test
that all coefficients for the individual characteristics are zero in an OLS regression
predicting treatment assignment The p-value is 0.337. We find similar evidence of
orthogonality in our panel sample (Appendix Table 1), which is smaller but has many
more variables we can use to check orthogonality given the availability of baseline
survey data.14

Compartamos began operating in the 120 treatment clusters in April 2009, and follow-up
surveys concluded during March 2012 (see below). For this three-year study period,
Compartamos put in place an address verification step to require individuals to live in
treatment areas in order to get loans, and only actively promoted its lending in treatment
clusters. This led to an 18.9% take-up rate among those with completed endline surveys
in the treatment clusters, and a 5.8% take-up rate in the control clusters.15 All analysis
will be intent-to-treat, on those surveyed, not just on those who borrowed in the treatment
clusters.

C. Partial Baseline and Full Endline
After an initial failed attempt at a baseline survey in 2008,16 we later capitalized on a
delay in loan promotion rollout to 33 contiguous rural clusters (16 treatment and 17
control), on the outskirts of Nogales, to do a baseline survey during the first half of 2010.
For sampling, we established a targeted number of respondents per cluster based on its
estimated population of females above the ages of 18 (from Census data) who would
have a high propensity to borrow from Compartamos if available: those who either had
their own business, would want to start their own business in the following year, or would
consider taking out a loan in the near future. Then we randomly sampled up to the target
number in each cluster, for a total of 6,786 baseline surveys. Compartamos then entered
these treatment clusters beginning in June 2010 (i.e., about a year after they entered the
other treatment clusters).

14
   Appendix Table 1 also shows that, in the panel, attrition does not vary by treatment (Columns 4).
Although attrition is not random-- the probability of being in the endline is positively correlated with age,
being married, and prior business ownership, and negatively correlated with income and formal account
ownership (Column 5)-- it does not systematically differ in control and treatment areas, as the p-value of
the F-test of joint significance of the coefficients of the baseline variables interacted by treatment is 0.145
(Column 6).
15
   Control households that did borrow from Compartamos were likely able to because of ambiguous
addresses or multiple viable addresses (e.g., using address from someone in their extended family or using
work address rather than home).
16
   We were unable to track baseline participants successfully, and in the process of tracking and auditing
discovered too many irregularities by the initial survey firm to give us confidence in the data. It was not
cost-effective to determine which observations were reliable, relative to spending further money on an
expanded follow-up survey and new baseline survey in areas still untouched by Compartamos. Thus we
decided to not use the first baseline for any analysis.
                                                      8
All targeted respondents were informed that the survey was a comprehensive
socioeconomic research survey being conducted by a nonprofit, nongovernmental
organization (Innovations for Poverty Action) in collaboration with the University of
Arizona (the home institution of one of the co-authors at the time of the survey). Neither
the survey team nor the respondents were informed of the relationship between the
researchers and Compartamos.

The survey firm then conducted an endline survey between November 2011 and March
2012. This timing produced an average exposure to Compartamos loan availability of 15
months in the clusters with baseline surveys. In those clusters, we tracked 2,912
respondents for endline follow up. In the clusters without baseline surveys, we followed
the same sampling rules used in the baseline, and the average exposure to Compartamos
loan availability was 28 months. In all, we have 16,560 completed endline surveys. We
also have 1,823 respondents with both baseline and endline surveys.

Our main sample is the full sample of 16,560 endline respondents. Their characteristics
are described in Table 1, Column 1. Relative to the female Mexican population aged 18-
60, our sample has a similar age distribution (median 37), is more educated (e.g., 29%
primary or less vs. 37%), rural (27% vs. 22%) and married (75% vs. 63%), and has more
occupants per household (4.6 vs. 3.9).17 Given the few available endline variables
conceivably unaffected by the treatment – age, education, marital status, and prior
business and loan experience, we fail to predict loan take-up in our data (the adjusted R-
squared is only 4.4% in the entire endline, and 2.3% in the subsample with a baseline).
Therefore, we do not attempt to predict take-up in the control group based on observable
information.

D. Estimating Average Intent-to-Treat Effects

We use survey data on outcomes to study the effect of providing access to Credito Mujer.
To do so, we estimate the parameters of the following equation:

(1) Yics =  + Tc + Xs + Zics + eics

The variable Y is an outcome, or summary index of outcomes, following Kling et al
(2007) and Karlan and Zinman (2010), for person i in cluster c and supercluster s. We
code Y’s so that higher values are more desirable, all else equal. The Data Appendix
details the survey questions, or combinations thereof (for summary indices), that we use
to measure each outcome. T is a binary variable that is 1 if respondent i lives (“lives”
defined as where she sleeps) in a treatment cluster c; X is a vector of randomization strata
(supercluster fixed effects, where the superclusters are nested in the bank branches), and
Z is the baseline value of the outcome measure, when available.18 We cluster the standard
errors at the geographic cluster c level, the unit of randomization.




17
   Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadìstica y Geografìa. “Demografìa y Poblaciòn.” 2010. Accessed 22
March 2013 from http://www3.inegi.org.mx/.
18
   Adding controls for survey date does not change the results.
                                                 9
The parameter  identifies a lower bound, in absolute value, on the average intent to treat
(AIT) effect under the joint assumptions of random assignment and that the effects of
loan availability are closer to zero in control than treatment areas.

Our parameter of interest is also a lower bound of the Average Treatment on the Treated
(ATT) effect under the assumption that any within-cluster spillover effect on “non-
compliers” (non-borrowers) is lower than any within-cluster spillover effect on
“compliers” (people induced to borrow by the treatment).

Lastly, under the additional assumption of no within-cluster spillovers, one can estimate
the ATT effect on Y by scaling up the estimated AIT effect on Y by the reciprocal of the
differential compliance rate in treatment and control areas. In our setting this would lead
to ATT point estimates that are about eight times larger than the AITs.


E. Dealing with Multiple Outcomes
We consider multiple outcomes, some of which belong to the same “family” in the sense
that they proxy for some broader outcome or channel of impact (e.g., we have several
outcomes that one could think of as proxies for business size: revenues, expenditures, and
profits). This creates multiple inference problems that we deal with in two ways. For an
outcome family where we are not especially interested in impacts on particular variables,
we create an index—a standardized average across each outcome in the family—and test
whether the overall effect of the treatment on the index is zero (see Kling et al (2007)).
For outcome variables that are interesting in their own right but plausibly belong to the
same family, we present both unadjusted and adjusted p-values using the False Discovery
Rate (FDR) approach (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). The unadjusted p-value is most
useful for making inferences about the treatment effect on a particular outcome. The
adjusted critical levels are most useful for making inferences about the treatment effect
on a family of outcomes. In general, however, it turns out that adjusting the p-values does
not change the statistical significance of individual estimates.

IV. Main Results

In tracking our results, note that sample sizes vary across different analyses due to item
non-response, and to using sub-samples conditioned on the relevance of a particular
outcome (e.g, decision power questions were only asked of married respondents living
with another adult). The Data Appendix provides additional details.
We group outcomes thematically, by outcome “family”. Tables 2-8 provide details on the
results for each outcome family, while Figure 2 summarizes all the results.




                                            10
A. Credit

Table 2a, and the top panel of Figure 2, present AIT estimates for several measures of
extensive margins of borrowing. Column 1 and 2 show 12pp and 8pp increases in the
likelihood of ever having borrowed from Compartamos, measured using either
administrative or survey data.19

Columns 3-5 show no effects on measures of borrowing from other (non-Compartamos)
formal sector sources. The confidence intervals rule out effects that are large in absolute
terms, but the 90% confidence intervals do not rule out effects that are about 10 percent
changes from the control group means for other MFIs and banks. Column 6 shows a 1pp,
or 20%, increase in the likelihood of any informal borrowing.20 This is consistent with the
Compartamos expansion not fully relaxing credit constraints, and hence crowding-in
other borrowing to some extent, and/or with the uses of Compartamos loans not “paying
for themselves”-- not producing increased income-- over the life of the loan for some
borrowers, who then need to borrow from other sources to pay off the Compartamos debt.

Importantly, the results so far seem to rule out that borrowing from sources other than
Compartamos increased in control areas as a reaction from being excluded from Credito
Mujer, in which case we would have estimated negative treatment effect on loans from
sources other than Compartamos.

Column 7 shows a 5pp increase in the likelihood of that the household borrowed at all
during the past two years (on a base of 0.54).21 Column 8 shows a 1 percentage point
effect on the likelihood of paying late on a Compartamos loan (measured from
Compartamos’ data). Note that this treatment effect includes non-borrowers and hence is
driven mechanically by the greater likelihood of Compartamos borrowing in the
treatment group.

Table 2b, and the second panel of Figure 2, paints a similar picture re: loan amounts.
These variables are not conditional on having borrowed and hence are well-identified; the
effects here combine the extensive and intensive margins of borrowing. We see a large
and significant increase in the amount borrowed from Compartamos (641 pesos, s.e. 75,
on a base of 286), no significant effects on borrowing from other formal sources
(Columns 2-4), and some evidence of crowd-in overall (Column 6): the point estimate on
total amount borrowed is nearly twice that of the effect on Compartamos borrowing


19
   The administrative and survey measures of borrowing from Compartamos are not strictly comparable for
several reasons. First, the lookback period in the Compartamos data is different: longer in most cases and
shorter in others (we could not get data prior to April 2009, meaning that some lookbacks are shorter than
the two years used in the survey). Second, borrowing is underreported in surveys (Karlan and Zinman
2008): 22% of borrowers who we know, from administrative data, to have borrowed from Compartamos
during the previous two years report no borrowing from Compartamos over the previous two years. Third,
the Compartamos data identifies only survey respondents, while the survey data includes borrowing by
respondents and/or other household members.
20
   The survey prompted for money owed to specific informal lender types—moneylenders, pawnshops, and
friends and relatives-- so the low prevalence of informal borrowing in our sample is not simply due to
respondent (mis)conceptions that money owed to these sources is not a “loan”.
21
   The AITs in Columns 2-6 will not sum up to Column 7 because Column 7 also includes borrowing from:
(1) merchandise not paid in the moment of purchase, (2) employer, and (3) other.
                                                   11
(1260 pesos, s.e. 472, on a base of 6703), although the two point estimates are not
statistically different from each other at conventional significance levels.

Overall, the results on borrowing suggest a large increase for the treatment relative to the
control group that is driven by Compartamos borrowing. There is some evidence of
crowd-in, particularly with respect to informal borrowing (on the extensive margin),
although the results on borrowing amounts do not rule out crowd-in of other formal
sources.

B. Self-Employment Activities
Table 3 and the self-employment panel in Figure 2 show the AIT estimates on self-
employment activities. The first two columns show growth in business size: revenues and
expenses during the past two weeks increase by 27% and 36%, with absolute effects of
the same magnitude (the AITs are 121 and 118 pesos, s.e.'s 52 and 47).22 Therefore, we
find no effect on profits, although this null result is imprecisely estimated (see also Table
4 Column 1 for a null result on “how much income did you earn from the business”).
Columns 4-7 suggest that the growth in business size comes from growth in pre-existing
businesses: we find no statistically significant treatment effects on the number of
businesses, or on any of several extensive margins (having a business, having a business
within the last 12 months, ever closing a business).23 The confidence intervals in
Columns 4-7 rule out effect sizes that are large in absolute terms, but do not rule out
effect sizes that are as large as 10% changes from the control group means.

In all, the results on business outcomes suggest that expanded credit access increased the
size of some existing businesses. But we do not find effects on business ownership or
profits.

C. Household Income
Table 4 and the Income panel in Figure 2 examine additional measures of income, each
elicited from questions about different sources of earnings during the prior month:
business, labor, remittances/transfers, and aid. The motivation for examining these
measures is twofold. Methodologically, any individual measure of income, wealth, or
economic activity is likely to be noisy, so it is useful to examine various measures.
Substantively, there is prior evidence of microloan access increasing job retention and
wage income (Karlan and Zinman 2010), and speculation that credit access might
increase self-reliance (which could reduce reliance on third-party aid) and/or finance
investments in migration (which could pay off in the form of remittances).24



22
   We ask about the last two weeks to minimize measurement error from longer recall periods. Turning to
another measure of business size, only 9% of control group households have any employees, and we find
no evidence of treatment effects on either the number or likelihood of employees (see also Table 5 Column
3).
23
   Respondents identified whether they currently had a business by responding to the following prompt:
“How many businesses or economic activities do you currently have? It can be, for example, the sale of a
product or food, either through catalogue, in an establishment or in your home.” Fewer than 10% of owners
have multiple businesses.
24
    For example, Angelucci (2013) finds that giving cash transfers to poor households in rural Mexico
increases international migration because the entitlement to the cash transfers increases access to loans by
providing collateral.
                                                    12
We do not find significant effects on business income, labor income, and transfers and
remittances, which have point estimates of 60, -29, -17 pesos (se's=63, 126, 29).
However, the confidence intervals cannot rule out large effect sizes on business income –
(upper bound of a 20% increase) and remittances (upper bound of a 23% decrease).
Conversely, the bounds of the AIT effects on labor income are smaller, around a 5%
change over the mean in control areas. The drop in labor income is consistent with the
(not statistically significant) decrease in child labor and increase in schooling, which we
show in Tables 5 and 7.

Column 4 shows that we do find a statistically significant reduction in income from
government or other aid sources. The point estimate is -17 pesos (se=7), a modest size
relative to total household income, but a 18% decrease relative to the control group mean.

Lastly, note that the AITs of these 4 columns roughly sum up to zero. That is, this table
suggests that any increase in business income may have been offset by a reduction in
income from other sources.

D. Labor Supply
To complement our analysis of impacts on income, we estimate AITs on three measures
of labor supply in Table 5: any participation by the respondent in an economic activity
(control group mean = 0.48), fraction of children 4-17 working (control group mean =
0.09), and number of family members employed in the respondent’s business(es) (control
group mean = 0.13). We do not find any statistically significant treatment effects. The
95% confidence interval of the coefficient on treatment for participation in an economic
activity ranges from -0.030 to 0.008. The confidence interval for fraction of children
working has a minimum of -0.020 and a maximum of 0.005. The confidence interval for
the number of family member employees ranges from -0.014 to 0.024. These CIs rule out
effect sizes that are large in absolute terms but do not necessarily rule out economically
significant changes relative to the control group means for child labor and employment of
family members. In particular, given the AIT estimate on child labor supply of -0.007
(se=0.006), we cannot rule out a drop in child labor of as much as 22% compared to the
control area mean. This would suggest a potential long-term benefit of expanded access
to microfinance.

E. Assets/Expenditures
Table 6, and the “Assets and Expenditures” panel of Figure 2, report AITs on measures of
household assets, and of recent-spending measures, over various horizons. In theory,
treatment effects on these variables could go in either direction. Loan access might
increase recent expenditures through, e.g., income-generation that leads to higher overall
spending; although we do not find effects on income above, it is important to keep in
mind that those null results are noisy. So one might detect (income) effects on spending
even in the absence of detecting effects on income itself. On the other hand, loan access
might lead to declines in our spending variables if: loans primarily finance short-term
consumption smoothing or durable purchases that must then be repaid at the expense of
longer-term consumption; marginal investments require funding above and beyond what
can be financed with Compartamos loans (lumpy investment), leading marginal
borrowers to cut back on spending as well; people “overborrow” on average, making bad
investments (broadly defined) with the loan proceeds.

                                            13
The first two columns of Table 6 present estimates of effects on fixed asset purchases (for
home and/or business). Our survey only asks about whether and which types of assets
were bought (or sold) during the prior 24 months, not the amount or value of those assets.
We infer asset values for Column 2 using data on assets bought with a loan, when the
respondent reported taking out a loan to pay for the item. We find the mean value of
assets bought with a loan in each of six asset categories. We then sum across these
category means to find a respondent's total value of assets. The estimate assumes that no
more than one asset was purchased from each category and that purchase prices do not
vary with the use of borrowed vs. non-borrowed funds. The most common assets we see
purchased are furniture, electronics, and vehicles. Column 1 shows a 10% decrease in the
likelihood of making asset purchases: a -0.05 AIT (se=0.02) from a control group mean
of 0.51. Column 2 shows a 19% drop in the value of purchased assets: a -1584 pesos AIT
(se=604) from a control group mean of 8377 pesos. In addition to the mechanisms
described above for negative treatment effects on spending, there is another mechanism
to consider here: a reduction in asset “churn”. We find some evidence consistent with this
mechanism and discuss it in Section V.

Columns 3-8 present results for six weekly expenditure categories: non-durables, food,
medical, school, family events, and temptation goods (cigarettes, sweets, and soda).
These are measured using questions with lookback periods of one week (non-durables,
food, and temptation goods), two weeks (food), one month (non-durables), or one year
(medical, school, and family); some categories include multiple questions with different
lookback periods. The only statistically significant result is a small (6 pesos and 6%)
reduction in temptation goods (cigarettes, sweets, and soda) purchased during the past
week. Banerjee et al (2009) attribute their similar finding to household budget tightening
required to service debt (i.e., temptation spending is relatively elastic with respect to the
shadow value of liquidity). Alternative explanations are that female empowerment
(discussed below in Table 7) leads to reduced spending on unhealthy items, and/or that
greater self-reliance and discipline in one domain (say business investment) leads to
greater willpower in other domains (Baumeister and Tierney 2011). The null results on
the other spending categories are noisy, with the exception of food, where the upper
bounds of the confidence intervals imply changes of less than 5%.

F. Social Indicators
Table 7 examines treatment effects on seven indicators of family and social interactions
and/or allocations. The first column shows a small increase in school attendance for
children aged 4 to 17, with an AIT of 0.009 (se=0.006) over a high control group mean of
0.878 (recall the decrease in child labor in Table 5). The upper bound of its 95%
confidence interval implies an increase of up to 2 percentage points over a total possible
increase of 12 (given the high attendance rate on the control group).

The next three columns examine impacts on the respondent’s intra-household decision
making power, for the subsample of women who are not single and not the only adult in
their household (recall that all survey respondents are women).25 These are key outcomes

25
  The intrahousehold decision power outcomes are estimated on the sub-sample of women (recall that all
survey respondents are women) who are not single and not the only adult in their household. The dependent
variable in Column 2, “Participates in any financial decisions,” is a binary variable equal to one if the
respondent participates in at least one of the household financial decisions, and equal to zero if she
participates in none of the decisions. The dependent variable in Column 3, “# of household decisions she
                                                   14
given the strong claims (by, e.g., financial institutions, donors, and policymakers) that
microcredit empowers women by giving them greater access to resources and a
supportive group environment (Hashemi, Schuler, and Riley 1996; Kabeer 1999). On the
other hand, there is evidence that large increases in the share of household resources
controlled by women threatens the identity of some men (Maldonado, Gonzales-Vega,
and Romero 2002), causing increases in domestic violence (Angelucci 2008). Column 2
shows an increase on the extensive margin of female participation in household financial
decision making: treatment group women are 0.8 percentage points more likely to have
any say. This is a large proportional effect on the left tail—i.e., on extremely low-power
women—since 97.5% of control group respondents say they participate in any financial
decision making; this effect represents an improvement for almost one third of the 2.5%
of respondents that otherwise had no financial decision making. Column 3 shows a small
but significant increase in the number of issues for which the woman has any say: 0.07
(se=0.03) on a base of 2.78.

Column 4 shows no increase in the amount of intra-household conflict. Note the expected
sign of the treatment effect on this final outcome and its interpretation is ambiguous: less
conflict is more desirable all else equal, but all else may not be equal in the sense that
greater decision power could produce more conflict. In practice we find little evidence of
any treatment effects on the amount of intra-household conflict.

Columns 5-7 estimate treatment effects on measures of social cohesion. Column 5 shows
that an index of trust in institutions (government workers, financial workers, and banks)
is unaffected (-0.011; se= 0.025). Column 6 shows that an index of trust in people
(family, neighbors, personal acquaintances, people just met, business acquaintances,
borrowers, and strangers) increases by an estimated 0.049 standard deviations (se=0.027).
This could be a by-product of the group aspect of the lending product. Column 7 shows a
significant negative effect of 1.9 percentage points on participation in an informal savings
group, on a base of 22.8%. We lack data that directly addresses whether this reduction is
by choice or constraint (where constraints could bind if increased formal access disrupts
informal networks), but the overall pattern of results is more consistent with choice: there
is no effect on the ability to get credit from friends or family in an emergency (results not
tabulated), and the positive effect on trust in people in Column 6.

V. Other Results
Table 8 reports AITs on various other measures of proxies for well-being: depression,
stress, locus of control, life and financial satisfaction, health status, and asset fire sales.
These outcomes are important given claims by microcredit supporters that expanded
access to credit improves subjective well-being. Social scientists have made considerable
progress in measuring it (Kahneman and Krueger 2006; Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi 2010;
Deaton 2012) and measures of subjective well-being are increasingly standard
components of impact evaluations (Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007; Fernald et al. 2008;
Karlan and Zinman 2010).



has a say on,” represents the number of household issues (of four) that the respondent either makes alone,
or has some say on when a disagreement arises if she makes the decision jointly. The dependent variable in
Column 4, the “# of household issues in which a conflict arises,” represents the number of household issues
(of four) in which a disagreement sometimes arises if the respondent makes the decision jointly.
                                                    15
Unless mentioned otherwise, we create indices out of batteries of multiple questions,
standardizing each index of well-being so that the control group mean is zero. As before,
we create indices so that positive AITs means that the treatment has a beneficial effect on
the outcome (e.g., for the depression index, we scale such that a positive AIT means less
depression).

Column 1 starts with perhaps our most important proxy for well-being, a measure of
depression.26 This outcome improves by 0.045 (se=0.024), a small but statistically
significant effect. Columns 2-6 show the AIT effects on indices of job stress, locus of
control, satisfaction with one’s life and harmony with others, satisfaction with economic
situation, and index of good health. The upper ends of these confidence intervals contain
effects that are at most +/- 0.07 standard deviations.

Columns 7 and 8 return to the question of whether the reduction in asset purchases (Table
6, Columns 1 and 2) is consistent with a reduction in costly “asset churn”. If secondary
markets yield relatively low prices (due, e.g., to a lemons problem), then reduced churn
could actually be welfare-improving. Column 7 shows that treatment group households
are 1 percentage point less likely (se=0.4 percentage points) to sell an asset to help pay
for a loan, a 20% reduction. This could indicate a reduction in costly “fire sales” and is a
striking result, since the positive treatment effect on debt mechanically pushes against a
reduction in fire sales (more debt leads to greater likelihood of needing to sell an asset to
pay off debt, all else equal). Also, the low-prevalence (only 4.9% of households in the 2
years prior to the endline) of such sales suggest that they are used as a last resort. In this
case, the treatment might be beneficial for people in people considerable financial
distress. Note however that we do not find a treatment effect on a broader measure of
asset sales than the debt service-motivated one in Column 7: Column 8 shows an
imprecisely estimated increase in the likelihood that the household did not sell an asset
over the previous two years (0.007, se=0.007).

In all, the results in this table suggest that expanded access to credit produces increases
in some aspects of subjective well-being. We do not find any evidence of ill-effects on
average.

VI. Conclusions

Our results suggest modest effects on our sample of borrowers and prospective
borrowers. We make five broad inferences. First, increasing access to microcredit
increases borrowing and does not crowd-out other loans. Second, loans seem to be used
for both investment—in particular for expanding previously existing businesses—and
risk management (through a reduction in asset fire sales). Third, there is evidence of
average increases in business size, reliance on/need for aid, lack of depression, trust, and

26
  The depression measure is an index of responses to questions about the incidence of the following: being
bothered by things that do not normally bother you, having a poor appetite, not being able to shake off the
blues even with support from friends and family, feeling just as good as other people, having trouble
focusing, feeling depressed, feeling like everything required extra effort, being hopeful about the future,
thinking your life was a failure, feeling fearful, having restless sleep, feeling happy, talking less than usual,
being lonely, thinking people were unfriendly, having crying spells, enjoying life, feeling sad, thinking
people dislike you, and feeling like you couldn’t keep going on.

                                                       16
female decision making. Fourth, there is little evidence of posited consequences from
debt traps, such as asset sales, or of higher expenditure on temptation goods as a result of
access to credit. Fifth, the overall effects are not sweeping or transformative. Although
some of the AIT effects are economically large, and all of the statistically significant
effects are likely large in treatment-on-the-treated terms, we find statistically significant
effects on only 12 of the 35 more-ultimate outcomes we evaluate, and no large increase
(or decrease) on household/business income, consumption, or wealth.

These results, taken together with a paper showing strong price elasticities of demand for
Compartamos credit (Karlan and Zinman 2013),27 suggest that lowering interest rates
would not lower profits, and could lead to larger social impact. One missing piece is
evidence on heterogeneous treatment effects. If average impacts mask dispersion where
some (potential) borrowers are much better off and others worse off, this would have
important implications for modeling and policy concerned with the effects of expanded
access to credit on inequality. We are undertaking further research to identify the presence
or absence of heterogeneous treatment effects from Compartamos credit and hope that
others will pursue similar inquiries in other settings.




27
  One caveat is that the study areas in the two papers do not overlap; although the interest rate study was
nationwide, Compartamos had not yet expanded into the study site for this paper.
                                                    17
                                    References

Angelucci, Manuela. 2008. “Love on the Rocks: Domestic Violence and Alcohol Abuse
       in Rural Mexico.” B.E Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 8 (1).
———. 2013. “Migration and Financial Constraints: Evidence from Mexico.” Review of
       Economics and Statistics forthcoming.
Attanasio, Augsburg, Britta Augsburg, Ralph de Haas, Fitz Fitzsimons, and Heike
       Harmgart. 2011. “Group Lending or Individual Lending? Evidence from a
       Randomised Field Experiment in Mongolia.” EBRD Working Paper 136
       (December).
Augsburg, Britta, Ralph de Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2012.
       “Microfinance at the Margin: Experimental Evidence from Bosnia and
       Herzegovina.” Working Paper (September).
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2013. “The
       Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation”. Working
       paper.
Benjamini, Yoav, and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A
       Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing.” Journal of the Royal
       Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological): 289–300.
Crepon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente. 2011. “Impact of
       Microcredit in Rural Areas of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized
       Evaluation.” M.I.T. Working Paper (March).
Deaton, Angus. 2012. “The Financial Crisis and the Well-Being of Americans 2011 OEP
       Hicks Lecture.” Oxford Economic Papers 64 (1) (January 1): 1–26.
       doi:10.1093/oep/gpr051.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. “Savings Constraints and
       Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.”
       American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1) (January): 163–192.
       doi:10.1257/app.5.1.163.
Fernald, Lia, Rita Hamad, Dean Karlan, Emily Ozer, and Jonathan Zinman. 2008. “Small
       Individual Loans and Mental Health: A Randomized Controlled Trial among
       South African Adults.” BMC Public Health 8 (1): 409–.
Hashemi, Syed, Sidney Schuler, and Ann Riley. 1996. “Rural Credit Programs and
       Women’s Empowerment in Bangladesh.” World Development 24 (4): 635–53.
Kabeer, Naila. 1999. “Conflicts Over Credit: Re-Evaluating the Empowerment Potential
       of Loans to Women in Rural Bangladesh.” World Development 29.
Kahneman, D., and A. Krueger. 2006. “Developments in the Measurement of Subjective
       Well-Being.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (1): 3–24.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Expanding Credit Access: Using
       Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts.” Review of Financial
       Studies 23 (1): 433–464.
———. 2011. “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Randomized Credit Scoring
       for Impact Evaluation.” Science 332 (6035) (June 10): 1278–1284.
———. 2013. “Long-Run Price Elasticities of Demand for Microcredit: Evidence from a
       Countrywide Field Experiment in Mexico.”
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
       Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1) (January): 83–120.


                                         18
Maldonado, Jorge, Claudio Gonzales-Vega, and Vivanne Romero. 2002. “The Influence
         of Microfinance on Human Capital Formation: Evidence from Bolivia.”
         Contributed Paper at 2002 LACEA Conference.
McKenzie, D., and C. Woodruff. 2008. “Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital
         and Access to Finance in Mexico.” The World Bank Economic Review 22 (3)
         (October 22): 457–482. doi:10.1093/wber/lhn017.
McKenzie, David J., and Christopher Woodruff. 2006. “Do Entry Costs Provide an
         Empirical Basis for Poverty Traps? Evidence from Mexican Microenterprises.”
         Economic Development and Cultural Change 55 (1) (October): 3–42.
         doi:10.1086/505725.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi. 2010. Mismeasuring Our Lives:
         Why GDP Doesn’t Add Up. The New Press.
Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai, and Kristin Johnson. 2013. “On the Impact of
         Microcredit: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Rural Ethiopia.” UPF
         Working Paper.




                                          19
Table 1: Summary statistics and balance tests
                                                     Endline Sample
                                                        Difference:
                                                        Treatment -
                                         Mean             Control        Balance Test
                                          (1)                (2)             (3)
Female                                     1                  0
Age                                     37.664            0.504*            0.001**
                                        (0.086)           (0.286)           (0.000)
Primary school or none                   0.289             -0.011            -0.022
(omitted: above high school)            (0.004)           (0.012)           (0.023)
Middle school                            0.399             0.009             -0.004
                                        (0.004)           (0.010)           (0.019)
High school                              0.235             -0.000            -0.006
                                        (0.003)           (0.012)           (0.016)
Prior business owner                     0.244             0.005             0.000
                                        (0.003)           (0.009)           (0.008)
In urban area                            0.726             0.038             0.298
                                        (0.003)           (0.068)           (0.284)



Share of sample in treatment
group                                                                        0.499
pvalue of F test of joint
significance of explanatory
variables                                                                    0.337
N                                       16560             16560              16489
Number of clusters                       238               238                238


Respondents are Mexican women aged 18-60. Column 2 reports the coefficient on
treatment assignment (1=Treatment, 0=Control) when the variable in the row is
regressed on treatment assignment. Column 3 reports the results of balance tests. The
cells show the coefficient for each variable when they are all included in one regression
with treatment assignment as the dependent variable. Standard errors are in parentheses
below the coefficients. All regressions include supercluster fixed effects and standard
errors clustered by the unit of randomization. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                           20
Table 2a: Credit Access
                                         Any loan from Any loan from                             Any loan from                                                     Client was ever
                                         Compartamos - Compartamos - Any loan from Any loan from other formal Any loan from                                            late on
                                 Outcome: admin data    survey data   other MFI     other bank    institution  informal entity                       Any loan         payments
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)                               (7)               (8)

Treatment                                     0.115***         0.082***           -0.002            0.002            -0.000         0.011**          0.051***         0.011***
                                               (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.005)           (0.010)          (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.011)          (0.002)

Baseline value controlled for                    No               No               No               No               No               Yes              Yes              No
Adjusted R-squared                              0.062            0.049            0.019            0.008            0.007            0.002            0.021            0.013
N                                               16560            15846            15845            15919            15821            15836            16177            16560
Number missing                                    0               714              715              641              739              724              383               0
Unadjusted p-value                              0.000            0.000            0.676            0.821            0.984            0.018            0.000            0.000
Significant adjusted?                                             Yes              No               No               No               Yes              Yes
Control group mean                              0.058            0.039            0.104            0.288            0.023            0.051            0.537             0.003
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01


Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster fixed
effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was
measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the
baseline value of the outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline
value is missing and zero otherwise. Number missing includes both nonresponse and not applicable values.

Outcome(s): The dependent variables in columns 1 and 8 are from administrative data and refer to all the respondent's loans from Compartamos from April 2009 to February 2012.
Columns 2-7 are self-reported and refer to the 3 most recent loans of the last 2 years, first among the respondent's loans and then within the household. Column 6 refers to loans
from money lenders, pawnshops, relatives, and friends. The adjusted critical values were calculated by treating columns 2-7 of this table and column 7 of Table 7 as an outcome
family.




                                                                                       21
Table 2b: Loan Amounts
                                          Amount from                                          Amount from
                                         Compartamos -       Amount from      Amount from      other formal      Amount from
                                 Outcome: survey data         other MFI        other bank       institution     informal entity   Total amount
                                              (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)

Treatment                                    640.868***          -52.115         226.988          -91.824           81.245        1260.375***
                                              (75.492)          (65.555)        (208.353)        (264.000)         (60.978)        (471.793)

Baseline value controlled for                    No               No               No               No               Yes              Yes
Adjusted R-squared                              0.023            0.004           0.001             0.001            0.001            0.005
N                                               15827            15748           15584             15790            15819            15602
Number missing                                   733              812             976               770              741              958
Unadjusted p-value                              0.000            0.427           0.277             0.728            0.184            0.008
Significant adjusted?                            Yes              No               No               No               No               Yes
Control group mean                             285.634          792.141         3007.002          939.938          314.586          6702.579
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01


Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Controls for randomization
strata (i.e. 45 supercluster fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value,
and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we
adjust critical levels following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the baseline value of the outcome, any
missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value
is missing and zero otherwise. Number missing includes both nonresponse and not applicable values.

Outcome(s): All columns refer to the 3 most recent loans of the last 2 years, first among the respondent's loans and then within the household.
Column 5 refers to loans from money lenders, pawnshops, relatives, and friends. The adjusted critical values were calculated by treating all
outcomes in the table as one outcome family.




                                                                      22
Table 3: Self-Employment Activities
                                                                                                                                 Has a business
                                                                                                                                that was started
                                            Revenues in the Expenditures in   Profits in the                     Number of        in the last 12 Has ever closed
                                 Outcome:    last 2 weeks the last 2 weeks    last 2 weeks     Has a business    businesses          months        a business
                                                  (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)                (6)             (7)

Treatment                                     121.004**       118.814**          -0.298            -0.004           -0.003           -0.007           0.001
                                               (52.512)        (47.419)         (39.036)          (0.009)          (0.010)          (0.005)          (0.007)

Baseline value controlled for                    Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              No               Yes
Adjusted R-squared                              0.009            0.001            0.000            0.025           0.022            0.003            0.065
N                                               16093            16184            15994            16560           16560            16560            16557
Number missing                                   467              376              566               0               0                0                3
Unadjusted p-value                              0.022            0.013            0.994            0.657           0.744            0.182            0.836
Significant adjusted?                            Yes              Yes              No               No              No               No               No
Control group mean                             450.328          327.595          145.388           0.243           0.264            0.103            0.146
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45
supercluster fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value)
are included when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by
Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the baseline value of the outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were
coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is missing and zero otherwise. Number missing includes both nonresponse and
not applicable values.

Outcome(s): Business profits (column 3) are calculated by subtracting responses for expenses from responses for revenues of the businesses. The adjusted critical
values were calculated by treating columns 1-3, 4-5, and 6-7 each as a separate family of outcomes. Two alternative families of outcomes gave the same results:
(1) columns 1-3 and 4-7 as separate families and (2) all columns as one family.




                                                                              23
Table 4: Income


                                                                Household       Monthly         Monthly
                                             Household        income from      household       household
                                               business        salaried and   income from     income from
                                             income last       non-salaried remittances and government
                                 Outcome:       month        jobs last month other transfers subsidies or aid
                                                 (1)                (2)            (3)             (4)

Treatment                                       60.580          -29.791           -17.213        -17.300**
                                               (63.891)        (127.732)         (29.053)         (7.086)

Baseline value controlled for                    Yes               No              No               Yes
Adjusted R-squared                              0.020            0.010            0.000            0.023
N                                               15577            16155            15919            16292
Number missing                                   983              405              641              268
Unadjusted p-value                              0.344            0.816            0.554            0.015
Significant adjusted?                            No                No              No               Yes
Control group mean                             839.818          4540.709         338.612           92.654
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01


Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in
parentheses. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster fixed effects and 3 branches) are included
but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are
included when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we
adjust critical levels following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the
baseline value of the outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as
zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is missing and zero otherwise. Number
missing includes both nonresponse and not applicable values.


Outcome(s): Income in column 1 is calculated from a question asking an explicit, all-in question about
household income from business or productive activity. Column 2 includes salaried jobs with a fixed schedule
as well as jobs without a fixed salary. Column 3 includes gifts or help in the last month from a family member,
neighbor, or friend that is not a member of the household; as well as remittances in the last 6 months, divided
by 6 to adjust to monthly values. Column 4 is government subsidies or aid in the last 2 months, divided by 2 to
adjust to monthly values. The adjusted critical values were calculated by treating all outcomes in the table as
one outcome family.




                                                     24
Table 5: Labor Supply


                                                                               Number of
                                                                            family members
                                          Participated in      Fraction of    employed by
                                           an economic        children 4-17   respondent's
                                 Outcome:    activity           working         business
                                                (1)                (2)            (3)

Treatment                                        -0.011           -0.007            0.005
                                                (0.009)          (0.006)           (0.010)

Baseline value controlled for                     No               Yes              Yes
Adjusted R-squared                               0.008            0.013            0.008
N                                                16560            12305            16560
Number missing                                     0              4255               0
Unadjusted p-value                               0.252            0.235            0.616
Significant adjusted?                             No               No               No
Control group mean                               0.478            0.085            0.133
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01




Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of
randomization), are in parentheses. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster
fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of
the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was
measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels
following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the baseline
value of the outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were
coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is missing
and zero otherwise. Number missing includes both nonresponse and not applicable values.

Outcome(s): Anyone reporting having a job or a business is classified as participating in an
economic activity (column 1). Number of family employees in column 3 is calculated by
summing the number of family employees for each of 4 businesses of the respondent's. The
adjusted critical values were calculated by treating all outcomes in the table as one outcome
family.




                                             25
Table 6: Assets and Weekly Expenditures
                                              # of asset                       Amount spent
                                              categories                      on nondurable                      Amount spent     Amount spent     Amount spent     Amount spent
                                             bought item                     items other than Amount spent        on medical       on school       on temptation     on family
                                 Outcome:        from        Value of assets       food         on food            expenses        expenses            goods          events
                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)                 (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)

Treatment                                      -0.049**      -1584.074***         -4.349           5.643             13.984           3.237           -5.857**           -0.573
                                                (0.022)        (604.574)         (11.211)         (15.329)          (17.055)         (2.594)           (2.704)          (1.726)

Baseline value controlled for                    No                No              No                Yes              No                No               No               No
Adjusted R-squared                              0.011            0.008            0.010             0.036           -0.001            0.010            0.009            0.001
N                                               16494            16494            16551             16258           15919             15573            16164            16373
Number missing                                    66               66               9                302              641              987              396              187
Unadjusted p-value                              0.030            0.009            0.698             0.713            0.413            0.213            0.031            0.740
Significant adjusted?                            Yes              Yes              No                No               No                No              Yes               No
Control group mean                              0.505           8377.593         502.497           886.482          37.026            32.549           99.463           16.748
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01


Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster fixed
effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was
measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the
baseline value of the outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline
value is missing and zero otherwise. Number missing includes both nonresponse and not applicable values.


Outcome(s): The survey instrument did not include details about the value of assets bought and sold unless they were bought or sold in relation to a loan. Consequently, column 1
reports the count of categories from which assets were purchased. Column 2 reports an approximate of the total value of assets purchased: for each asset category of purchase, the
respondent's total includes the mean value of assets in the category purchased with a loan. The total assumes that no more than one asset was purchased from each category; see
the Data Appendix for details. The amounts in columns 3-8 are weekly. Column 3 includes cigarettes and transportation in the last week, as well as electricity, water, gas, phone,
cable, and Internet in the last month, adjusted to weekly values. Column 4 is the sum of amount spent on food eaten out in the last week and amount spent on groceries in the last 2
weeks divided by 2. Columns 5-6 were asked for the last year and were adjusted to weekly values. Column 7 includes cigarettes, sweets, and soda from the last week. Column 8
refers to amount spent in the last year on important events such as weddings, baptisms, birthdays, graduations, or funerals, adjusted to weekly values. The adjusted critical values
were calculated by treating all outcomes in the table and columns 7-8 of Table 8 as one outcome family.




                                                                                       26
Table 7: Social Effects



                                            Fraction of    Participates in # of household # of household           Trust in                        Member of
                                          children 4-17 in any financial issues she has a issues in which        institutions   Trust in people     informal
                                 Outcome:      school        decisions         say on      conflict arises          index           index         savings group
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)                  (5)             (6)              (7)

Treatment                                       0.009          0.008***          0.071**           0.023            -0.011          0.049*         -0.019***
                                               (0.006)          (0.003)          (0.030)          (0.033)          (0.025)          (0.027)         (0.007)

Baseline value controlled for                    Yes              No               No              No               No               No               Yes
Adjusted R-squared                              0.015            0.001            0.010           0.016            0.009            0.027            0.023
N                                               12305            12183            12379           12400            16530            16558            16551
Number missing                                  4255             4377             4181            4160               30               2                9
Unadjusted p-value                              0.151            0.009            0.020           0.479            0.653            0.067            0.009
Significant adjusted?                                             Yes              Yes             No                                                 Yes
Control group mean                              0.878            0.975            2.780           1.525             0.000            0.000           0.228
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45
supercluster fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value)
are included when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by
Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the baseline value of the outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were
coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is missing and zero otherwise. Number missing includes both nonresponse and
not applicable values.

Outcome(s): Columns 2-4 include only married respondents living with another adult. Higher values in the indices in columns 5-6 denote beneficial outcomes. In
column 5, institutions include government workers, financial workers, and banks. Trust in people in column 6 includes questions about trust in family, neighbors,
personal acquaintances, people just met, business acquaintances, people who borrow money, strangers, and a question about whether people would be generally
fair. The adjusted critical values were calculated by treating columns 2-4 as one outcome family and column 7 of this table and columns 2-7 of Table 2 as another
outcome family.




                                                                              27
Table 8: Various Measures of Welfare
                                                                                     Subjective well-being                                                          Assets

                                            Depression Job stress index                           Satisfaction Satisfied with                         Did not sell an
                                          index (higher = (higher = less          Locus of         (life and     economic            Good health       asset to help Did not sell an
                                 Outcome:    happier)         stress)           control index   harmony) index   situation             status         pay for a loan     asset
                                                (1)             (2)                  (3)               (4)           (5)                 (6)                (7)           (8)

Treatment                                       0.045*             -0.004           0.003             0.017            -0.009            0.012            0.010**             0.007
                                                (0.024)           (0.025)          (0.024)           (0.024)          (0.011)           (0.008)           (0.004)            (0.007)

Baseline value controlled for                     Yes              No                No               No                No               Yes                No                No
Adjusted R-squared                               0.031            0.004             0.009            0.009             0.007            0.025              0.002             0.006
N                                                16336            7656              16549            16553             16526            16556              16552             16483
Number missing                                    224             8904                11               7                 34               4                  8                 77
Unadjusted p-value                               0.059            0.870             0.915            0.473             0.418            0.125              0.011             0.330
Significant adjusted?                                                                                                                                       Yes               No
Control group mean                               -0.000           0.000             -0.000           -0.000            0.458            0.779              0.951             0.862
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01


Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster fixed
effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was
measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. If a control was added for the
baseline value of the outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline
value is missing and zero otherwise. Number missing includes both nonresponse and not applicable values.


Outcome(s): Higher values in the indices denote beneficial outcomes. Column 1 consists of a standard battery of 20 questions that ask about thoughts and feelings in the last week.
The feelings and mindsets include: being bothered by things that do not normally bother you, having a poor appetite, not being able to shake off the blues even with support from
friends and family, feeling just as good as other people, having trouble focusing, feeling depressed, feeling like everything required extra effort, being hopeful about the future,
thinking your life was a failure, feeling fearful, having restless sleep, feeling happy, talking less than usual, being lonely, thinking people were unfriendly, having crying spells,
enjoying life, feeling sad, thinking people dislike you, feeling like you couldn’t keep going on. In column 2, the sample frame is restricted to just those that report participating in
an economic activity; the index includes three questions about job stress. The index of locus of control in column 3 includes five questions about locus of control. The adjusted
critical values were calculated by treating columns 7-8 of this table and columns 1-8 of Table 6 as an outcome family.




                                                                                         28
29
                                                Figure 2: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects for the Full Sample, at a Glance
  Credit
                                                                                                                                  Any loan from Compartamos - admin data
                                                                                                                      Any loan from Compartamos - survey data
                                                                      Any loan from other MFI
                                                                      Any loan from other bank
                                                          Any loan from other formal institution
                                                                          Any loan from informal entity
                                                                                                      Any loan
                                                                                         Client was ever late on payments
                                                                                                       Amount from Compartamos - survey data
                                                                         Amount from other MFI
                                                                          Amount from other bank
                                                            Amount from other formal institution
                                                                        Amount from informal entity
                                                                                            Total amount
  Self-Employment
                                                                           Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                                                                          Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                                                     Profits in the last 2 weeks
                                                                               Has a business
                                                                       Number of businesses
                                        Has a business that was started in the last 12 months
                                                                     Has ever closed a business
  Income
                                                        Household business income last month
                            Household income from salaried and non-salaried jobs last month
                              Monthly household income from remittances and other transfers
                           Monthly household income from government subsidies or aid
  Labor Supply
                                                      Participated in an economic activity
                                                      Fraction of children 4-17 working
                                   Number of family members employed by respondent's business
  Expenditures
                                             # of asset categories bought item from
                                                                    Value of assets
                                              Amount spent on nondurable items other than food
                                                                         Amount spent on food
                                                          Amount spent on medical expenses
                                                                  Amount spent on school expenses
                                                      Amount spent on temptation goods
                                                                  Amount spent on family events
  Social
                                                                 Fraction of children 4-17 in school
                                                                  Participates in any financial decisions
                                                               # of household issues she has a say on
                                                    # of household issues in which conflict arises
                                                                   Trust in institutions index
                                                                                  Trust in people index
                                                      Member of informal savings group
  Other Welfare
                                                                   Depression index (higher = happier)
                                                        Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                                                          Locus of control index
                                                             Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                                                           Satisfied with economic situation
                                                                                   Good health status
                                                               Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                                                                Did not sell an asset

-0.6           -0.5             -0.4             -0.3             -0.2          -0.1          0.0            0.1           0.2                        0.3          0.4     0.5   0.6
                                                                     Effect size in standard deviations of the control group
This figure summarizes the treatment effects presented in Tables 2-8. Here, treatment effects on continuous variables are presented in standard deviation units.
Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for that outcome.
For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach.
No treatment effects were significant at the unadjusted level but not significant after adjustment.




                                                                                                     30
Appendix Table 1: Attrition
                                            Baseline for Panel Sample Frame                Baseline Sample Targeted for Endline Surveying
                                                        Difference:
                                                       Treatment -                             Outcome:          Outcome:           Outcome:
                                         Mean            Control       Balance Test            Surveyed          Surveyed           Surveyed
                                          (1)               (2)            (3)                     (4)               (5)               (6)
Treatment Assignment                                                                             -0.002            -0.012             0.036
                                                                                                (0.031)           (0.029)            (0.079)
Female                                     1                  0
Age                                     39.345              0.711             0.001                              0.004***           0.005***
                                        (0.254)            (0.805)           (0.002)                              (0.001)            (0.001)
Primary school or none (omitted:
above high school)                       0.324              0.015             -0.039
                                        (0.011)            (0.033)           (0.093)
Middle school                            0.378              0.012             -0.026
                                        (0.011)            (0.026)           (0.069)
High school                              0.210              -0.033            -0.057
                                        (0.010)            (0.027)           (0.080)
Prior business owner                     0.488              -0.015            -0.006                              0.058**            0.066**
                                        (0.012)            (0.029)           (0.027)                              (0.021)            (0.029)
Married (omitted: single)                0.766              -0.023            -0.030                              0.056**            0.054**
                                        (0.010)            (0.027)           (0.034)                              (0.022)            (0.025)
Separated                                0.082              0.005             -0.019                               -0.044             -0.079
                                        (0.006)            (0.017)           (0.052)                              (0.049)            (0.068)
Household income per adult in
the last 30 days (000s)                  1.571              -0.063             -0.002                            -0.020***          -0.023***
                                        (0.043)            (0.103)            (0.007)                             (0.003)            (0.003)
High risk aversion                       0.716              -0.042            -0.053*                              -0.004             -0.002
                                        (0.011)            (0.026)            (0.030)                             (0.019)            (0.018)
High formal credit experience            0.315             -0.044*             -0.046                              -0.002             0.014
                                        (0.011)            (0.025)            (0.028)                             (0.018)            (0.023)
Impatient now                            0.445              0.018              0.031                               0.014              0.002
                                        (0.012)            (0.026)            (0.025)                             (0.022)            (0.029)
Present bias                             0.300            -0.057**           -0.067**                              -0.027             -0.019
                                        (0.011)            (0.022)            (0.027)                             (0.023)            (0.029)
Has had a formal account                 0.198              -0.012             -0.006                            -0.096***          -0.109***
                                        (0.009)            (0.026)            (0.031)                             (0.019)            (0.022)
Has been a member of an
informal savings group                   0.238              -0.034            -0.030                               -0.017             -0.009
                                        (0.010)            (0.022)           (0.028)                              (0.018)            (0.021)

N                                         1823              1823               1790              2912               2853              2853
Number of clusters                         33                33                 33                33                 33                33
Share of sample in treatment
group                                                                         0.374
pvalue of F test of joint
significance of explanatory
variables                                                                     0.222
Above variables interacted with
Treatment                                                                                         No                No                 Yes
Outcome mean                                                                                     0.626             0.627              0.627
p-value from test that Treatment
and all other variables above
interacted with Treatment are
jointly 0                                                                                                                             0.145


Respondents are Mexican women aged 18-60 and all reside in outlying areas of Nogales. Column 2 reports the coefficient on treatment
assignment (1=Treatment, 0=Control) when the variable in the row is regressed on treatment assignment. Column 3 reports the results of
balance tests. The cells show the coefficient for each variable when they are all included in one regression with treatment assignment as the
dependent variable. Column 4 reports the coefficient on treatment assignment when it is included in a regression with a binary variable for
survey response (1=yes, 0=no) as the outcome variable. Column 5 reports the coefficient on each variable in the row when they are all
included in one regression with survey response as the outcome. Column 6 reports the results of the test for unbalanced attrition between
treatment and control groups. The cells show the coefficient for each variable when they are all included in one regression along with each of
their interactions with treatment, with survey response as the outcome. The coefficients on the interaction terms (not shown) are each not
significant. Standard errors are in parentheses below the coefficients. All regressions include supercluster fixed effects and standard errors are
clustered by the unit of randomization. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.




                                                                       31
Appendix Table 2: Data Appendix
Variable                                  Description                                                                                            Time of measurement

                                                                    Table 2a: Credit Access
Any loan from Compartamos - admin data    Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent has taken out a loan from Compartamos                April 2009 - February
                                                                                                                                            2012
Any loan from Compartamos - survey data   Binary variable equal to 1 if the household has taken out a loan from Compartamos; observed from Last 2 years
                                          among the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3
                                          loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the household, at least one loan
                                          was from Compartamos.
Any loan from other MFI                   Binary variable equal to 1 if the household has taken out a loan from other (non-Compartamos)          Last 2 years
                                          MFI; observed from among the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she
                                          has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the
                                          household, at least one loan was from a non-Compartamos MFI.
Any loan from other bank                  Binary variable equal to 1 if the household has taken out a loan from other (non-Compartamos,    Last 2 years
                                          MFI) bank; observed from among the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if
                                          she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the
                                          household, at least one loan was from a non-Compartamos bank.

Any loan from other formal institution    Binary variable equal to 1 if the household has taken out a loan from other (non-Compartamos,        Last 2 years
                                          MFI, or bank) formal institution; observed from among the 3 most recent loans belonging either to
                                          the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other
                                          members of the household, at least one loan was from a formal institution other than an MFI or
                                          bank.
Any loan from informal entity             Binary variable equal to 1 if the household has a loan from an informal entity (money lender,          Last 2 years
                                          pawnshop, relative, or friend); observed from among the 3 most recent loans belonging either to
                                          the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other
                                          members of the household. In order to maintain consistency between baseline and endline, we
                                          excluded "employer" from the definition of "informal entities."

Any loan                                  Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent or a household member has taken out a loan in the last Last 2 years
                                          two years
Client was ever late on payments          Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent was ever late on a payment for a Compartamos loan      April 2009 - February
                                          (admin data)                                                                                        2012

                                                                   Table 2b: Credit Amount




                                                                                32
Amount from Compartamos - survey data            The amount (in pesos) of loans taken from Compartamos from among the 3 most recent loans              Last 2 years
                                                 belonging either to the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years,
                                                 belonging to her and other members of the household.
Amount from other MFI                            The amount (in pesos) of loans taken from other (non-Compartamos) MFIs from among the 3 most          Last 2 years
                                                 recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2
                                                 years, belonging to her and other members of the household.
Amount from other bank                           The amount (in pesos) of loans taken from other (non-Compartamos, MFI) banks from among the           Last 2 years
                                                 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the
                                                 last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the household.
Amount from other formal institution             The amount (in pesos) of loans taken from other (non-Compartamos, MFI, bank) formal                   Last 2 years
                                                 institutions from among the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she has
                                                 had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the household.

Amount from informal entity                      The amount (in pesos) of loans taken from informal entities (money lenders, pawnshops, relatives, Last 2 years
                                                 and friends) from among the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she has
                                                 had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the household. In
                                                 order to maintain consistency between baseline and endline, we excluded "employer" from the
                                                 definition of "informal entities".
Total amount                                     The amount (in pesos) of the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she has    Last 2 years
                                                 had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the household.



                                                                     Table 3: Self-employment Activities
Revenues in the last 2 weeks                     Total revenues (pesos) from all of the respondent's businesses                                        Last 2 weeks
Expenditures in the last 2 weeks                 Total expenditures (pesos) from all of the respondent's businesses                                    Last 2 weeks
Profits in the last 2 weeks                      Total profits (pesos), calculated as total revenues minus total expenditures from all of the          Last 2 weeks
                                                 respondent's businesses
Has a business                                   Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent has a business                                           At survey
Has a business that was started in the last 12   Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent has a business that she started in the last 12 months    At survey
months
Has ever closed a business                       Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent used to have a business but no longer has one            Ever

                                                                             Table 4: Income
Household business income last month             Total household income (pesos) from business or productive activity, asked as an independent          Last month
                                                 question
Household income from salaried and non-          Total household income (pesos) from salaried and non-salaried jobs                                    Last month
salaried jobs last month



                                                                                       33
Monthly household income from remittances Household income (pesos) from remittances and other transfers, including gifts or help in the last Last month; last 6
and other transfers                       month from a family member, neighbor, or friend that is not a member of the household; as well as months
                                          remittances in the last 6 months, divided by 6 to adjust to monthly values.

Monthly household income from government Household income from government subsidies or aid in the last 2 months, divided by 2 to adjust to Last 2 months
subsidies or aid                         monthly values

                                                                          Table 5: Labor Supply
Participated in an economic activity           Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent had a business at the time of the survey or worked in    At survey; last 30 days
                                               the last 30 days
Fraction of children 4-17 working              The fraction of children in the household aged 4-17 who the respondent says are working               At survey
Number of family members employed by           Number of family member employees for all of the respondent's businesses                              At survey
respondent's business

                                                                Table 6: Assets and Weekly Expenditures
# of asset categories bought item from         The number of asset categories from which the household bought an item. Asset categories include Last 2 years
                                               furniture or appliances, electronics, motorized vehicles, jewelry, property, and other items valued
                                               at more than 2,000 pesos.
Value of assets                                Approximate total value of assets purchased (pesos). The survey instrument did not include details Last 2 years
                                               about the value of assets bought and sold unless they were bought or sold in relation to a loan.
                                               Thus, to estimate asset value, we first find the mean value of assets bought with a loan in each of
                                               six asset categories. We then sum across these category means (excluding categories in which the
                                               respondent has no purchases) to find total value of assets. The estimate assumes that no more than
                                               one asset was purchased from each category and that transactions do not fundamentally differ
                                               depending on the use of borrowed vs. non-borrowed funds.


Amount spent on nondurable items other than Weekly household spending (pesos) on nondurable items other than food, including cigarettes and          Last week; last month
food                                        transportation in the last week; as well as electricity, water, gas, phone, cable, and internet in the
                                            last month, adjusted to weekly values.
Amount spent on food                        Weekly household spending (pesos) on food, including amount spent on food eaten out in the last          Last week; last 2 weeks
                                            week and amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks divided by 2
Amount spent on medical expenses            Weekly household spending (pesos) on medical expenses. Total yearly spending adjusted to                 Last year
                                            weekly values.
Amount spent on school expenses             Weekly household spending (pesos) on school expenses. Total yearly spending adjusted to weekly           Last year
                                            values.
Amount spent on temptation goods            Weekly houshold spending (pesos) on sweets, soda, and cigarettes                                         Last week




                                                                                    34
Amount spent on family events                 Weekly household spending (pesos) on important family events such as weddings, funerals,                Last year
                                              graduations, baptisms, or birthdays. Total yearly spending adjusted to weekly values.



                                                                         Table 7: Social Effects
Fraction of children 4-17 in school           The fraction of children in the household aged 4-17 who the respondent says attend school.           At survey
                                              Variable is only measured for households with children aged 4-17.
Participates in any financial decisions       Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent reports participating in any financial decision-making, At survey
                                              based on a question that asked for how many financial decisions she participates in the decision-
                                              making, allowing answers from "none" to "all" on a five point scale. The variable is only measured
                                              for married respondents living with another adult.
# of household issues she has a say on        The number of household issues (of 4) in which the respondent reports having some decision         At survey
                                              power on, including always making the decision, making the decision for herself, or if she makes
                                              the decision with another person, having some role in deciding disagreements. The variable is only
                                              measured for married respondents living with another adult.

# of household issues in which conflict arises The number of household issues (of 4) in which the respondent reports making the decision with         At survey
                                               another person and at least sometimes having a disagreement. The variable is only measured for
                                               married respondents living with another adult.
Trust in institutions index                    An index of 3 questions that ask about trust in government workers, financial workers, and banks       At survey
                                               on a five point scale from "complete distrust" to "complete trust"
Trust in people index                          An index of trust in family, neighbors, personal acquaintances, people just met, business              At survey
                                               acquaintances, people who borrow money and strangers on a five point scale from "complete
                                               distrust" to "complete trust" and a question about whether people would be generally fair

Member of informal savings group              Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent was a member of an informal savings group                  Last 2 years

                                                                 Table 8: Various Measures of Welfare
Depression index (higher = happier)           An index of a standard battery of 20 questions that ask about the respondent's mood and thoughts        At survey
                                              over the last week. The feelings and thoughts include: being bothered by things that do not
                                              normally bother you, having a poor appetite, not being able to shake off the blues even with
                                              support from friends and family, feeling just as good as other people, having trouble focusing,
                                              feeling depressed, feeling like everything required extra effort, being hopeful about the future,
                                              thinking your life was a failure, feeling fearful, having restless sleep, feeling happy, talking less
                                              than usual, being lonely, thinking people were unfriendly, having crying spells, enjoying life,
                                              feeling sad, thinking people dislike you, feeling like you couldn’t keep going on.




                                                                                    35
Job stress index (higher = less stress)        An index of three questions that ask about stress related to work over the last 30 days. The          At survey
                                               questions were answered on a five point scale. They included: Did you feel stressed by your job or
                                               economic activity? Did you find your job or economic activity prevented you from giving time to
                                               your partner or family? Did you feel too tired after work to enjoy the things you would like to do at
                                               home?
Locus of control index                         An index of five questions that ask about the respondent's feelings of control. The first four        At survey
                                               questions presented respondents with two phrases and they were asked which one they agree with
                                               the most. The choices were: What happens to me is my own doing vs. sometimes I feel that I dont
                                               have enough control over the direction my life is taking; when I make plans, I am almost certain
                                               that I can make them work vs. it is not always wise to plan too far ahead, because many things turn
                                               out to be a matter of good or bad fortune anyhow; in my case, getting what I want has little or
                                               nothing to do with luck vs. many times we might just as well decide what to do by flipping a coin;
                                               many times I feel that I have little influence over the things that happen to me vs. it is impossible
                                               for me to believe that chance or luck plays an important role in my life. The fifth question asked
                                               respondents on a five point scale how much they agreed with the following phrase: In the long run,
                                               hard work will bring you a better life.


Satisfaction (life and harmony) index          An index of one question about satisfaction with life on a five point scale from "very unsatisfied"     At survey
                                               to "very satisfied" and another about harmony with others on a five point scale from "very
                                               unsatisfied" to "very satisfied"
Satisfied with economic situation              Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent said she was either "very satisfied" or "satisfied" with   At survey
                                               her economic situation on a five point scale
Good health status                             A binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent said she her health was either "very good" or "good"     At survey
                                               on a five point scale.
Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan   Binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent sold any asset to help pay off a loan                      Last 2 years
Did not sell an asset                          Binary variable equal to 1 if someone in the household sold an asset                                    Last 2 years




                                                                                     36
Appendix Table 3: Sample Sizes
Analysis                                                         Location                     Sample                                             Sample Size*
Balance                                                          Table 1                      Endline                                                          16,560
Average Intent to Treat Effects                                  Tables 2-8                   Endline                                                          16,560


Attrition                                                        Appendix Table 1             Panel                                                             1,823
Attrition                                                        Appendix Table 1             Baseline targeted for Endline                                     2,912


Sample by Outcome
Fraction of children 4-17 working                                Table 5, Col. 2              Endline respondents with children aged 4-17                      12,305
Fraction of children 4-17 in school                              Table 7, Col. 1              Endline respondents with children aged 4-17                      12,305
                                                                                              Endline respondents who are married and live
Intra-household decision power variables                         Table 7, Col. 2-4            with another adult                                               12,439
Job stress                                                     Table 8, Col. 2              Endline respondents with a business or job                           7,772
All other outcomes                                                                          Endline                                                             16,560
* Sample sizes refer to the maximum possible number of respondents within the sample. In particular parts of the analysis, the sample size will be smaller than shown
in this column because respondents may have answered "I don't know" or "No response" for the outcome in question.




                                                                                   37
