                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHY HAS U.S. POLICY UNCERTAINTY RISEN SINCE 1960?

                                            Scott R. Baker
                                           Nicholas Bloom
                                        Brandice Canes-Wrone
                                           Steven J. Davis
                                         Jonathan A. Rodden

                                         Working Paper 19826
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19826


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2014




We thank the National Science Foundation, the Sloan Foundation and the Initiative on Global Markets
and the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago for financial support, and participants at the American
Economic Association meetings in Philadelphia for comments. This paper is a draft for the American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19826.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, Brandice Canes-Wrone, Steven J. Davis, and Jonathan
A. Rodden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Has U.S. Policy Uncertainty Risen Since 1960?
Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, Brandice Canes-Wrone, Steven J. Davis, and Jonathan A.
Rodden
NBER Working Paper No. 19826
January 2014
JEL No. D7,E02,E6,H11

                                             ABSTRACT

There appears to be a strong upward drift in policy-related economic uncertainty after 1960. We consider
two classes of explanations for this rise. The first stresses growth in government spending, taxes, and
regulation. A second stresses increased political polarization and its implications for the policy-making
process and policy choices. While the evidence is inconclusive, it suggests that both factors play a
role in driving the secular increase in policy uncertainty over the last half century.


Scott R. Baker                                      Steven J. Davis
Stanford University                                 Booth School of Business
Department of Economics                             The University of Chicago
579 Serra Mall                                      5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Stanford, CA 94305                                  Chicago, IL 60637
srbaker@stanford.edu                                and NBER
                                                    Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University                                 Jonathan A. Rodden
Department of Economics                             Stanford University
579 Serra Mall                                      616 Serra Street
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                             Encina Hall Central, Room 444
and NBER                                            Stanford, CA 94305-6044
nbloom@stanford.edu                                 jrodden@stanford.edu

Brandice Canes-Wrone
Corwin 34
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
bcwrone@princeton.edu
I. Rising Policy Uncertainty

                                                           There appears to be a strong upward drift in policy-related uncertainty after 1960. As

evidence, Figure 1 plots a newspaper-based index of economic policy uncertainty (EPU) for the

United States, showing a secular rise over the last half century. The EPU index, drawn from

Baker, Bloom and Davis (2013), relies on scaled frequency counts of newspaper articles that

contain terms pertaining to the economy, uncertainty, and economic policy.1 Baker et al. (2013)

also find a strong rise in the frequency of discussions of policy-related uncertainty in the Federal

Reserve’s periodic “Beige Book” releases from 1983 (first release) to 2012, suggesting that

Beige Book survey respondents also perceive a rise in policy uncertainty. This rise in economic

policy uncertainty is potentially damaging to US growth (Bloom, 2013).



II. Policy Uncertainty and the Scale of Government Activity

                                                           Alongside the EPU index, Figure 1 plots two measures for the scale of government

activity. One measure shows the rise in government spending from about 20 percent of GDP in

the early 1950s to about 35 percent by 2010. This secular increase likely brought with it a greater

prevalence and intensity of concerns related to uncertainty about government spending programs

and about tax rates and rules. Figure 1 also reports a page count index for the Code of Federal

Regulations, an annual publication that compiles all federal regulations in effect in a given year.

The index rose more than six-fold after 1950, highlighting a tremendous expansion in the extent

and complexity of federal regulations. Uncertainty about the existence, meaning and

enforcement of government regulations likely increases with their scale and complexity. The size

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
         Specifically, Baker et al. search the digital archives of 6 newspapers (Boston Globe, Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles
           Times, New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and Washington Post) for articles containing ‘uncertain’ or
           ‘uncertainty’; plus ‘economy’, ‘economic’, ‘industry’, ‘industrial’, ‘commerce’ or ‘business’; plus ‘congress’,
           ‘deficit’, ‘federal reserve’, ‘legislation’, ‘regulation’ or ‘white house’. The monthly frequency counts for each
           paper are scaled by the number of all articles in the same paper and month, and averaged for the overall index.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1	  
and complexity of the U.S. tax code also grew dramatically in recent decades, as discussed in

Joint Committee on Taxation (2001) and National Taxpayer Advocate (2012).

                                                           In summary, secular growth in government spending and taxes relative to GDP and the

greater scale and complexity of both government regulations and the tax code are likely

contributors to the rise in policy-related economic uncertainty. The payoffs associated with

private economic decisions are increasingly affected by government activities and policies that

are subject to change. Of course, an expanded role for government could bring benefits that

outweigh the costs, and a greater role for government could lower overall economic uncertainty

even as it raises policy-related uncertainty. For example, an expansive tax-funded social safety

net serves as an automatic fiscal stabilizer that dampens fluctuations in output and employment.

Moreover, many financial regulations seek to reduce uncertainty associated with financial crises

and their spillovers to the rest of the economy. Nevertheless, Figure 1 suggests that the secular

growth in government is one reason for rising policy uncertainty.2



III. Political Polarization and Policy Uncertainty

                                                           Another class of explanations for rising policy uncertainty stresses the potential for

political polarization to produce more extreme policies, less policy stability, and less capacity of

policy makers to address pressing problems. In recent years, American politics appears at odds

with the classic model of two-party electoral competition. Rather than converging on preferences

of the median voter, the economic policy positions of the parties’ most prominent figures have

diverged sharply. At the same time, partisan control of Congress has switched frequently, and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
         The web appendix shows that newspaper-based indexes of sectoral economic uncertainty (for agriculture,
          manufacturing and finance, insurance and real-estate) vary with sectoral shares of aggregate output. This pattern
          indicates that larger sectors typically attract more media coverage about economic uncertainty, supporting the
          view that the growth in government leads to more concern about government-related economic uncertainty.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2	  
presidential elections have been competitive. Thus, national elections often produce spikes in

policy uncertainty, especially around close presidential contests (e.g., Canes-Wrone and Park,

2012 and Baker et al., 2013).

       Even amidst partisan rancor, investors in the U.S. economy traditionally take solace in

the extensive checks and balances embedded in the American constitution. Divided government,

Senate obstructionism, and opposition from co-partisan legislators often derail presidential

policy initiatives. In recent years, however, these sources of status quo bias often reinforced

rather than reduced policy uncertainty. The status quo is unattractive when the debt ceiling must

be raised to avoid default, or fiscal adjustment is required for a sustainable debt path. Yet change

from the status quo under American-style separation of powers typically requires the agreement

of both parties, creating tensions that can lead to high-stakes bargaining scenarios in which

political incentives for brinkmanship create high levels of uncertainty.

       Political polarization can also increase policy uncertainty in more subtle ways. Presidents

of both parties have increasingly politicized the bureaucracy by appointing partisan loyalists and

shifting key policy decisions to White House operatives not subject to Senate confirmation (e.g.,

Moe, 1985). In contrast to the early postwar period, when appointed regulators held the upper

hand vis-à-vis political appointees, the policy environment is now more prone to rapid swings

between an aggressive regulatory stance and a more hands-off approach. The tendency toward

rapid switching of regulatory regimes intensifies when presidents respond to legislative gridlock

by implementing policy agendas through executive orders and other forms of “unilateral action”

(e.g., Howell 2003). Because successor presidents can readily reverse unilateral executive

actions, the effect is to increase long-term policy uncertainty.




	                                                                                                3	  
III.a. Polarization of voters and districts? 	  

                                                           The most popular measure of Congressional polarization is based on the NOMINATE

scores of Poole and Rosenthal (1985), which estimate the ideological locations of legislators

based on their roll-call voting behavior. As displayed in Figure 2, the ideological gap between

Democrats and Republicans has been increasing since the 1960s according to this measure.

Several alternative Congress-based measures, including ones based on campaign finance records

(Bonica, 2013) and textual analysis of the congressional record (Jensen et al., 2012), also show a

pronounced secular increase in the ideological distance between Democratic and Republican

legislators and a precipitous decline in moderate legislators.	  

                                                           One potential reason for this increasing polarization of policymakers is the increasing

polarization of voters. However, an important puzzle for political scientists is the absence of

evidence for a corresponding polarization in the policy preferences of the public during the same

period (Fiorina, 2010), and relatedly, the growing number of Americans who classify themselves

as “independents.” Voter preferences seem to be unipolar – most voters report preferring centrist

policies – and this pattern has not changed much over time. The correlation between policy

attitudes and voting behavior has increased somewhat, but this “sorting” has taken place almost

exclusively on non-economic dimensions of partisan conflict (e.g., Ansolabehere, Rodden, and

Snyder, 2006). Also, polarization of the economics-oriented content of published party platforms

has fluctuated rather than consistently increased. Yet as shown in Figure 2, voters perceive the

parties’ overall platforms to be diverging steadily, a perception that is highly correlated with the

newspaper-based EPU index.3



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3
         The American National Election Study has maintained a consistent question asking respondents if they see any
          important differences between the major parties. From each survey we display the percent of all respondents
          who answer in the affirmative.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4	  
       Perhaps the most basic solution to this puzzle lies in the country’s rapidly changing

political geography. The Democrats have become the party of the post-industrial urban core and

inner suburbs, and the Republicans have become the party of the outer suburbs and rural

periphery. Partly as a result, there has been a slow and steady decline in the number of

competitive Congressional seats over recent decades. Aggregating presidential votes to the level

of Congressional districts, Figure 2 shows that the standard deviation of the Democratic vote

share has increased substantially since the 1980s and is reasonably correlated with the

newspaper-based measure of policy uncertainty.

       However, the explanation for Congressional polarization cannot lie exclusively in the

outward movement of the tails of the distribution of district-level partisanship. The distribution

over districts remains unimodal, with a large density of rather evenly divided districts in the

middle, while the distribution of roll-call votes has become sharply bimodal. Moreover, various

analyses indicate that Congressional polarization emerges from the radically different roll-call

voting behavior of Democratic and Republican representatives from otherwise similar districts,

rather than the polarization of districts (e.g., Lee, Moretti and Butler, 2004). Although partisan

gerrymandering is frequently cited in the media as a major source of polarization, academic

studies fail to find evidence of a causal impact (e.g., McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal, 2009).

McCarty et al. (2013) suggest the large difference in roll-call voting behavior between

Democrats and Republicans is related to the internal ideological heterogeneity of many suburban

and exurban “centrist” districts. Given that voter perceptions of party platforms are driven by

highly vocal partisans from the ideologically homogeneous districts in the tails of the

distribution, it is difficult for candidates in heterogeneous centrist districts to credibly position

themselves as moderates. Rather, they opt for a strategy of mobilizing core supporters who are




	                                                                                                 5	  
more likely to turn out, especially in primary elections. The growing availability of household-

level data for use in micro-targeted campaign materials only enhances the appeal of this strategy.

       Two other factors frequently mentioned as solutions to rising political polarization are

rising media polarization and rising income inequality. While media polarization does not appear

to have directly polarized voters or districts, this phenomenon has perhaps encouraged politicians

to cater to core supporters rather than independents. Research finds that the direct link between

partisan media and political polarization is weak. Polarization began more than a decade before

the advent of Fox News and MSNBC, political views have been relatively constant, and notably,

most voters either avoid partisan news altogether or select an ideological spectrum of

programming (e.g., Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2011). At the same time, however, cable TV itself

may have contributed to polarization by letting viewers choose entertainment over news, thereby

decreasing politicians’ exposure to less partisan voters and incentivizing their focus on politically

active partisans (Prior, 2013).

       Likewise, rising income inequality could facilitate legislative polarization in a number of

ways, even if mass opinion has not polarized. One possibility is that greater income inequality

raises the political stakes for the rich as they realize the median voter has more to gain from

redistributive policies. A related argument is that politicians are more responsive to rich than

poor voters (e.g., Gilens, 2012). Thus, as the right tail of the income distribution pulls outward,

the right-leaning party shifts away from centrist policies.



III.b. Institutional dynamics

       When discussing political polarization, media pundits and reformers often stress

institutional factors that might be amenable to change, such as campaign finance and the




	                                                                                                 6	  
structure of primary elections. One claim is that low-turnout primary elections are an important

factor in the rise of polarization. Anecdotal evidence suggests that incumbents now avoid casting

bipartisan votes that would have been uncontroversial in the 1970s, because they fear inducing a

well-funded primary challenger. Incumbent candidates certainly face primary threats, and these

threats may influence roll-call voting incentives. However, most states introduced congressional

primaries before the rise in polarization, and even in states that adopted primaries more recently,

electoral reform is not associated with increased within-state polarization (Hirano et al., 2010).

        A more significant change to elections and campaigns since the 1970s involves campaign

finance. In particular, individual donors have replaced political action committees (PACs) as the

most important source of campaign finance. While PACs tend to be ideologically moderate and

flexible, individual donors tend to be more extreme and rigid. Barber (2013) links these

developments to polarization; when states increase individual donor limits, state-level legislative

polarization increases.



IV. Conclusion

        As the reach of government has expanded, the rhetoric of the major parties has become

more polarized, and legislators have found fewer incentives to cast the bipartisan votes needed to

solve basic problems in a political system with divided powers. These trends closely track a

secular increase in policy-related economic uncertainty. We hope this paper serves to introduce a

nascent research agenda aimed at explaining the interplay of uncertainty, polarization, and

government growth. The next step in this agenda is a focus on causality, which will require

investment in cross-state and cross-national analysis as well as historical research. 	  




	                                                                                                   7	  
                                            References

Ansolabehere, Stephen, Jonathan Rodden, and James M. Snyder, Jr. 2006. “Purple America.”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 2: 97-118.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis, 2013. “Measuring Economic Policy
       Uncertainty,” working paper.
Barber, Michael, 2013. “Ideological Donors, Contribution Limits, and the Polarization of State
       Legislatures.” Working paper.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2013 “Fluctuations in uncertainty, NBER Working Paper 19714.
Bonica, Adam. 2013. “Mapping the Ideological Marketplace.” American Journal of Political
       Science. First published online 30 OCT 2013 DOI: 10.1111/ajps.12062.
Canes-Wrone, Brandice, and Jee-Kwang Park. 2012. "Electoral Business Cycles in OECD
       Countries." American Political Science Review 106(1): 103-122.
Crews, Clyde Wayne, Jr., 2013. 10,000 Commandments, 2013: An Annual Snapshot of the
       Federal Regulatory State, Competitive Enterprise Institute.
Dawson, John W. and John J. Seater, 2013. “Federal Regulation and Aggregate Economic
       Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, 18, 137-177.
Fiorina, Morris. 2010. Culture War? The Myth of a Polarized America. NY: Pierson Longman.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Shapiro, Jesse, 2011. “Ideological Segregation Online and Offline”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, no. 4 (November).
Gilens, Martin, 2012. Affluence and Influence: Economic Inequality and Political Power in
       America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hirano, Shigeo, James Snyder, Stephen Ansolabehere, and John Hansen. 2013. “Primary
       Elections and Partisan Polarization in the U.S. Congress,” Quarterly Journal of Political
       Science 5, no. 2: 169-191.
Howell, William G. 2003. Power without Persuasion: The Politics of Direct Presidential Action.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Jensen, Jacob, Suresh Naidu, Ethan Kaplan, and Laurence Wilse-Samson. 2012. “Political
       Polarization and the Dynamics of Political Language: Evidence from 130 Years of Partisan
       Speech.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012 (Fall): 1-60.
Joint Committee on Taxation, 2001. Study of the Overall State of the Federal Tax System and
       Recommendations for Simplification (JCS-3-01), April.


	                                                                                            8	  
Lee, David, Enrico Moretti, and Matthew Butler. 2004. “Do Voters Affect or Elect Policies?
       Evidence from the U.S. House.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 3: 807-859.
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal, 2009. “Does Gerrymandering Cause
       Polarization?” American Journal of Political Science, 53, no. 3 (July), 666-680.
McCarty, Nolan, Jonathan Rodden, Boris Shor, Chris Tausanovitch, and Chris Warshaw, 2013.
       “Geography and Polarization.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
       Political Science Association, Chicago, IL.
Moe, Terry. 1985. "The Politicized Presidency," in The New Direction in American Politics, ed.
       John E. Chubb and Paul E. Peterson. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
National       Taxpayer      Advocate,      2012.     Annual     Report      to    Congress,   at
       www.TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/2012AnnualReport.
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1985. "A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call
       Analysis." American Journal of Political Science 29(2): 357-384.
Prior, Markus. 2013. “Media and Political Polarization.” Annual Review of Political Science
       16:101-127.
                                	  




	                                                                                             9	  
Figure 1: US Economic Policy Uncertainty and Government Activity
  250




                                                                                                                                       40
  200




                                                                                                             Government share of GDP

                                                                                                                                       35
  150




                                                                                                                                       30
  100




                                                                                                                                       25
  50




                                                                                                                                       20
   0




        1950           1960             1970             1980            1990             2000             2010
                                                          year

                         Policy uncertainty                                         Pages of regulation
                         Government share of GDP
 Notes: U.S. Economic Policy Uncertainty Index from Baker et al. (2013); total government spending (federal, state and local) as
 a percent of GDP from BEA; Code of Federal Regulations page count from Dawson and Seater (2013), spliced to data from
 Crews (2013, Figure 12) for 2006 to 2012. The EPU and CFR data are scaled to 100 from 1949 to 2012.
Figure 2: US Economic Policy Uncertainty and Political Polarization
  250




                                                                                                                        2
  200




                                                                                                                        1
  150




                                                                                                                        0
  100




                                                                                                                        -1
   50




                                                                                                                        -2
   0




        1950            1960             1970             1980            1990             2000             2010
                                                           year

                        Policy uncertainty                                 Polarization of roll-calls
                        SD of district pres. vote                          Voter perception of party diff

Notes: U.S. Economic Policy Uncertainty Index from Baker et al. (2013). Polarization of roll-calls from NOMINATE. SD of district
presidential vote shares from authors’ calculations. Voter perception of party differences calculated from American National
Election Study data. All variables except policy uncertainty normalized to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
       Web Appendix for “Why Has U.S. Policy Uncertainty Risen Since 1960”

       Scott Baker (Stanford), Nicholas Bloom (Stanford), Brandice Canes-Wrone (Princeton),
                 Steven J. Davis (Chicago Booth) and Jonathan Rodden (Stanford)
	  

Sector Size and Newspaper Coverage of Sectoral Economic Uncertainty

           As mentioned in the main text (footnote 2), newspaper coverage of sectoral economic

uncertainty is likely to trend over time in the same direction as sectoral shares of aggregate

output. To investigate the relevance of this sectoral size effect, we consider three sectors that

underwent large secular changes in their shares of aggregate output in recent decades:

Agriculture, Manufacturing, and FIRE (i.e., Finance, Insurance and Real Estate). For each sector,

we first construct frequency counts of articles about sectoral economic uncertainty following the

same approach as described in footnote 1 of the main text, except that we replace the policy-

related terms (‘congress’, ‘deficit’, etc.) with the following sector-specific terms:

       •   Agriculture: ‘farms’ or ‘farming’ or ‘farmers’ or ‘agriculture’ or ‘agricultural’.

       •   Manufacturing: ‘manufacturing’ or ‘manufactures’ or ‘factories’ or ‘factory’.

       •   FIRE: ‘finance’ or ‘insurance’ or ‘real estate’, or ‘banks’.

We use the same “economy” and “uncertainty” terms as in the EPU index.

           We scale these sectoral uncertainty measures by the frequency of articles that discuss any

form of economic uncertainty, i.e., by the number of articles that contain “economyy” and

“uncertainty” terms. In this manner, we obtain a ratio for the count of articles about economic

uncertainty in a specific sector to the count of articles about any aspect of economic uncertainty.

We construct these scaled sectoral uncertainty counts by year and average to decades to highlight

low-frequency variation. Figure A.1 shows that these ratio measures closely track sectoral output

shares for Agriculture, Manufacturing and FIRE in recent decades. This result supports the idea



	                                                                                                12	  
that secular changes in sectoral output shares affect the trend behavior of newspaper coverage of

sectoral economic uncertainty in the same direction.



Rescaling the Newspaper-Based Index of Economic Policy Uncertainty

       The EPU index displayed in Figures 1 and 2 could be affected by exogenous changes

over time in the mix of newspaper articles. Suppose, for example, that newspapers devote a

secularly rising share of articles to economic matters because readership gradually shifts towards

people with greater appetite for business and financial news. As another example, suppose that

newspapers gradually shift toward hard news, economics included, because other media

(television) increasingly supply a greater share of high-quality entertainment for public

consumption. In these examples, a gradual increase in the fraction of newspaper articles devoted

to economic matters leads, for our purposes, to a spurious secular rise in the EPU index. To

address this concern, we scale the monthly frequency count of EPU articles by the count of

articles that contain one of the “economy” terms rather than scaling by the count of all articles.

       Figure A.2 shows that this rescaled EPU index also increased sharply over the past half

century. Thus, while we cannot rule out the possibility that gradual shifts in newspaper coverage

imparted a spurious upward trend in our main EPU index shown in Figure 1, our newspaper-

based evidence of a secular increase in policy-related economic uncertainty is robust to this

concern.




	                                                                                                   13	  
Figure	  A.1:	  Sectoral	  Shares	  of	  GDP	  and	  of	  All	  EU	  Ar>cles	  by	  Decade,	  1940-­‐2010	  
                                                      Agriculture	  




                                                    Manufacturing	  




                                                           FIRE	  


                                                         Dashed	  Blue	  Line:	  Sector’s	  Share	  of	  EU	  Ar>cles	  
                                                         Solid	  Red	  Line:	  Sector’s	  Share	  of	  GDP	  
                                                                                                                                   14	  
