                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      LIGHTS, CAMERA,... INCOME!:
ESTIMATING POVERTY USING NATIONAL ACCOUNTS, SURVEY MEANS, AND LIGHTS

                                      Maxim Pinkovskiy
                                      Xavier Sala-i-Martin

                                      Working Paper 19831
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19831


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2014




We would like to thank Richard Crump for useful suggestions. Any views expressed in this paper
are the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Lights, Camera,... Income!: Estimating Poverty Using National Accounts, Survey Means,
and Lights
Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 19831
January 2014
JEL No. D31,E01,O1,O4

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper we try to understand whether national accounts GDP per capita or survey mean income
or consumption better proxy for true income per capita. We propose a data-driven method to assess
the relative quality of GDP per capita versus survey means by comparing the evolution of each series
to the evolution of satellite-recorded nighttime lights. Our main assumption, which is robust to a variety
of specification checks, is that the measurement error in nighttime lights is unrelated to the measurement
errors in either national accounts or survey means. We obtain estimates of weights on national accounts
and survey means in an optimal proxy for true income; these weights are very large for national accounts
and very modest for survey means. We conclusively reject the null hypothesis that the optimal weight
on surveys is greater than the optimal weight on national accounts, and we generally fail to reject the
null hypothesis that the optimal weight on surveys is zero. Using the estimated optimal weights, we
compute estimates of true income per capita and $1/day poverty rates for the developing world and
its regions. We get poverty estimates that are substantially lower and fall substantially faster than those
of Chen and Ravallion (2010) or of the survey-based poverty literature more generally.


Maxim Pinkovskiy
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
maxim.pinkovskiy@ny.frb.org

Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, 1005
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
xs23@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

    Our understanding of how rapidly poverty is falling in the developing world critically depends on how

we measure the means of country income distributions. Disagreement over whether this variable is best

captured by GDP per capita from the national accounts or by mean consumption from household surveys

forms the crux of the di¤erences between researchers asserting that world poverty has fallen dramatically

and has ceased to be a major presence in the developing world outside of Africa, and researchers suggesting

that it has declined more modestly, and remains a problem to be grappled with. Thus, Bhalla (2002),

Sala-i-Martin (2002, 2004, 2006), Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2009) and Sala-i-Martin and Pinkovskiy

(2010) use national accounts data to …nd that world poverty has declined to 13% of the developing world

population by 2000 (Bhalla 2002) or to less than 6% of the developing world population by 2006 (Pinkovskiy

and Sala-i-Martin 2009), and that Africa is on track to halve its 1990 level of poverty within a few years of

2015. On the other hand, Chen and Ravallion (2001, 2004, 2010) …nd that world poverty was 25% in 2005

(down from 52% in 1992), that the number of the poor (though not the fraction) continues to increase, and

that the developing world outside China (in particular, Africa) is not on track to achieve the Millennium

Development Goals. The major di¤erence in methodology between these two sets of studies is estimation

of the means of country income distributions: survey means have a much lower level and a slower growth

rate than do national accounts-based GDP estimates, and this di¤erence dwarfs any di¤erence in poverty

estimates that can be attributed to di¤ering parametric or nonparametric assumptions about the course of

within-country income inequality. Deaton (2005) discusses the sources of this discrepancy, some working to

bias national accounts and others to bias survey means, and Young (2012) argues that national accounts

(and, a fortiriori, survey means) underestimate economic growth in Africa based on consumption data from

the Demographic and Health Surveys, but so far, to our knowledge, there has been no success in reconciling

national accounts and survey means and in showing which source of data is superior.

        In this paper, we hope to contribute to the literature by proposing a way to assess whether national

accounts or survey means perform better in capturing di¤erences in income across countries and over time,

creating a new measure of income per capita that is an optimal combination of national accounts and

survey means data, and presenting estimates of world poverty from 1992 to 2010 using this measure. Our

main idea is to exploit a third, independently collected source of data on economic activity around the

world: satellite-recorded nighttime lights (Elvidge et al. 1997). It is intuitive that nighttime lights should

re‡ect economic activity to some degree because light is a critical input in many production processes and

consumption activities (e.g. outdoor lighting, consumption activities at night in private homes or public

places, transportation of goods and people, productive activity in factories and o¢ ce buildings, and evening



                                                      2
consumption of mass media). The main advantage of using nighttime lights rather than a di¤erent proxy

for income is that the data generating process for lights allows us to distinguish the components of national

accounts (or survey means) that re‡ect true income rather than measurement error. In general, a positive

correlation between measured income (national accounts or survey means) and nighttime lights could be

due to two factors: that they are both correlated with true income, or that their measurement errors are

strongly correlated with each other. However, the latter possibility is implausible because the generating

process of nighttime lights data is to a very large degree independent of the generating process either of

national accounts or of survey means. For example, measured income is collected by statisticians interacting

with survey respondents, while nighttime lights are recorded impersonally by satellites. Statistical teams use

di¤erent procedures in di¤erent countries, while lights are recorded homogeneously across national borders.

Both national accounts and survey means may su¤er from nonrandom nonresponse and misreporting, whereas

nighttime lights do not require compliance or truthfulness of the surveyed population to record whatever

lights exist. Moreover, nighttime lights may vary because of climatic conditions such as auroral activity,

cloudiness and humidity, or because of cultural attitudes towards lighting, which presumably do not a¤ect

measurement errors in national accounts or survey means. Therefore, the strength of the correlation between

nighttime lights and measured income is directly related to the strength of the correlation between the given

income measurement and the true income it is trying to measure. We can use the ratios of correlations

between nighttime lights and di¤erent income measurements to assess the relative strengths of the correlations

between these income measurements and unobserved true income.

        Our goal in this paper is twofold: …rst, test whether national accounts or survey means better re‡ect

variation in true income across countries and over time, and second, create a new proxy for true income that

will allow us to compute poverty rates in developing countries and assess the evolution of world poverty.

We …nd that under our assumptions, the national accounts GDP data re‡ect variation in income per capita

much better than survey means do. If we wish to construct an optimal loglinear combination of national

accounts and survey means as an improved proxy for true income per capita, we …nd that the weight that

we wish to place on survey means is 18% of the weight that we wish to place on national accounts GDP.

This is very di¤erent from prior methods of combining survey means and national accounts, which have used

Bayesian theory and the principle of insu¢ cient reason to assign equal weights to survey means and their

predicted value based on national accounts GDP; hence survey means got more than 100% of the weight

placed on national accounts (Chen and Ravallion, 2010). This conclusion also does not change whether

we look at predicting cross-country di¤erences or growth rates of true income, or when we allow for the

relationships between the measures of income we consider (GDP, survey means and lights) to be a¤ected by

other variables, or to vary across space and over time.


                                                      3
        We can use this methodology to compute optimal loglinear predictors of true income in terms of

national accounts and survey means and estimate poverty for the world as a whole over time. The precise

magnitude of our poverty estimates depends on assuming a scale for the unobserved true income measure.

Under the plausible assumption that this scale is at its long-run value given the weights that should be

placed on national accounts and survey means, we …nd that poverty in the developing world is very close in

level and in trend to the national accounts-based measurements. Even if we use the scaling assumption that

is most favorable for replicating poverty estimates obtained with survey means (Chen and Ravallion 2001,

2004, 2010) we …nd that poverty is lower and has declined by more than has been found by research using

survey means alone, the di¤erence being statistically signi…cant if we account for the statistical error in our

computation of the optimal weights. This result is also robust to ‡exible speci…cations of the relationships

between the di¤erent measures of income, or to accounting for the potential mismeasurement (and speci…cally,

underestimation) of the growth in inequality, rather than just growth in mean income, in the surveys.

        In this paper, we remain agnostic about the precise reasons for which national accounts appear to be

a superior measure of true income than survey means are. However, an explanation that is consistent with the

literature exploring the discrepancies between national accounts and survey means (Bhalla (2002), Deaton

(2005, 2010)) is that national accounts-based measures of GDP better capture income streams arising from

consumption of owner-occupied housing and from public goods provided by the government than household

surveys do. This explanation is particularly consistent with our results because nighttime lights would be

expected to capture these two sources of income particularly well, as housing stock and public goods are

major sources of private and public lighting. It is also unlikely that nighttime lights capture aspects of public

or private consumption that do not …gure substantially in the consumption of the poor, such as national

defense spending, spending on luxury goods, transfer of money abroad and corruption.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the relevant literatures.

Section 3 describes the lights measure that we use. Section 4 describes our mathematical framework for

computing optimal weights and states the assumptions that we make on the data generating processes for

lights, GDP and surveys. Section 5 presents our results for relative weights. Section 6 presents our poverty

estimates for the world and for some of its regions. Section 7 concludes.




2    Related Literature

    Our paper is most directly in the literature on estimating the world distribution of income, which is

divided into two major strands: papers estimating means of income distributions with national accounts



                                                       4
GDP [Bourguignon and Morrisson (2002), Bhalla (2002), Sala-i-Martin (2002, 2004, 2006), Pinkovskiy and

Sala-i-Martin (2009), Sala-i-Martin and Pinkovskiy (2010), Pinkovskiy (2013)], and papers estimating means

of income distributions with income or consumption survey means [Chen and Ravallion (2001, 2004, 2010),

Milanovic (2005)]. All papers use data from household surveys to estimate within-country inequality in

the distribution of income or consumption, which is also the procedure we will follow here. It is apparent

(Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin 2009, Dhongde and Minoiu 2010) that the most important factor explaining

the di¤erences between various world poverty estimates is whether national accounts GDP or survey means

are used to anchor country income distributions, rather than the way in which the shape of these distributions

is extracted from limited inequality data. Alvaredo and Gasparini (2013) provide a general review of this

literature.

        We are not the …rst to combine national accounts GDP and survey means in an attempt to obtain a

better measure of true income. Deaton (2001) notes that if we have two faulty measures of the same thing, it

is reasonable to try to use a weighted average of them to reduce their ‡aws. Chen and Ravallion (2010) draw

on Karshenas (2003) to present a mixed method in which log survey means are averaged with their predicted

value based on national accounts consumption. However, using a simple average of these two measures is

arbitrary when it is possible to exploit auxiliary information to create an optimal, data-driven combination

of national accounts and survey means, which is our contribution in this paper.

        Many arguments have been made about the virtues and defects of national accounts and survey

means. On the one hand, it is obvious that surveys su¤er from nonresponse bias, which may have been

growing over time (Bhalla (2002)). It is also the case that surveys may measure certain categories of spending,

which may have been growing in importance as a share of consumption, incorrectly, such as spending on

new goods (Bhalla 2002) or spending on public goods. On the other hand, it is plausible that household

surveys, which are typically carried out by the World Bank itself, may be better implemented than the

national accounts collection in developing countries. National accounts estimates are often constructed under

assumptions that are implausible for many markets in developing countries (e.g. perfect competition), which

may lead to overstating income through the inclusion of rents as value added (Deaton 2005). Moreover, survey

nonresponse is unlikely to be independent of respondent income, with rich people in developing countries

probably unlikely to respond to surveys, or to reveal their incomes. For example, Korinek et al. (2005)

…nds that rich people in America are nearly 50% less likely to respond to surveys as poor people are (but

Bhalla (2002) …nds that consumption of luxuries is not substantially more underreported in India’s 1993-

1994 National Statistical Survey than is consumption of necessities). While it is not theoretically necessary

that increasing nonresponse with income should decrease measured inequality (Deaton (2005) exhibits an

admittedly special model in which nonresponse by the rich leaves inequality unchanged and decreases the


                                                      5
survey mean only), there is the possibility that nonrandom nonresponse, growing over time, may mask rising

inequality in developing countries.1

        We believe that our analysis can avoid many of the pitfalls of either national accounts or survey means.

Given that light is such an essential input to most meaningful economic activities, it is unlikely that our lights

measure can be critiqued for attributing spurious or deleterious activites, such as monopoly rent extraction,

to economic growth. Nor is it plausible to believe that the part of income that varies with light intensity is

particularly unequally distributed, since light intensity derives from agglomeration of multiple lit structures,

which are unlikely to be very closely owned. We think that nighttime lights most likely re‡ect lighting in

houses, production facilities (stores, factories, ports) and modes of transportation. Since nighttime lights

data is collected through an impersonal, nonintrusive process, concerns about nonresponse do not apply.

While we cannot rule out theoretically that surveys underestimate inequality as well as economic growth, in

our analysis, we can perform robustness checks by assuming counterfactual paths for the growth rate of the

Gini coe¢ cient over time; we …nd only modest e¤ects on poverty estimates for very large mismeasurements

of the Gini coe¢ cients.

         More recently, several papers have challenged the quality of national accounts, especially for the

estimation of growth rates. Johnson et al. (2009) …nd large discrepancies between di¤erent vintages of the

Penn World Tables, and show that successive updates of the PWT may yield di¤erent answers to questions

on year-to-year variation in country growth rates. Young (2012) …nds that changes in consumption of

common goods recorded in the Demographic and Health Surveys in a variety of developing countries imply

much higher growth rates in income than are recorded in the national accounts. Our paper also tries to

assess the quality of and improve national accounts data by using external information (as in Young [2012]).

We sidestep the di¢ culties of using the PWT by using PPP-adjusted GDP per capita from the World

Development Indicators, but our focus is ultimately on comparing national accounts and survey means to

each other rather than on assessing both of them against a third measure.

         There is a large and growing literature that uses satellite data on lights at night as a proxy for in-

come. Elvidge et al. (1997, 1999, 2007, 2010, 2012) describe the nighttime lights data, show that nighttime

lights correlate well with electricity utilization and GDP, and construct poverty and inequality measures

based on nighttime lights. Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2009, 2012) (the latter, hereafter, HSW (2012))

and Chen and Nordhaus (2010) (hereafter CN (2010)) argue that nighttime lights are systematically corre-

lated with rates of economic growth and may improve measures of GDP for poor countries. Michalopoulos
   1 Survey estimates of disposable income from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) (LIS 2013) …nd mean incomes to be

larger and Gini coe¢ cients to be smaller for the several developing countries and years for which both LIS estimates and survey
estimates used in Chen and Ravallion (2010) are available. For example, the LIS survey for Brazil …nds that mean disposable
income is $6000 and the Gini is 48; the Brazilian survey cited by Chen and Ravallion (2010) …nds that mean income is $3900
and the Gini is 56. Comparisons for Colombia, Estonia, Guatemala, Hungary, Mexico, Peru and Poland are similar.



                                                               6
and Papaioannou (2012, 2013), Alesina, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) and Pinkovskiy (2013) use

nighttime lights to construct measures of income within African ethnicities, world ethnicities and neighbor-

hoods of national borders respectively. Our paper is closest in spirit to HSW (2012) and CN (2010) in that it

also considers the problem of optimally combining measures of economic activity; however, instead of using

nighttime lights as a component of such a measure, we use it as an auxiliary variable to help uncover the

correlation structure between the measures we do wish to use in our index. We also consider a di¤erent

type of predictor for true income that do either HSW (2012) or CN (2010), which allows us to make fewer

assumptions on the data generating processes that we consider.




3       The Nighttime Lights Measure

     Data on luminosity at night is collected by the DMSP-OLS satellite program and is maintained and

processed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Satellites orbit the Earth

every day between 20:30 and 22:00, sending images of every location between 65 degrees south latitude and

65 degrees north latitude at a resolution of 30 arcseconds (approximately 1 square km at the equator). The

images are processed to remove cloud cover, snow and ephemeral lights (such as forest …res) to produce the

…nal product available for download at


                       http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html


         The nighttime lights data is available from 1992 to 2012, and we use the data up to 2010 because of

the paucity of household surveys after that date that have already been made available for research.

         Each pixel (1 square kilometer) in the luminosity data is assigned a digital number (DN) representing

its luminosity. The DNs are integers ranging from 0 to 63, with the relationship between DN and luminosity

being



                                              Radiance / DN3=2


    (Chen and Nordhaus 2010). However, pixels with DN equal to 0 or 63 may be top- or bottom-censored.

Another known problem with the lights data is the presence of overglow and blooming: light tends to travel

to pixels outside of those in which it originates, and light tends to be magni…ed over certain terrain types

such as water and snow cover (Doll 2008). Given that we will compute national-level estimates of aggregate

lights, it is unlikely that these sources of error will be large enough or su¢ ciently correlated with important



                                                       7
variables that they will confound our analysis. Another problem may be that satellites age in space and are

eventually retired. Hence, they might give inconsistent readings from year to year, or new satellites may

give fundamentally di¤erent readings from old ones.2 While some evdence of this problem exists, we will

show in Sections 5 and 6 that our estimates of the optimal ways of combining national accounts and survey

means are almost invariant to allowing the relationship between national accounts, survey means and lights

to di¤er from year to year.

         In our analysis, we will use the nighttime lights to construct an aggregate radiance measure for each

country in each year and use it as a proxy for aggregate income. We construct this measure by computing the

radiance within each pixel in each country and adding up the pixels. Using alternative aggregation formulas

(for instance, adding up the DN’s across pixels) yields very similar results. For years with multiple satellites

available, we average the logarithms of our aggregate luminosity measure, following HSW (2012).

         It is well established that lights are very well correlated with national accounts GDP, in levels, growth

rates and business cycle ‡uctuations. Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) provide these correlations, as

well as dramatic pictures of long-term di¤erences in incomes (North vs. South Korea) as well as short-term

‡uctuations (the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997-8) re‡ected in lights. We provide two pictures emphasizing

two poor countries for which national accounts and survey means give completely di¤erent growth estimates:

Angola and India. Figure I presents a picture of nighttime lights over southern Africa in 2000 and in 2009. We

see that Angola, which according to the household surveys has experienced a 5% decline in per capita income,

and according to the national accounts has experienced a doubling of per capita income (for all statistics, see

Appendix Table AII), has many more lights in 2009 than it did in 2000. Most other southern African countries

also have more lights in 2009 than in 2000 (Botswana, Zambia, Mozambique, South Africa, Malawi), but

Zimbabwe has fewer lights, because of its economic collapse under the disastrous hyperin‡ationary policies of

Robert Mugabe. Figure II gives a view of India between 1994 and 2010. According to household surveys, its

per capita income grew by 29% over this time period, but according to the national accounts its per capita

income more than doubled. We see that lights in India increase dramatically both in their intensity over

the major cities as well as in their extent over previously unlit areas of the country (for example, there is a

marked increase over Bihar in the Ganges valley, one of India’s poorest provinces). The increase in lights in

India and in Angola is much closer to what is suggested by the national accounts than by the survey means,

and it is very unlikely that this additional economic activity bene…ts exclusively the rich because of the

spatial extent of the new lights. Moreover, the fact that we observe Angola growing and Zimbabwe shrinking

over the same period of time and measured with the same satellites suggests that uniform di¤erences in
   2 The satellites from which data is available are: F10 (1992-1994), F12 (1994-1999), F14 (1997-2003), F15 (2000-2007), F16

(2004-2009) and F18 (2010-).




                                                             8
brightness between satellites do not dominate the observed variation in lights. While these …gures are only

suggestive (the lights we observe are aggregate rather than per capita lights), they already provide a hint

that economic growth in the developing world may have been more extensive than surveys show.




4      Mathematical Framework

4.1     Calculation of Relative Weights in Optimal Forecasts

      Consider the following model of our data. We have N + 1 candidate proxies yin , n = 0; :::; N for log true

income, denoted yi . We also have a vector of covariates xi of length K (which always includes a constant

but may also include other variables). De…ne the loglinear forecast of yi as


                                                                        0
                                                  zi = (Xi ) +              yi


         where yi is a vector of the yin ’s, Xi is an N         K matrix of the xi ’s,        is a linear function, and    is a

vector of weights.

         To …x notation, we set the log lights-based GDP measure to be yi0 , log World Bank GDP per capita

to be yi1 , log survey means to be yi2 and other GDP-based measures (if any) are yi3 , yi4 etc.

         We are interested in two quantities. First, we wish to assess the weight given to log survey means

(yi2 ) in the optimal forecast relative to the weight given to log World Bank GDP per capita (yi1 ). This is

given by

                                                        ^ := ^ 2 =^ 1
                                                        !


where ^ is the optimal weight vector.

         We are also interested in computing values for zi itself for all countries and years in our sample and

in using zi in place of yi1 or yi2 as the logarithm of the true mean of the income distribution for the country

and year corresponding to observation i. Doing this will require more assumptions than calculating !
                                                                                                   ^ , but

our conclusions will be qualitatively robust to a variety of alternatives for the assumptions we have to add.

         To calculate !
                      ^ we make the following assumptions:



                                  yin =   n   (xi ) +   n yi   + "ni , "ni i.i.d. across i.                               (A1)




                                                 E ("ni "m
                                                         i jXi ) =          nm                                            (A2)


                                                               9
                                                 E ("ni yi jXi ) = 0                                                            (A3)




                                                E "ni "0i jXi = 0                                                               (A4)


        All of these assumptions have been made (without conditioning on controls) in the previous literature,

notably by Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2010). The iid assumption is

the substance in Assumption A1. Assumption A2 assumes homoskedasticity with respect to Xi . Assumption

A3 mandates that the error in each proxy is an a¢ ne function of true income plus noise that is uncorrelated

with income, and that the linear relationship is stable across the sample. Assumption A4 is the key reason

for the use of the lights data: it says that the random errors in lights measurement are uncorrelated with

the random errors in GDP or survey-based income measurement. This assumption has also been made in

HSW (2012) and CN (2010). This is a plausible assumption because the data generating processes of the

lights data and of GDP (or surveys) are largely disjoint; lights data is collected by satellites without respect

for borders, institutional structures, or people’s desire to respond to surveys, whereas GDP and survey data

are obtained primarily by asking people, who may be unwilling to respond accurately, if at all. There is

a fear that errors in GDP, surveys and lights have a common component; for instance, if the product of

di¤erent industries is di¤erentially accounted for by surveys (because of di¤erential ease of reporting), and

also generates di¤erent amounts of light per unit of true income, then the errors in both light and GDP

will have a common component (though likely with di¤erent coe¢ cients, or even signs). However, since                              n

is not necessarily unity, all our GDP proxies are allowed to have a bias that is a¢ ne in true income, so if

di¤erential industrial composition causes a bias that is related to GDP size (which is not an implausible

assumption, at least to …rst order) this will be re‡ected in the                      n ’s   not being equal to unity. Moreover, the

framework accomodates including controls that may help make this assumption more credible.
                                                   N                           N                           N;M
        Suppose that the parameters        =[   n ]n=0 ,            =[      n ]n=0 ,   and       =[    nm ]n=0;m=0   are known. Then,

the di¤erence between the proxy zi and yi can be expressed as follows:




                                                           0
                             zi   yi   =    (Xi ) +            yi      yi
                                                           0                      0                    0
                                       =    (Xi ) +                 (Xi ) + (                1) yi +       "i


   Note that if we set




                                                               10
                                                                                         0
                                                       (Xi )             =                       (Xi )                                        (C)
                                                            0
                                                                         =       1


   then our proxy zi will be unbiased for all values of Xi , regardless of the functional form of E (yi jXi ).

   The mean squared error of zi under Assumptions A1 and A2 is given by




                                 2                                                   0                            0                 2
                    E (zi     yi ) jXi         =        ( (Xi ) +                            (Xi ) + (                1) E (yi jXi ))      (MSE)
                                                                     0               2       2               0
                                                        +(                       1)              +



   Consider the     that minimizes (MSE) subject to the unbiasedness constraint (C). This                                               solves the

simpli…ed program


                                                                0                                        0
                                     ^ = arg min                         subject to                              =1 ( )



   since (Xi ) imposes no restrictions on . By taking …rst order conditions, we get the system of equations

                                         0                          10                1           0              1
                                         B                 CB ^ C B 0 C
                                         @                 A@   A=@ A
                                                   0
                                                         0          1


   which imply that


                                                                     0       1           1           1
                                               ^=


   If we relax the unbiasedness constraint, and set


                                                        0                                0
                                     (Xi ) =       (                (Xi ) + (                        1) E (yi jXi ))


   the optimal solution solves



                                                                    0                    0                   2   2
                                         ~ = min                             +(                      1)



                                                                             11
     and is given by
                                                                                     0 2    1        2
                                                            ~=          +


     Under assumptions A1-A4 we cannot solve for the optimal weight vectors ^ and ~ , but we can compute
              ^n            ~n
the ratios    ^m    and     ~m     (which turn out to be the same) for any n; m 6= 0 (that is, for the relative weights of

any two proxies excluding the lights proxy). We can de…ne the variance-covariance matrix S of the residuals



                                                                   y~in = E (yin jXi )


     and note that




                                                                             2 2
                                     Sn;n      :   = var (yin jXi ) =        n         +    2
                                                                                            n

                                        Sn;0   :   = cov yin ; yi0 jXi =              n 0
                                                                                             2


                                    Sn;m       :   = cov (yin ; yim jXi ) =           n m
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                     +       nm   for n; m   1


where the left hand-sides are known data elements (they are entries of the variance-covariance matrix S)
                                                                             2
and the right hand-sides are equations in ;                        and           :

            Note that the equations for Sn0 use Assumption A3 and are key towards identifying ratios of the

parameters         0;   1 ; :::;   n.   They are the algebraic statement of the inference we draw from assuming that the

measurement error in lights is uncorrelated with the measurement error in the measured income proxies: any

covariance between lights and measured income is proportional to                                              n,   the proportionality constant being
     2
 0       . If we consider a positive covariance between national accounts and survey means (yi1 and yi2 ) then

we cannot reach the same conclusion: cov (yin ; yim jXi ) may be large because                                           n m     is large or because   nm

is large. Since Assumption A3 rules out a                     n0   term, it allows us to estimate the ratio                         n= m   for any n and

m        1, and thus to identify the relevant parameters in our model.

     Then,


                                                             0              S1;0
                                                                    =        2 2
                                                             1               1
                                                             n              Sn;0
                                                                    =
                                                             1              S1;0
                                                             2                              2 2
                                                             n      = Sn;n                  n

                                                                                                         2
                                                            nm      = Sn;m                  n m




                                                                             12
   More compactly, we can write

                                                                                                          2                        3
                                                                                                                   S1;0
                                                         ^           2                1            6                   2       2   7
                                                                             :=                   =4                   1
                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                   S1;0

                                      0
   where C^ = [S1;0 ; S2;0 :::; Sn;0 ] : Hence, all the coe¢ cient ratios                                                              n= m      for any n and m        1 are identi…ed.

   We can also note that under Assumption A3


                                                                                                              0 2
                                                                         S=                   +


   Noting that by the binomial inverse theorem,



                                                                                                                                   2
                            1                                0 2             1                    1                                                   1     0       1
                                 =           S                                    =S                                           0       1     2
                                                                                                                                                 S              S
                                                                                                              1+                   S
                                                                                  0           1
                                             0       1                   S
                                )                            =
                                                                     1 + 0S                   1           2

                                                 1                       1                                1
                                )                        =S                                           0        1           2
                                                                                      1+                  S

                                                                                                                                                                             0 2
   which allows us to get a simple expression for ^ that turns out not to depend on the term                                                                                       :




                                                             0           1            1           1
                                     ^       =
                                                             0           1            1           1
                                             =                   S                        S
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                 ^           2 0              1^               2                        1^        2
                                             =           1                            S                                            S


   and

                                                                                      2
                                                                                                          1^               2
                                                                 ~=                               S
                                                                                      1

         Therefore, ^ and ~ are proportional; the unbiasedness constraint just a¤ects the scale of each vector.

Moreover, since ^     2
                          depends on             2
                                                     only through its …rst argument and S has zeros in its o¤-diagonal
                                                                                                  1^           2                                      2
elements on its …rst row and column, it is clear that S                                                                depends on                         only through its …rst argument

                                                     0                                        12                               3       2                        3
                                                                                                              S1;0                              S
                                1^       2        B          S001                 0           C6                   2           7 6         S001 21;02           7
                            S                    =@                                           A4                               5=4               1
                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                               ^                                 ^ 1C ^
                                                                 0            S^      1                        C
                                                                                                              S1;0
                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                  S1;0



                                                                                          13
             This …rst argument corresponds to the weight on lights in the optimal proxy, and is the only entry
                                                                                                                2
of the weight vector that depends on the unknown parameter                                                          . Hence, the ratios between any two entries
        1^     2
of S               , and hence of ^ and ~ that do not correspond to the entry for lights, is pinned down by the

data and assumptions A1-A4.

             For the analysis in this paper, we will not include the nighttime lights variable as a component of
                                                                                                                                                      2 2
our optimal proxy for true income. We do this because its weight depends on the product                                                               1   ,   which may

vary in a range that permits the relative weight on nighttime lights to be zero, or to be in…nite.3 Therefore,
                                                          2
without assumptions on                   1   and              , we cannot compute this weight, and adding lights does not bene…t us in

the construction of the proxy.

             Finally, the parameters                      i   (X) can be calculated using the system of equations


                                                                   E (yin jxi ) =     n   (xi ) +          nE    (yi jxi )


    up to the value E (yi jxi ).


4.2      Calculation of Optimal Forecasts

       To calculate absolute magnitudes of ^ (the unbiased estimation weights) and the optimal proxies zi we

need additional assumptions on                            1       and E (yi jXi ) in order to estimate the                       i   (X)’s. Intuitively, the vector

^ incorporates information about cross-country income di¤erences and growth rates, but we need to make

assumptions about the average level of our income proxy series. These assumptions are essentially arbitrary

but can matter substantially for the results.

             We make the following assumption for our baseline analyses:

                                                                      n h
                                                                                                       !   1
                                                                      X                        i                                      N
                                                                                                                                      X
                                   2 0
                   1   = ^               S       1^           2
                                                                            S   1^        2
                                                                                                                and E (yi jXi ) =           nE   (yin jXi )          (A5a)
                                                                                                   i
                                                                      i=1                                                             n=1
                     h                       i
                             1^          2                                                                 1^       2
             (where ( S                              ) is the ith component of S                                        ). This assumption implies that for the
                                                 i
unbiased estimator (with ^ 0 = 1),

                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                   X
                                                                          (Xi ) = 0 and                    ^i = 1
                                                                                               n=1

so the estimated weights sum to unity and the intercept function of our proxy zi can be set to zero. HSW
                             2   2                              2
  3 Speci…cally,             1
                                                               S1;0                                                                                             2
                   if   =    S11
                                     , then           2       S00 S11
                                                                      ;     , where       is typically very close to unity. The lower bound sets                0   = 0 and

assigns in…nite relative weight to the lights measure, whereas the upper bound makes the matrix S^ be singular, assigning zero
relative weight to the lights measure.



                                                                                          14
(2012) also consider weights that sum to unity (and that, in fact are also nonzero). The second part of

Assumption A5a is motivated by noting that if yin is indexed by time (so i = (j; t) where j indexes countries

and t indexes years) and we have


                                                      n
                                                 lim yj;t =1
                                                 t!1


   (which is reasonable given that income tends to grow at an exponential rate) then the proxy zj;t will

satisfy


                                                       zj;t
                                                 lim   0y
                                                             =1
                                                t!1      j;t


          Hence, setting   (Xi ) = 0 will be a good approximation to the value of the optimal proxy for yi in

the long run. Since we have no reason to believe that the system governing the relative errors of the national

accounts and survey means data is not in a long-run steady state, to which it will eventually tend, we take

this normalization as a baseline assumption for computing the optimal proxies.

          Another justi…cation for the assumptions on E (yi jXi ) in Assumption A5a is that they yield very

similar results to scaling the optimal proxy to national accounts consumption. Bhalla (2002) scales the

means of country income distributions to national accounts consumption, arguing that national accounts

consumption is an accurate proxy for the fraction of national accounts GDP that is reasonably shared with

the poor, and Deaton (2005) also suggests that national accounts consumption may be a reasonable proxy for

household disposable income. Most interestingly, the harmonized household disposable income estimates of

the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS 2013) seem to con…rm this view, coming very close, or much closer than

do the surveys used by Chen and Ravallion (2010), to matching national accounts consumption. In fact, LIS

household disposable income estimates for OECD countries are virtually identical to World Bank national

accounts estimates of consumption per capita in these countries (the average of LIS household disposable

income in a dataset of 34 country-years in the OECD on the LIS website is $24,550, and the same average of

their World Bank-recorded consumption is $24,549). The LIS has very little data on developing countries,

but for the 12 country-years in developing countries that they have data for, their estimates of household

disposable income are much higher than PovcalNet estimates of mean income or consumption, and for one

of these country-years (Guatemala 2006), the LIS estimate even exceeds the World Bank national accounts

consumption estimate. A table of these 12 country-years with estimates of mean income or consumption for

PovcalNet household surveys, LIS surveys and NA consumption is given as Appendix Table AIII.

          We also consider alternative normalizations in which we assume that either national accounts or

survey means have a unit relationship with true income (again based on HSW (2012) and CN (2010)) and


                                                       15
that the scale of true income matches that of the national accounts or of the survey means:



                                      1   = 1 and E (yi jXi ) = E yi1 jXi    (NA)                      (A5b)




                              1   = S2;0 =S1;0 and E (yi jXi ) = E yi2 jXi    (Surveys)                (A5c)



         HSW (2012) also need to assume that

                                                       2 2
                                                       1
                                                 =   2 2     2
                                                                 is known.                              (A6)
                                                     1   +   1

    in order to compute their estimates. However, since when light is excluded, the unbiased-forecast weights
                      2
^ do not depend on        we do not need to make this assumption.




5     Results for Optimal Weights

5.1     Data

      We use national accounts data from the World Bank (GDP per capita, PPP, constant 2005 international

dollars). The overwhelming majority of countries do not have missing data for this element. National

accounts data (from the World Bank or from the Penn World Tables) is overwhelmingly used in cross-

country studies of determinants of growth [Barro (1991), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992a and b), Mankiw,

Romer and Weil (1992), Barro (1999), Sala-i-Martin (1996), Sala-i-Martin, Mulligan and Gil (2002), Sala-i-

Martin, Doppelho¤er and Miller (2005), La Porta et al. (1999), Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002, 2003, 2008),

Spolaore and Wacziarg (2005), Ashraf and Galor (2013) among others]

         We use a dataset on mean survey consumption from household surveys collected by the World Bank

(Povcalnet, http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm) and used by Chen and Ravallion (2001,

2004, 2010). This dataset mainly consists of surveys after 1990, although there are a few surveys present

in the 1980s as well. Many of the survey parameters are heterogeneous (for instance, some surveys are

income surveys and others are consumption surveys) but it appears that the heterogeneity is decreasing over

time and is not particularly important for our results (allowing indicators for survey income concept does

not a¤ect our conclusions). On average, there are about 30-40 surveys each year since 1992, and there are

123 countries surveyed. Survey availability is the primary constraint for our baseline sample from which to

estimate the relative optimal weights of national accounts and survey means in the optimal proxy. Overall,


                                                           16
we have 701 surveys in this sample, all of which match to national accounts and the lights data for the period

1992-2010.

        We also use the lights proxy detailed in Section 3, which we construct by summing up radiance

for each country pixel by pixel, dividing by country population and taking the logarithm. This measure is

available for all countries after 1992, which precludes using the (relatively few) surveys taken before that

date for the analysis. In principle, since we do not use the nighttime lights measure in our index, we could

use the surveys from before 1992 for our poverty estimation, but we choose to concentrate on the period

1992-2010 to avoid assumptions about the out-of-sample validity of the optimal survey weights.

        Our sample contains observations from the developing world only: there are no World Bank surveys

for OECD countries because OECD countries have virtually no population below the $1/day poverty line.

Since this paper focuses on poverty, including the OECD countries should not change our analysis. Moreover,

lights are a worse measure of output (in particular, growth rates) in OECD countries than in developing

countries because the lights measure tends to be topcoded at a light intensity corresponding to the luminosity

of a typical developed world city (Doll 2008). Appendix Table AII presents a list of all countries in the base

sample, the number and date range of their surveys, and their income as measured by GDP, surveys and

lights in the …rst and last year of their membership in the sample.

        For some speci…cations we also include controls in the function            (X). We have data on log population

and the log fractions rural and urban for each country in each year. For most countries and years, we also have

data on log consumption share, log capital formation as percent of GDP, log shares of GDP in agriculture,

manufacturing and services, log export share, log import share, and log government expenditure share of

GDP. All these variables are from the World Bank. Appendix Table AI presents summary statistics for all

these variables for the whole world between 1992 and 2010, as well as for the base sample.

        It is important to verify explicitly that there indeed exist relationships between nighttime lights,

national accounts GDP and true income. To do so, in Table I we provide estimates of the quantity

                                                                         2
                                                        S1;0
                                                                = 1 0
                                                      S1;1 S0;0  S1;1 S0;0

which is positive if and only if   0   and   1   are both distinct from zero and have the same sign. If    0   were equal to

zero, lights would be a useless indicator of true income and our approach would fail to estimate the structural

parameters of our model (we would not be able to identify              n= 1   because all covariances would be equal to

zero and their quotient would be meaningless). If             1   were zero or of di¤erent sign from      0,   then national

accounts would be a useless (or misleading) indicator of true income if lights were considered an indicator

of true income and vice versa, making the rationale for using lights to proxy for income questionable. We


                                                              17
provide these estimates for a variety of speci…cations for       (Xi ) in rows 1-5: constant   (Xi ) (corresponding

to looking at the power of lights to predict true income over all across-country-year variation), year …xed

e¤ects (looking at how well lights predict cross-country variations in income but not world growth rates),

country …xed e¤ects (looking at how well lights predict within-country growth rates but not the cross-country

income distribution), country and year …xed e¤ects (looking at cross-country deviations in growth rates), and

country and year …xed e¤ects with country time trends (looking at country business cycles). Fortunately,

regardless of the type of variation we consider, as Table I shows, lights have predictive power over true

income. We also provide estimates of the correlation

                                                                2
                                               S2;0
                                                       = 2 0
                                             S2;2 S0;0  S2;2 S0;0

for comparison, which corresponds to the correlation between nighttime lights and survey means. Survey

means are also strongly correlated with nighttime lights, though not as strongly as are national account esti-

mates, and cross-country deviations in growth rates of survey means are not correlated with such deviations

of nighttime lights (column 4).


5.2     Estimates of Relative Weights

      Table II presents estimates of the ratio of the weight of the log survey mean to the weight of the log

national accounts mean in the optimal linear proxy for log true income. This ratio corresponds to


                                         ^ = ^ 2 =^ 1 = ^ surveys =^ N A
                                         !


   or



                                         ~ = ~ 2 =~ 1 = ~ surveys =~ N A
                                         !


         in the notation of Section 4. Recall that this ratio is estimable under Assumptions A1-A4 without

any need to assume anything about the magnitude of          1.

         The interesting hypothesis to test on the relative weights that we obtain are not only whether these

weights are equal to zero but also how they compare to weights implicitly used in the literature. Research

using exclusively national accounts implicitly assumes that ^ surveys = 0, and hence that !
                                                                                          ^ = 0. Research

that exclusively uses survey means implicitly assumes that ^ N A = 0 and hence that !
                                                                                    ^ = +1. Chen and

Ravallion (2010) consider a mixed method in which they measure income per capita by the geometric mean

of the survey mean consumption and the …tted value of survey mean consumption from a regression of log

                                                       18
consumption on a constant and on log consumption in the national accounts. Chen and Ravallion (2010)

report that the coe¢ cient on log consumption from the national accounts in such a regression tends to be

between 0:6 and 0:85, so we can consider

                                                       1     1
                                            ziCR =    + yi2 + yi1
                                                       2     2

        where      2 (0:6; 0:85). Hence, the Chen-Ravallion (2010) approach assumes that ^ surveys > ^ N A ,

and hence that !
               ^ > 1.

        Each column of Table II presents estimates of optimal relative weights from a di¤erent speci…cation

of our model. We consider estimates with and without control variables, and we also consider treating

each survey as an observation (so countries with more surveys get more weight) or treating each country

as an observation (thus countries are equally weighted and surveys in countries with many surveys are

underweighted relative to ones in countries with few surveys). Both approaches can be rationalized: surveys

within each country di¤er in methodology, but surveys within a country tend to be more similar than surveys

across countries (at least because they are processed by the same statistical o¢ ces). In lieu of standard errors

we present upper and lower 95% con…dence interval bounds for each weight ratio obtained by the bootstrap,

which are more conservative than the asymptotic approximation. We also present (as P (j^
                                                                                       ! j > 1)) the

fraction of bootstrap iterations in which the weight ratio !
                                                           ^ is estimated to be greater than unity in absolute

value, which is evidence towards the null hypotheses !
                                                     ^ > 1 and !
                                                               ^ = +1. We present this statistic because

the distribution of !
                    ^ is nonstandard, and under the null hypothesis !
                                                                    ^ = +1 would be bimodal: it would

contain no mass in the interval j^
                                 ! j > 1 but a lot of mass outside that interval. The raw con…dence interval

would then be a misleading indicator of the domain of !
                                                      ^ because this domain would no longer be an interval

but comprise two disjoint intervals. Hence, the statistic P (j^
                                                              ! j > 1) provides useful information for the few

speci…cations we have with wide con…dence intervals for !
                                                        ^ by indicating where the mass of the distribution

of !
   ^ is located.

         Each row of Table II presents estimates of this optimal ratio for forecasting di¤erent types of variation

in true income by including richer and richer …xed e¤ects to account for the remaining variation. Row 1

includes no …xed e¤ects, and thus seeks to …nd an optimal proxy to capture di¤erences in income across and

within countries. Row 2 includes year …xed e¤ects; thus allowing world growth to di¤er ‡exibly between

national accounts and surveys (this speci…cation also allows di¤erences between satellites in di¤erent years).

Row 3 includes country …xed e¤ects, thus considering only the relative quality of national accounts and

survey means in forecasting country growth rates. Row 4 includes both country and year …xed e¤ects, which

focuses on country growth deviations from a world trend. Finally, row 5 includes country and year …xed


                                                       19
e¤ects as well as country trends, which looks at the relative quality of national accounts and survey means

in forecasting each country’s ‡uctuations around its growth trend, and comparing these ‡uctuations across

countries. Di¤erent types of analyses may wish to use relative weights from di¤erent columns: for instance,

studies of business cycles in developing countries would be most interested in within-country variation around

a trend, which is presented in row 5. Since we will be interested in estimating levels of mean income and

since we do not wish to impose priors on average levels of income for each country over time, we will be

using the estimates from row 1 in our poverty analysis in Section 6.

        Our baseline estimate (Row 1 and Column 1 of Table II) suggests that the relative weight of surveys

in an optimal proxy, !
                     ^ , is 0:182, and that with 95% con…dence, it is between        0:072 and 0:541. Note that

we easily reject the null hypothesis that !
                                          ^ = 1, or surveys get the same weight as national accounts (Chen

and Ravallion 2010), and a fortiriori, !
                                       ^ = +1. We see that P (j^
                                                               ! j > 1) < 0:01 (which is intuitive based

on the narrow con…dence interval), so virtually all of the distribution of !
                                                                           ^ is outside the region it would

be predicted to be in if surveys had the same weight as national accounts or greater. We also fail to reject

the null hypothesis that !
                         ^ = 0, or surveys get zero weight in the optimal proxy [Sala-i-Martin (2002, 2004,

2006), Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin 2009, Sala-i-Martin and Pinkovskiy 2010]. In fact, for any speci…cation

in rows 1-4 (using cross-country variation in levels or growth rates) and in any column (with or without

control variables for potential common sources of measurement error in nighttime lights, national accounts

and survey means) we reject the hypothesis !
                                           ^ = 1, we fail to reject the hypothesis !
                                                                                   ^ = 0, and we …nd that

P (j^
    ! j > 1) is very low. In row 5, we reject the null hypothesis that !
                                                                       ^ = 0 for two speci…cations, and we fail to

reject the null hypothesis that !
                                ^ = 1 for two other speci…cations. However, the magnitudes of our estimated

relative weights in row 5 are similar to those in rows 1-4 (they are all less than 0:42 in absolute value) and our

changes in inference come from di¤erences in the standard errors. In particular, for the speci…cations with

the full set of controls in row 5, the standard errors explode and the estimator distribution has outliers, which

prevents us from rejecting the null that !
                                         ^ = 1. This is not particularly surprising because we almost succeed

in explaining our GDP proxies with the covariate controls as well as with the very rich …xed e¤ects and time

trends, leaving little variation to be explained by business cycle variation in true income. It is important to

verify that the wide con…dence interval comes from large standard errors and not from         N A = surveys   being

close to zero; if that were the case, we would see a lot of bootstrap trials with j^
                                                                                   ! j > 1. However, even for

these speci…cations, P (j^
                         ! j > 1) is low (it is about 0:15 and 0:06 respectively), suggesting that most of the

distribution of !
                ^ is still consistent with the hypothesis that the weight on survey means should be lower in

absolute value than the weight on the national accounts.

        Table III presents estimates of the optimal relative weight of log survey means for each of four

large subregions of the developing world (Africa, Latin America, Asia and the post-Communist countries of


                                                       20
Europe and the former USSR) as well as for three time subperiods of the sample (1992-1997, 1998-2003 and

2004-2010). for the same speci…cations as in Table II. Each cell also presents the estimates of the implied

weights of national accounts and of survey means under the additional assumption A5a. We see that for all

the subregions and the subperiods, the point estimates of the relative weight of log survey means are less than

unity (in fact, less than 0.5), and frequently negative. We also see that the weights on log national accounts

GDP are large and close to unity and the weights on log survey means are relatively small, except for certain

years. However, we see that there is greater heterogeneity in !
                                                              ^ than in Table II and that we can no longer

reject most hypotheses of interest based on the bootstrap con…dence intervals for our estimates for America,

Asia, and the period 2004-2010. This pattern may be rationalized by noting that Latin American countries

conduct surveys more frequently than other countries do (and hence, they have had more opportunities to

optimize their survey design), that Latin American countries survey income, rather than consumption, and

that surveys conducted in the later period 2004-2010 may have been of better quality than preceding ones.




6      Estimates of Global Poverty and True Income Per Capita

6.1      Additional Assumptions on Data for Poverty Estimation

      Under assumptions A1-A4 and any one of assumptions A5a-A5c we can calculate the optimal proxies for

log true income zi for each country and year and compute the implied estimates of world poverty. Owing to

the paucity of surveys, the literature interpolates or extrapolates survey mean consumption to avoid having

poverty estimates depend drastically on whether or not countries with many poor people happen to have a

survey in a given year. We perform this imputation by 1) linearly interpolating and extrapolating log survey

means for countries with at least two surveys in the Chen-Ravallion database, 2) using the growth rates

of national accounts GDP for countries with only one survey in the database, and 3) dropping countries

with no surveys in the Chen-Ravallion database.4 We drop 33 countries this way, of which the largest are

South Korea, Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia, Zimbabwe, Cuba, Somalia, the UAE, Libya, Eritrea and Lebanon.

Altogether we are left with 123 countries in the developing world, which cover 5.66 billion people in 2010,

or about 96.7% of the developing world population.

             Having interpolated and extrapolated survey mean consumption, we can easily compute the optimal

proxies zi for the log means of the country income distributions using this interpolated log survey mean

series, the log World Bank GDP series, and a set of weights and intercept terms (Xi ) from the …rst row and
    4 Chenand Ravallion (2010) perform a very similar procedure, using national accounts growth rates to interpolate and
extrapolate survey means.



                                                          21
column of Table II. We can then use these estimates of the income distribution means to recover poverty

by assuming the income distribution is lognormal, recovering the distribution / shape parameters from the

Gini coe¢ cients reported with the surveys (which we also interpolate and extrapolate as we do the survey

mean consumption for countries with two or more surveys and leave constant for countries with one survey),

and integrating up to the poverty line.5 We follow the World Bank and the United Nations Development

Programme and use a poverty line of $1.25 a day in 2005 PPP-adjusted dollars, which is approximately 457

dollars a year. We then bootstrap this procedure for each speci…cation and report the mean, the 5% lower

bound and the 95% upper bound of poverty estimates for the years 1992 and 2005 (the …rst year that lights

data are available and the last year of the Chen-Ravallion sample) as well as for each year between 2006 and

2010. The uncertainty in the poverty estimates comes from the fact that the optimal weights and intercept

terms used to construct them are estimated with error.6


6.2     Estimates of Poverty and True Income per Capita for the Developing World:
        Baseline Results and Robustness Checks

      Table IV presents the poverty rate estimates for the developing world as a whole. Rows 1 and 2 recall

the results of the previous literature by presenting poverty estimates under the assumptions that either

 1   = 0 and    2   = 1 (designed to replicate the survey mean-based estimates of Chen and Ravallion (2010),

hereafter CR (2010)) or, respectively, that            1   = 1 and    2   = 0 (designed to replicate the national account-

based estimates of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2009), hereafter PSiM (2009)). Since the interpolation

and extrapolation methods are di¤erent across papers we cannot replicate the results exactly but we come

extremely close. For example, we replicate CR (2010) poverty to be 42% in 1992 and 25.8% in 2005, while

in the original paper these numbers are 39.6% in 1993 and 25.2% in 2005 (Row 2). PSiM (2009) estimate

poverty to be 8.3% in 1992 and 5.6% in 2005, but these numbers are for the world as a whole rather than

for the developing world only, and they also include the countries without surveys. Since it may be safely

assumed that no one in rich countries (the OECD) is poor, the population of the OECD is approximately

14% of the world population, and the population of countries without surveys is relatively small, the poverty

rates for the developing world implied by PSiM (2009) are 9.5% in 1992 and 6.3% in 2005, while we replicate

these rates here to be 9.4% in 1992 and 5% in 2005. The means of the developing world income distributions

for these years are reported in Table VI; we see that the national account-based means are more than twice
    5 We use the lognormal distribution as an example, as we have shown in Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2010) that neither

the interpolation procedures nor the parametric form of the country income distributions matter substantially for estimating
the world distribution of income.
    6 Bootstrapping the distribution of our estimator also helps us avoid the problem that we estimate log true income whereas

we are interested in estimating true income. We simply use the mean of the distribution of each estimator as our estimate of
the desired quantity. In practice, typically, the bias arising from nonlinearity tends to be small, and we would get similar results
if we used standard asymptotic analysis.


                                                                22
as large as the survey-based means.

        The rest of Table IV presents our new estimates of developing world poverty based on optimally

combining national accounts and survey means. Row 3 presents our baseline estimates under the long-run

scaling assumption A5a. We see that our poverty estimate for 1992 is 11.8%, which falls to 6.1% in 2005

and 4.5% in 2010. Our estimated poverty rates are very close to the estimates of PSiM (2009), and we

can reject with 95% con…dence the hypothesis that poverty fell by less than half by 2010. Hence (and not

surprisingly given our evidence on relative weights in Table II) optimally combining national accounts and

survey means through the use of the nighttime lights data as an independent benchmark to uncover the

joint relationship of these measures’errors from true income yields poverty estimates much closer to those

deriving from the national accounts than from the survey means. Table VI presents our baseline estimates

of developing world true income per capita levels; they are much closer to the national account-based means

than to the survey-based means.

        Rows 4 and 5 present robustness checks of this result by changing assumption A5a to assumptions

A5b and A5c respectively; hence, by normalizing the optimal proxy to the level of the national accounts or

to that of the household surveys. We see that normalization makes a di¤erence: the level of poverty that

we calculate under assumption A5c (normalizing to surveys) is much higher than the one that we calculate

under assumption A5b (normalizing to national accounts). However, even under assumption A5c, which uses

very nearly the same scale for income as do CR (2010) and uses the weights only to compute growth rates

and cross-sectional di¤erences across countries, we see that poverty is estimated to be a third to a half the

size in all years considered than in CR (2010), and that our survey-normalized estimates indicate both lower

and faster-falling poverty rates than do the estimates of CR (2010) with 95% con…dence. Table VI presents

the corresponding estimates of the developing world true income per capita levels; they vary as the poverty

rate estimates do. Figures III and IV present the time paths of world poverty rates, the …rst in levels and the

second as a percentage of the 1992 value. We see that even when we use the survey normalization, poverty

estimated using the optimal weighting method is much lower and falls faster than poverty estimated using

surveys alone.

        Rows 6 and 7 again use assumption A5a to scale our optimal proxies, and explore the sensitivity

of our results to assumption A1: the homogeneity of the underlying statistical model across countries and

years. Row 6 presents estimates for which the relative weights have been re-estimated in each year using

a sample of countries and years with surveys in that year only. This check is important because surveys

may be improving or deteriorating over time; also, satellites in di¤erent years may have di¤erent optical

properties and record the same lights di¤erently. To avoid sharp changes in poverty estimates when weights




                                                      23
                                                                                                                     7
change from year to year, we normalize these estimates using a recursive formula.                                         Since in Row 7 we

allow the weights to vary cross-sectionally rather than longitudinally, no changes to the scaling assumption

are required. We see that the poverty estimates are again quite similar to the baseline, albeit with wider

con…dence intervals. Rows 8 and 9 add covariates to our baseline speci…cation in order to account for factors

that may bias light density away from true income, such as the shares of manufacturing or services in GDP

or the fraction of the population that is urban. Once again, our poverty estimates are very similar to the

baseline. Table VI presents the corresponding estimates of the developing world true income per capita

levels.8

           Our last two robustness checks attempt to address conceptual problems with combining national

accounts and survey means. It is obvious (Deaton 2005, 2010) that national accounts GDP and survey mean

consumption measure two di¤erent income concepts, and that a part of their divergence is explained by this

di¤erence. It may be the case that while true income is growing faster than survey consumption, it is not

necessarily re‡ected by national accounts GDP and is in fact much closer in concept to national accounts

consumption. However, since we do not include national accounts consumption as a potential component of

our optimal proxy in our baseline speci…cation, we cannot rule this out. Row 10 adds log national accounts

consumption (household …nal consumption expenditure) as another proxy in our optimal construction of true

income, hence as yi3 in the notation of Section 4. Hence, we now compute our proxy as a weighted average

of national accounts GDP, survey means and national accounts consumption and we have three weights.

Additionally, instead of using assumption A5a to scale our optimal proxy, we instead scale the proxy to the

level of national accounts consumption: we assume that E (yi jXi ) = E yi3 jXi , and that                                      3   = 1.9 Our
   7 The   assumption that
                                                                      1                        2
                                          E yi;t jxi;t =   1;t E     yi;t jxi;t +    2;t E    yi;t jxi;t
is modi…ed to read
                                                                      1                        2
                                          E yi;t jxi;t =   1;t E     yi;t jxi;t +    2;t E    yi;t jxi;t
  where
                                                      1;t+1   = (1     g)    1;t   +g   1;t


                                                      2;t+1   = (1     g)    2;t   +g   2;t

                                      1                  1                             2                      2
                       g=    1;t   E yi;t+1 jxi;t+1   E yi;t jxi;t       +    2;t   E yi;t+1 jxi;t+1       E yi;t jxi;t
   and the initial values of 1;t and 2;t are set to the baseline (Row 1) values of 1 and 2
    8 These estimates of the true income per capita levels may seem somewhat puzzling because 1) the year-speci…c weights

estimates are lower than the baseline estimates, although the poverty levels estimated with year-speci…c weights are also lower
than the baseline poverty levels, and 2) the region-speci…c weights estimates of per capita true income appear to be implausibly
large, although the poverty rates are not out of line with our other poverty estimates. However, these apparent puzzles can
be easily reconciled by noting that poverty is a nonlinear function of true income and therefore, that the lower tail of the
distribution of our estimates for true income matters more than does the uppore tail of that distribution, and potentially, more
than does the mean. We see that in fact, the lower 5% percentile of the distribution of the year-speci…c-weights true income
estimates tends to be higher than the lower 5% percentile of the distribution of the baseline true income estimates, and that
the lower 5% percentile of the distribution of the region-speci…c-weights true income estimates is very similar to that of the
baseline true income estimates. The large positive outliers for the region-speci…c-weights true income estimates matter little
for poverty estimation because they replace the top percentiles of the baseline estimates distribution, which also generate very
low poverty rates (since poverty rates are bounded below by zero).
    9 Using Assumption A5a yields poverty estimates that are virtually identical to the baseline estimates.




                                                                      24
poverty estimates hardly change.10 This robustness check is also notable because it shows that assumption

A5a is very similar to just scaling the optimal proxy to consumption, which appears to be consistent with

survey evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS 2013).

         A second problem is that if household surveys systematically mismeasure the mean of the income

distribution, they may also systematically mismeasure its dispersion. There is no reason, either based on

theory or on data, to believe that the household surveys understate income inequality, and in our case there

are good reasons to believe that they actually overstate it. Deaton (2005) presents a parametric example

in which nonresponse leads surveys to underestimate the mean but not inequality. Survey estimates of

disposable income from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS 2013) …nd mean incomes to be larger and Gini

coe¢ cients to be smaller for the several developing countries and years for which both LIS estimates and

survey estimates from Chen and Ravallion (2010) are available.11 . Finally, as discussed in Section 2, it is

very unlikely that any supplementary income indicated by the nighttime lights data (arising from proper

valuation of housing and public goods) is particularly unequally distributed as this income is embodied in

capital-intensive and bulky goods that are unlikely to be very closely held. However, in a …nal robusteness

check we will explicitly consider the possibility that the gains from global growth have been increasingly

distributed to rich people in developing countries who do not cooperate with household surveys. Such a

process would cause us to attribute to the poor the income that went to the rich and to overestimate

poverty reduction. To assess the sensitivity of our results to mismeasurement of inequality, we consider the

situation in which the Gini coe¢ cient for each survey is downward biased by a certain number of Gini points.

We select this number by computing the median within-country standard deviation of the Gini coe¢ cient

under a weighted scheme in which each country is weighted by the standard deviation of the years in which

surveys for that country are available (hence, countries with surveys over a longer period of time get more

weight), and by taking 1.96 times this number, which amounts to 5.37 Gini points. (This mismeasurement

is somewhat below the median within-country range of the Gini coe¢ cient (computed in the same manner),

which is 7.6 Gini points.) We compute poverty rates using the new inequality series in which 5.37 is added to

each country’s Gini coe¢ cient. We also compute an additional conservative estimate of the ratio of poverty

in 2010 to poverty in 1992 by using the poverty based on the new inequality data for 2010 and poverty based

on the actual CR (2010) inequality data for 1992. Such a computation would account for the possibility that

surveys become progressively worse at measuring inequality, perhaps because much growth accrues to rich
  1 0 This is not surprising because the weight on the surveys remains small (the ratio to the national accounts GDP weight is

0:179). The ratio of the weight on national accounts consumption to national accounts GDP is smaller (0:113) but imprecisely
estimated. Hence, the weights are about 77% national accounts GDP, 14% surveys, and 9% national accounts consumption.
  1 1 For example, the LIS survey for Brazil …nds that mean disposable income is $6000 and the Gini is 48; the Brazilian survey

cited by Chen and Ravallion (2010) …nds that mean income is $3900 and the Gini is 56. Comparisons for Colombia, Estonia,
Guatemala, Hungary, Mexico, Peru and Poland are similar.




                                                              25
people who do not participate in surveys, and this procedure would make it more di¢ cult to …nd poverty

declines. Row 11 presents the resulting estimates; under the new inequality series, poverty is higher and falls

more slowly, but is much closer to the baseline than to the survey-based poverty series, let alone the CR

(2010) estimates. We also …nd that even under our conservative procedure for computing poverty ratios, by

2010, poverty has fallen to less than 57% of its 1992 level. Table VI presents the corresponding estimates of

the developing world true income per capita levels.

         The conclusion that we draw from Tables IV and Table VI is that the developing world has grown

by much more, and poverty has fallen by much more than indicated by the household surveys alone. For

all speci…cations, even the ones in which the overall scale of our true income measure is set to be the same

as that of the household surveys, poverty in 2010 (and in all other years) is estimated to be statistically

signi…cantly lower with our optimal weighting method than by using survey means alone. The di¤erence

is also practically large: our largest estimate for poverty in 2010 is 12.1%, as compared with 20.5% using

only survey means. For all speci…cations except the conservative ratio computation with measurement error

in inequality, we …nd that poverty declined by a larger percentage from 1992 to 2010 than we would …nd

based on evidence from household surveys, and that this decline happened o¤ of a lower poverty baseline.

We …nd that the most important factors a¤ecting our estimates are our choice of scaling of the true income

measure, and to a lesser extent, our assumptions about mismeasurement of inequality by the surveys. It

is intuitive that these two factors should be the most important, as, in principle, assuming very low levels

of true income or assuming that all the income growth since 1992 went to the nonpoor would be enough

to remove any poverty decline whatsoever. However, these assumptions either imply that the data we have

are systematically untrustworthy, or imply that we are away from the long-run steady state of the process

governing the evolution of national accounts and survey means.


6.3     Regional Results

      Tables V and VII present poverty and true income per capita estimates for various regions of the

developing world. Each row reports a di¤erent speci…cation, which are the same speci…cations as in Tables

IV and VI. We report only a few poverty numbers for each region in order to present a compact picture, and

we only present the 2010 / 1992 poverty ratio upper con…dence bound as a tool for inference. In Table VII we

just report true income levels for 1992, 2005 and 2010 without con…dence intervals. We see much the same

pattern as for the world as a whole, with East and South Asia experiencing more rapid poverty reduction and

Sub-Saharan Africa experiencing less rapid poverty reduction. Interestingly, for all speci…cations except the

one using the survey mean normalization (row 5) and the conservative ratio using the increased inequality



                                                      26
series (last cell of row 11), Sub-Saharan Africa reduces poverty by more than 30% between 1992 and 2010,

which is statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from the 20% reduction one obtains by just using survey means

(row 2 of the table). Since both of these robustness checks are somewhat extreme (given that national

accounts get a much higher weight than surveys do, it is not particularly plausible that the scale of the

optimal true mean proxy should be so far away from its long-run value as are the survey means; it is neither

likely that African surveys drastically undermeasured inequality in 2010 relative to 1992), this suggests that

Africa is doing better than is suggested by the evidence in the household surveys.12




7     Conclusion

     A large number of papers have attempted to estimate poverty rates around the globe. All of them

use survey data to determine the dispersion of income across citizens around a given mean to construct the

distribution of income of each country and then they estimate the poverty rates as the integral of that dis-

tribution to the left of a given poverty line. Di¤erent papers use di¤erent types of surveys, di¤erent methods

to parameterize each country’s distribution of income, di¤erent ways to interpolate and extrapolate with

missing observations, di¤erent data sources and di¤erent estimates of the mean of each country distribution

of income or consumption. Our reading of the literature is that the …nal estimates of the global poverty rate

do not depend crucially on the exact parametric speci…cations chosen by the researchers nor do they depend

on the way they interpolate or extrapolate the missing data (Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin 2009, Dhongde

and Minoiu 2010). The determining methodological choice is the choice of anchor of the income distribution.

In this sense, there are two groups of papers. There are those that anchor the distribution of income to

the national accounts’ GDP per capita [Bhalla (2002), Sala-i-Martin (2002, 2004, 2006), Pinkovskiy and

Sala-i-Martin (2009) and Sala-i-Martin and Pinkovskiy (2010)]. And then there are those that anchor the

distribution to the survey means [Chen and Ravallion (2001, 2004, 2010), Milanovic (2005)]. The choice of

the mean of the distribution matters empirically because it turns out that, for many developing countries,

the survey means not only are much smaller than the national accounts’ GDP per capita, but they also
  1 2 Sala-i-Martin and Pinkovskiy (2010) use exclusively national accounts to conclude that Africa is on track to achieve the

Millennium Development Goal of halving poverty relative to the 1990 level by 2015. Our poverty ratios compare poverty in 2010
and 1992 only and therefore cannot be used to answer this question; if we forecast poverty to 2015 and compute a 2015/1992
poverty ratio we would get that Africa reduces poverty by 2015 to 55% or less of its 1992 level for all speci…cations except for
the two speci…cations mentioned in this paragraph. Our estimates of the 2010/1992 Africa poverty ratio using our baseline
weights are higher than using national accounts alone (row 2) because the baseline estimates place some positive weight on
survey means, and we know that the growth rate of surveys is smaller than the growth rate of GDP. However, it is likely that
this weight on the survey means is too large in the context of Africa. From Table III we see that the weight on surveys for the
African subsample alone is negative, in contrast with the small positive weight on surveys for the whole world sample. In row
7 of Table V we estimate the 2010/1992 African poverty ratio using the weights estimated o¤ of the African subsample only,
and we see that this ratio is actually lower than the ratio we obtain using national accounts alone.




                                                              27
grow much more slowly. Obviously, if one anchors the distribution to a smaller number, one obtains a much

larger poverty rate. And if the anchor grows at a smaller speed, the poverty rate will decline much more

slowly. Hence, the studies that use the estimated average income of the survey as the mean of each country’s

distribution tend to …nd much larger poverty rates than the studies that use per capita GDP. And they also

tend to estimate that these poverty rates fall much more slowly.

        Nobody really knows why the survey means are di¤erent from the estimates of GDP per capita

(Deaton 2005). The rationale for using the national account’s GDP per capita is that the distribution

of income should be consistent with all the macroeconomic studies used to evaluate the performance of

countries. When economists say that China grew at x% per year during an entire decade, what they mean

is that its GDP per capita (not its survey means) grew at x% per year. And when they put the growth rate

for China in a cross country comparison analysis, they use the growth rate of GDP per capita. And any

measure of the distribution of income should be consistent with the most widely used measure of income:

GDP. If the survey means are smaller than GDP per capita, it must be due to some kind of misreporting on

the part of the surveyed. Economists using GDP as the anchor implicitly assume that the missing income

occurs proportionally across the entire income distribution.

        Researchers that like to use the survey mean, on the other hand, argue that it is possible that

much of the income missing from the surveys goes to the nonpoor (Chen and Ravallion 2010). Hence, even

though GDP is a good measure of overall income, when it comes to estimating poverty the survey means are

much closer to the mean of the “distribution of the poor”. Since nobody knows for sure the source of the

discrepancy between GDP per capita and the survey means, we cannot be sure whose estimates of poverty

rates are more accurate.

        We believe that this paper provides an avenue to solve the problem. We use a third, independently

collected data on economic activity to test whether GDP per capita or survey means are a better estimate

of true income. The data we use is satellite-recorded luminosity at night as measured by the DMSP-OLS

satellites of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

        In general, a positive correlation between measured income (national accounts or survey means) and

nighttime lights could be due to two factors: that they are both correlated with true income, or that their

measurement errors are strongly correlated with each other. However, the latter possibility is implausible

because the generating process of nighttime lights data is to a very large degree independent of the generating

process either of national accounts or of survey means. For example, measured income is collected by sta-

tisticians interacting with survey respondents, while nighttime lights are recorded impersonally by satellites.

Statistical teams use di¤erent procedures in di¤erent countries, while lights are recorded homogeneously

across national borders. Both national accounts and survey means may su¤er from nonrandom nonresponse


                                                      28
and misreporting, whereas nighttime lights do not require compliance or truthfulness of the surveyed pop-

ulation to record whatever lights exist. Moreover, nighttime lights may vary because of climatic conditions

such as auroral activity, cloudiness and humidity, or because of cultural attitudes towards lighting, which

presumably do not a¤ect measurement errors in national accounts or survey means. Therefore, the strength

of the correlation between nighttime lights and measured income is directly related to the strength of the

correlation between the given income measurement and the true income it is trying to measure. We can use

the ratios of correlations between nighttime lights and di¤erent income measurements to assess the relative

strengths of the correlations between these income measurements and unobserved true income.

        Using data on nighttime lights we test whether national accounts or survey means better re‡ect

variation in true income across countries and over time. We …nd that national accounts do a better job. We

also use the luminosity data to create a new proxy for true income as a log linear weighted average of the

national accounts and the survey means. We …nd that the weight that we wish to place on survey means is

18% of the weight that we wish to place on national accounts GDP.

        Finally, we use the new optimal measure of true income to calculate the evolution of poverty at the

worldwide level as well as at the regional level. Not surprisingly, our estimates of poverty rates are between

those of the literature that uses GDP and the literature that uses survey means. Given that our optimal

measure gives a small weight to survey means, our optimal estimates of poverty rates tend to be closer to

those reported in the research that uses GDP as the anchor. An objection could be that surveys not only

mismeasure the mean of the distribution of income, but also inequality, and that it is therefore incorrect to

combine survey-based inequality measures with income distribution means that are constructed on the basis

of national accounts. However, we show that poverty declines more rapidly if measured using our optimally

constructed means than if measured using survey means alone even if we allow for very large survey errors

in inequality measurement.

        And this is the main conclusion of this paper: poverty rates have been falling much faster than

predicted by the literature that measures poverty solely using survey means.




                                                     29
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review 91, no. 5: 1369-
     1401.
 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. "Reversal of Fortune: Ge-
     ography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution." Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 117, no. 4: 1231-1294.
 [3] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2003. "Disease and Development in
     Historical Perspective." Journal of The European Economic Association 1, no. 2-3: 397-405.
 [4] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared. 2008. "Income
     and Democracy." American Economic Review 98, no. 3: 808-842.
 [5] Alesina, Alberto F., Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou. 2012. "Ethnic Inequality."
     NBER WP #18512.
 [6] Alvaredo, Facundo and Leonardo Gasparini. 2013. "Recent Trends in Inequality and Poverty in
     Developing Countries." Documiento de Trabajo #151, Universidad de la Plata. Forthcoming Handbook
     of Income Distribution, vol. 2, eds. Atkinson, Anthony B. and Francois Bourguignon.
 [7] Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2013. "The ’Out of Africa’Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diver-
     sity, and Comparative Economic Development." American Economic Review 103, no. 1: 1-46.
 [8] Barro, Robert J. 1991. "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 106, no. 2: 407-443.
 [9] Barro, Robert J. 1999. "Human Capital and Growth in Cross-Country Regressions." Swedish Eco-
     nomic Policy Review 6, no. 2: 237-277.
[10] Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1992a. "Convergence." Journal of Political Economy
     100, no. 2: 223-251.
[11] Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1992b. "Public Finance in Models of Economic
     Growth." Review of Economic Studies 59, no. 4: 645-661.
[12] Bhalla, Surjit S. 2002. Imagine there’s no country: Poverty, inequality, and growth in the era of
     globalization. Washington, D.C.:Penguin.
[13] Bourguignon, Francois, and Christian Morrisson. 2002. "Inequality among World Citizens: 1820-
     1992." American Economic Review 92, no. 4: 727-744.
[14] Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion. 2001. "How Did the World’s Poorest Fare in the 1990s?."
     Review of Income and Wealth 47, no. 3: 283-300.
[15] Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion. 2010. "The Developing World Is Poorer Than We Thought,
     but No Less Successful in the Fight against Poverty." Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no. 4: 1577-
     1625.

[16] Chen,      Shaohua,      Martin     Ravallion    and    Prem     Sangraula.        2013.   Povcalnet,
     http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm. Accessed October 1, 2013.
[17] Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion. 2004. "How Have the World’s Poorest Fared since the Early
     1980s?." World Bank Research Observer 19, no. 2: 141-169.
[18] Chen, Xi, and William D. Nordhaus. 2010. "The Value of Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic
     Statistics." NBER Working Papers: 16317.



                                                    30
[19] Deaton, Angus. 2001. "Counting the World’s Poor: Problems and Possible Solutions." World Bank
     Research Observer 16, no. 2: 125-147.
[20] Deaton, Angus. 2005. "Measuring Poverty in a Growing World (or Measuring Growth in a Poor
     World)." Review of Economics and Statistics 87, no. 1: 1-19.

[21] Deaton, Angus. 2010. "Price Indexes, Inequality, and the Measurement of World Poverty." American
     Economic Review 100, no. 1: 5-34.
[22] Dhongde, Shatakshee and Camelia Minoiu. 2010. "Global Poverty Estimates: Present and Fu-
     ture." ECINE Working Paper Series, ECINEQ-WP 2010 #281
[23] Doll, Christopher N.H. 2008. "CIESIN Thematic Guide to Night-time Light Remote Sensing and
     its Applications." Manuscript.
[24] Doll, Christopher N.H., Jan Peter Muller and Jeremy G. Morley. 2006. "Mapping Regional
     Economic Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery." Ecological Economics 57: 75-92
[25] Elvidge, Christopher D. and Kimberly E. Baugh, Eric A. Kihn, Herbert W. Kroehl, Ethan
     R. Davis. 1997. "Mapping City Lights With Nighttime Data from the DMSP Operational Linescan
     System." Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 63, no. 6: 727-734
[26] Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberly E. Baugh, John B. Dietz, Theodore Bland, Paul C.
     Sutton and Herbert W. Kroehl. 1999. "Radiance Calibration of DMSP-OLS Low-Light Imaging
     Data of Human Settlements." Remote Sensing of Environment, 68(1):77-88.
[27] Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberly E. Baugh, Sharolyn. J. Anderson, Paul. C. Sutton, and
     Tilottama Ghosh. 2012. "The Night Light Development Index (NLDI): A Spatially Explicit Measure
     of Human Development from Satellite Data." Social Geography 7, 23–35.
[28] Ghosh, Tilottama, Rebecca L. Powell, Christopher D. Elvidge, Kimberly E. Baugh, Paul
     C. Sutton and Sharolyn Anderson. 2010. "Shedding Light on the Global Distribution of Economic
     Activity." The Open Geography Journal 3, 148-161.
[29] Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. 2009. "Measuring Economic
     Growth from Outer Space." NBER Working Paper #15199,
[30] Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. 2012. "Measuring Economic
     Growth from Outer Space." American Economic Review 102, no. 2: 994-1028.
[31] Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian. 2013.
     "Is Newer Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates." Journal of
     Monetary Economics 60, no. 2: 255-274.
[32] Karshenas, Massoud, 2003, "Global Poverty: National Accounts Based versus Survey Based Esti-
     mates," Development and Change 34(4): 683-712.
[33] Baugh, Kimberly E., Christopher D. Elvidge, Tilottama Ghosh and Daniel Ziskin. 2009.
     "Development of a 2009 Stable Lights Product using DMSP-OLS Data." Proceedings of the 30th Asia-
     Paci…c Advanced Network Meeting.
[34] Korinek, Anton, Johan Mistiaen and Martin Ravallion, 2006. "Survey Nonresponse and the
     Distribution of Income." Journal of Economic Inequality, 4(2): 33–55.
[35] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1998.
     "Law and Finance." Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 6: 1113-1155.
[36] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. "The Economic
     Consequences of Legal Origins." Journal of Economic Literature 46, no. 2: 285-332.



                                                 31
[37] Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) Database, Key Figures, http://www.lisdatacenter.org (mul-
     tiple countries; [1967-2010]). Luxembourg: LIS.
[38] Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil. 1992. "A Contribution to the Empirics
     of Economic Growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 2: 407-437.

[39] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. 2013. "Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Con-
     temporary African Development." Econometrica 81, no. 1: 113-152.
[40] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. 2014. "National Institutions and Sub-national
     Development in Africa." Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[41] Milanovic, Branko. Worlds Apart: Measuring International and Global Inequality. Princeton and
     Oxford: Princeton University Press. 2005.
[42] Mulligan, Casey B., Ricard Gil, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2004. "Do Democracies Have Dif-
     ferent Public Policies than Nondemocracies?." Journal of Economic Perspectives 18, no. 1: 51-74.
[43] Pinkovskiy, Maxim L. 2013. "Economic Discontinuities at Borders: Estimation Using Satellite Data
     of Lights at Night." mimeo, MIT.
[44] Pinkovskiy, Maxim L. 2013. "World Welfare Is Rising: Estimation Using Nonparametric Bounds on
     Welfare Measures." Journal of Public Economics, v. 97, pp. 176-95
[45] Pinkovskiy, Maxim L. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2009. "Parametric Estimations of the World
     Distribution of Income." NBER Working Paper #15433.
[46] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 1997. "I Just Ran Two Million Regressions." American Economic Review 87,
     no. 2: 178-183.
[47] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 2002a. "The Disturbing ’Rise’of Global Income Inequality." NBER Working
     Paper #8904.
[48] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 2002b. "The World Distribution of Income (estimated from Individual Country
     Distributions)." NBER Working Paper #8933.
[49] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 2006. "The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty and . . . Conver-
     gence, Period." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, no. 2: 351-397.
[50] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, Gernot Doppelhofer, and Ronald I. Miller. 2004. "Determinants of
     Long-Term Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach." American Eco-
     nomic Review 94, no. 4: 813-835.
[51] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and Maxim L. Pinkovskiy 2010. "African Poverty is Falling...Much Faster
     Than You Think!" NBER Working Paper #15775.
[52] Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2009. "The Di¤usion of Development," Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 124 no.2: pp 469-592
[53] Sutton, Paul C., Christopher D. Elvidge and Tilottama Ghosh. 2007. "Estimation of Gross
     Domestic Product at Sub-National Scales using Nighttime Satellite Imagery." International Journal of
     Ecological Economics & Statistics 8:5-21

[54] World Bank. 2013. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC.
[55] Young, Alwyn. (2012). "The African Growth Miracle." Journal of Political Economy 120, no. 4, pp.
     696-739.




                                                   32
8     Tables
                                                          Table I                                                          (I)


                     Correlations Between Measured Income and Nighttime Lights
                                                                     (1)                   (2)
                     Speci…cation                                  National             Survey
                                                                   Accounts             Means

                     No FE                                           .862                 .799
                                                                    (.809)               (.743)
                                                                    (.904)               (.852)
                     Year FE                                         .870                 .809
                                                                    (.817)               (.753)
                                                                    (.911)               (.859)
                     Country FE                                      .461                 .275
                                                                    (.336)               (.172)
                                                                    (.583)               (.383)
                     Country FE + Year FE                            .450                 .104
                                                                    (.309)               (-.068)
                                                                    (.584)               (.229)
                     Ctry FE + Ctry Trend + Year FE                  .338                 .233
                                                                    (.144)               (.112)
                                                                    (.550)               (.365)
     The …rst column of Table I presents estimates and 95% con…dence intervals for the correlation between log nighttime lights
per capita and log national accounts GDP per capita, and the second column presents estimates and 95% con…dence intervals
for the correlation between log nighttime lights per capita and log survey mean income or consumption per capita, as described
in Section 5. Correlations estimated over sample of countries and years with available survey and nighttime lights data, with
701 observations and 123 di¤erent countries. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on national accounts GDP from
the World Development Indicators, and data on survey means is from Chen and Ravallion (2010). Con…dence intervals obtained
by boostrapping countries with 120 repetitions. Each row corresponds to partialling out di¤erent …xed e¤ects, mentioned in
the row headings, from the log income measures (including them in the function (Xi )).




                                                              33
                                                           Table II                                                             (II)



                Estimates of Relative Weight of Survey Means in Optimal GDP Index
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)
 Speci…cation                                    Base       Equal.      Urb / Rur       Urb / Rur         All         All Ctrls.
                                                 Line       Weight       Controls        Eq. Wt.        Controls      Eq. Wt.

 No FE                                            .182        -.020          .111           -.024          .079          -.097
 Con…dence Bounds                               (-.072)      (-.220)       (-.158)         (-.249)        (-.247)       (-.375)
                                                (.541)       (.246)        (.525)          (.373)         (.486)        (.224)
 P-value j^
          !j > 1                                (.008)         (0)         (.008)            (0)          (.008)          (0)
 Year FE                                          .221         .002          .156           -.009          .130          -.051
 Con…dence Bounds                               (-.048)      (-.231)       (-.122)         (-.247)        (-.155)       (-.322)
                                                (.612)       (.273)        (.523)          (.379)         (.600)        (.255)
 P-value j^
          !j > 1                                   (0)          (0)        (.008)            (0)          (.008)          (0)
 Country FE                                      -.052        -.036         -.052           -.002          -.080         -.122
 Con…dence Bounds                               (-.274)      (-.321)       (-.313)         (-.331)        (-.328)       (-.348)
                                                (.324)       (.355)        (.390)          (.442)         (.249)        (.131)
 P-value j^
          !j > 1                                  (0)          (0)           (0)             (0)            (0)           (0)
 Country FE + Year FE                            -.036        -.025         -.030           -.005          -.024         -.061
 Con…dence Bounds                               (-.240)      (-.266)       (-.246)         (-.275)        (-.235)       (-.286)
                                                (.299)       (.240)        (.351)          (.284)         (.340)        (.231)
 P-value j^
          !j > 1                                  (0)          (0)           (0)             (0)            (0)           (0)
 Ctry FE + Ctry Trend + Year FE                   .191         .168          .169            .162          .413           -.224
 Con…dence Bounds                                (.019)       (.022)       (-.002)         (-.018)       (-3.862)       (-.089)
                                                 (.460)       (.433)       (.509)          (.475)        (3.732)        (2.546)
 P-value j^
          !j > 1                                   (0)          (0)           (0)             (0)          (.15)         (.066)
 No. Obs.                                         701          701          701             701            650            650
 No. Clusters                                     123          123           123             123           117           117

     Each column of Table II presents estimates and 95% con…dence intervals for !
                                                                                ^ = ^ surveys =^ N A , the ratio of the weight
of log survey means per capita to the weight of log national accounts GDP per capita in the optimal unbiased proxy zi of the
mean of the true income distribution. The di¤erent column speci…cations involve di¤erent sample survey weighting schemes,
control variables, and inclusion of national accounts consumption in zi . The baseline speci…cation weighs all surveys equally,
does not include covariate controls, and proxies zi by a combination of national accounts GDP per capita and survey means
per capita only. The bolded cell indicates the estimates that will be used in the baseline speci…cations in all subsequent tables.
Data de…nitions, inference procedures and sample selection are as in Table I. Columns 1, 3, and 5 correspond to weighting all
observations equally; columns 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 correspond to weighting all countries equally. The controls in columns 3 and
4 are: log total population, log percentage rural population, log percentage urban population. The controls in columns 5 and
6 are: log consumption share, log capital formation as percent of GDP, log shares of GDP in agriculture, manufacturing and
services, log export share, log import share, and log government expenditure share of GDP. Each row corresponds to partialling
out di¤erent …xed e¤ects, mentioned at the foot of the table, from the log income measures (including them in the function
  (Xi )).




                                                               34
                                         Table III                                                 (III)



                    Estimates of Weights on Survey Means and National Accounts
                            (1)       (2)             (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)      (8)
Speci…cation                Base     Equal.     Urb / Rur      Urb / Rur     All      All Ctrls.   Obs.    Clusters
                            Line     Weight      Controls       Eq. Wt.    Controls   Eq. Wt.

Baseline                    .182      -.020          .111        -.024        .079      -.097       701      123
                           (-.072)   (-.220)        (-.158)     (-.249)     (-.247)    (-.375)
                           (.541)    (.246)         (.525)      (.373)      (.486)     (.224)
Survey Weight               .154      -.021          .100        -.024        .073      -.107
WB GDP Weight               .845      1.021          .899        1.024        .926      1.107
Region == Africa            -.210     -.224          -.176       -.175       -.458       -.457      114       41
                           (-.560)   (-.526)        (-.578)     (-.536)    (-7.417)    (-2.845)
                           (.219)    (.222)         (.360)      (.519)     (1.395)     (1.915)
Survey Weight               -.266     -.289          -.214       -.213       -.845       -.842
WB GDP Weight               1.266     1.289          1.214       1.213      1.845        1.842
Region == Asia              .077      -.175           -.017       -.307      -.137       -.224      119       29
                           (-.823)   (-.829)        (-1.221)    (-1.171)   (-4.186)    (-4.572)
                           (2.654)   (1.006)        (2.178)     (1.540)    (1.418)     (1.791)
Survey Weight               .071      -.212           -.017       -.444      -.159       -.289
WB GDP Weight               .928      1.212           1.017       1.444      1.159       1.289
Region == America           .441       .218           -.529      .394        .160       .082        234       25
                           (-.328)   (-.291)        (-.378)     (-.504)     (-.393)    (-.392)
                           (2.678)   (1.332)        (1.901)     (2.356)     (.805)     (.880)
Survey Weight               .306       .179          -1.124      .283         .138      .076
WB GDP Weight               .693       .820           2.124       .716        .861      .923
Region == PostCommunist     .145      -.014          .095        .025        -.082      -.209       234       28
                           (-.295)   (-.322)        (-.288)     (-.417)     (-.499)    (-.761)
                           (.941)    (.721)         (.675)      (1.232)     (.435)     (.171)
Survey Weight               .126      -.014          .087        .024        -.090      -.264
WB GDP Weight               .873      1.014           .912        .975       1.090      1.264
1992-1997                   .167       .074           .035       .034         .332      .062        165       88
                           (-.092)   (-.165)        (-.282)     (-.280)     (-.168)    (-.335)
                           (.658)    (.527)         (.573)      (.522)      (1.676)    (.604)
Survey Weight               .143       .069           .033       .033         .249      .059
WB GDP Weight               .856       .930           .966       .966         .750      .940
1998-2003                   .003      -.112          -.011       -.086        .063      -.082       234       98
                           (-.284)   (-.405)        (-.320)     (-.453)     (-.296)    (-.407)
                           (.344)    (.353)         (.365)      (.537)      (.477)     (.358)
Survey Weight               .003      -.127          -.011       -.094        .059      -.090
WB GDP Weight               .996      1.127          1.011       1.094        .940      1.090
2004-2010                   .464       .074           .469       .147         .349      .325        302      103
                           (-.098)   (-.230)        (-.159)     (-.280)     (-.229)    (-.418)
                           (1.197)   (.686)         (1.291)     (1.375)     (1.698)    (3.758)
Survey Weight               .317       .069           .319       .128         .258      .245
WB GDP Weight               .682       .930           .680       .871         .741      .754




                                               35
    Table III presents estimates and 95% con…dence intervals for !
                                                                 ^ = ^ surveys =^ N A the ratio of the weight of log survey
means per capita to the weight of log national accounts GDP per capita in the optimal unbiased proxy zi for the mean of the
true income distribution, as well as the values of the estimated weights under the assumption A5a. Each row corresponds to
estimating the weight !
                      ^ for a di¤erent subsample of the baseline sample: either restricting to observations in a speci…c region
or to observations in a speci…c year range. Data de…nitions, inference procedures and sample selection are as in Table I. The
baseline speci…cation corresponds to the speci…cation in the bolded cell of Table II. Each column corresponds to a di¤erent
speci…cation in which either countries are weighted equally instead of surveys, or urban and rural control variables are included
(log total population, log percentage rural population, log percentage urban population), or all control variables are included
(log consumption share, log capital formation as percent of GDP, log shares of GDP in agriculture, manufacturing and services,
log export share, log import share, and log government expenditure share of GDP) or both.




                                                               36
                                                          Table IV                                                          (IV)



                                        Developing World Poverty Estimates
                                      (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)          (8)
                                     1992      2005       2006        2007     2008       2009       2010       Ratio
                                                                                                              2010-1992
       Survey Weight = 1             .421       .258       .247       .237      .227       .214      .205         .487
       (CR 2010)
       GDP Weight = 1                .094       .050       .047       .043      .041       .039      .037         .400
       (PSiM 2009)
       Baseline                      .118       .061       .057        .052     .049       .047      .045         .381
                                    (.087)     (.047)     (.044)      (.041)   (.039)     (.037)    (.036)       (.365)
                                    (.156)     (.079)     (.074)      (.068)   (.064)     (.060)    (.057)       (.409)
       Scale Normalized              .099       .051       .048        .044     .042       .040      .038         .387
       to GDP                       (.092)     (.050)     (.046)      (.043)   (.040)     (.039)    (.037)       (.373)
                                    (.108)     (.054)     (.051)      (.047)   (.044)     (.042)    (.040)       (.405)
       Scale Normalized              .289       .170       .158        .146     .138       .130      .121         .420
       to Surveys                   (.258)     (.154)     (.143)      (.132)   (.124)     (.117)    (.110)       (.407)
                                    (.332)     (.190)     (.177)      (.164)   (.155)     (.145)    (.136)       (.437)
       Year-spec. Weights            .119       .059       .057        .053     .049       .047      .042         .354
       Recursive Scale              (.107)     (.055)     (.052)      (.048)   (.047)     (.043)    (.039)       (.311)
                                    (.131)     (.065)     (.065)      (.060)   (.052)     (.053)    (.046)       (.404)
       Region-spec Weights           .101       .056       .052        .048     .045       .043      .040         .460
                                    (.039)     (.031)     (.028)      (.026)   (.024)     (.023)    (.022)       (.274)
                                    (.246)     (.115)     (.106)      (.096)   (.089)     (.082)    (.075)       (.708)
       Urban / Rural                 .108       .057       .053        .049     .046       .044      .042         .391
       Covariates                   (.076)     (.043)     (.040)      (.037)   (.035)     (.034)    (.032)       (.367)
                                    (.148)     (.075)     (.070)      (.064)   (.061)     (.057)    (.054)       (.431)
       All Covariates                .104       .055       .051        .047     .044       .043      .040         .398
                                    (.071)     (.041)     (.039)      (.036)   (.034)     (.033)    (.031)       (.366)
                                    (.152)     (.077)     (.072)      (.066)   (.062)     (.058)    (.055)       (.441)
       Add NA                        .123       .064       .060        .055     .052       .049      .047         .382
       Consumption                  (.098)     (.057)     (.053)      (.049)   (.046)     (.044)    (.042)       (.351)
                                    (.146)     (.072)     (.067)      (.061)   (.057)     (.054)    (.051)       (.421)
       Inequality Upper Bd.          .163       .089       .083        .076     .071       .067      .064         .391
       Gini + 1.96 * Med.SD         (.126)     (.068)     (.063)      (.058)   (.055)     (.052)    (.049)       (.388)
                                    (.206)     (.115)     (.107)      (.098)   (.093)     (.087)    (.082)       (.399)
       Conservative Forecasts                                                                                     .540
                                                                                                                 (.568)

    Each row of Table IV presents estimates and 90% con…dence intervals (5% and 95% con…dence bounds) for developing
world poverty rates in selected years using the estimated proxies zi as the means of the country income distributions. Data
de…nitions, inference procedures and sample selection for the sample used to compute the weights on national accounts and
survey means in the construction of zi are as in Table I. Poverty estimates are constructed using these weights for the whole
sample of country-years of all countries not including the OECD and countries with no household surveys, and all years in the
time period 1992-2010. Poverty estimates are obtained as the fraction of the population below $1.25 a day, with the income
distribution assumed to be lognormal with mean equal to zi and variance implied by the Gini coe¢ cient from the corresponding
household survey. All estimates obtained as means of corresponding bootstrapped distributions; estimates ratios need not equal
exactly to ratios of estimates because of Jensen’s inequality. Row 1 presents estimates in which zi is set to the survey mean
(as in CR (2010)). Row 2 presents estimates in which zi is set to national accounts GDP per capita (as in PSiM (2009)).
Row 3 presents the baseline speci…cation, where the weights corresponds to the speci…cation in the bolded cells of Table II
and Table III, and Assumption A5a is invoked to …x the overall scale of zi . Row 4 presents the baseline speci…cation with the
scale based on Assumption A5b. Row 5 presents the baseline speci…cation with the scale based on Assumption A5c. Row 6
presents the baseline speci…cation from Row 3 but with additional control variables for the estimation of the weights. (log total



                                                                 37
population, log percentage rural population, log percentage urban population). Row 7 presents the same speci…cation as Row
6 but with further control variables for the estimation of the weights (log consumption share, log capital formation as percent
of GDP, log shares of GDP in agriculture, manufacturing and services, log export share, log import share, and log government
expenditure share of GDP). Row 8 presents the same speci…cation as Row 3 but adds national accounts consumption per capita
as an additional component of the proxy zi , and replaces assumption A5a with an analogous assumption to A5b in which the
parameters associated with national accounts consumption are normalized. Row 9 presents the same speci…cation as Row 3
but assumes all survey Gini coe¢ cients are 5.37 Gini points higher than they are recorded to be in the household surveys. The
conservative ratio in the last cell of Row 9 assumes that the survey Gini coe¢ cients in 1992 are as reported, but the survey
Gini coe¢ cients in 2010 are 5.37 points higher than reported. We also present the upper bound for this ratio.




                                                              38
                                                         Table V                                                         (V)



                                                    Regional Poverty Estimates
                                                                   (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)      (7)
                                                                  Dev.      East      South       Lat.       SSA       MENA      Fmr
                                                                  World     Asia       Asia       Am.                            USSR
 Survey Weight = 1                  Poverty 1992                   .421     .512        .545       .129       .585       .074     .084
 (CR 2010)                          Poverty 2010                   .205     .093        .321       .058       .474       .048     .071
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .487     .182        .588       .455       .811       .651     .841
 GDP Weight = 1                     Poverty 1992                   .094     .081        .072       .026       .346       .003     .030
 (PSiM 2009)                        Poverty 2010                   .037     .002        .008       .017       .217       .003     .009
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .400     .031        .119       .673       .628      1.037     .327
 Baseline                           Poverty 1992                   .118     .115        .105       .033       .374       .005     .031
                                    Poverty 2010                   .045     .004        .016       .020       .244       .005     .015
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .381     .040        .149       .625       .650       .962     .478
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.409)   (.054)      (.201)     (.690)     (.681)    (1.060)   (.691)
 Scale Normalized                   Poverty 1992                   .099     .092        .080       .026       .347       .003     .027
 to GDP                             Poverty 2010                   .038     .002        .010       .016       .219       .003     .012
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .387     .032        .131       .638       .631      1.072     .455
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.405)   (.033)      (.152)     (.684)     (.639)    (1.123)   (.668)
 Scale Normalized                   Poverty 1992                   .289     .321        .334       .118       .554       .052     .075
 to Surveys                         Poverty 2010                   .121     .046        .107       .076       .435       .033     .043
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .420     .146        .319       .643       .785       .640     .571
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.437)   (.163)      (.353)     (.688)     (.795)     (.654)   (.639)
 Year-spec. Weights                 Poverty 1992                   .119     .105        .106       .032       .401       .005     .040
 Recursive Scale                    Poverty 2010                   .042     .005        .019       .017       .218       .004     .019
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .354     .053        .182       .547       .545       .826     .509
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.404)   (.077)      (.283)     (.667)     (.663)     (.999)   (.754)
 Region-spec Weights                Poverty 1992                   .101     .098        .093       .039       .299       .007     .031
                                    Poverty 2010                   .040     .008        .028       .023       .179       .005     .013
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .460     .039        .363       .613       .593       .902     .434
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.708)   (.106)     (1.744)     (.772)     (.649)    (1.192)   (.755)
 Urban / Rural                      Poverty 1992                   .108     .101        .092       .030       .362       .004     .030
 Covariates                         Poverty 2010                   .042     .004        .013       .019       .233       .004     .012
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .391     .036        .138       .647       .641       .995     .415
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.431)   (.051)      (.190)     (.728)     (.675)    (1.105)   (.653)
 All Covariates                     Poverty 1992                   .104     .096        .086       .029       .357       .004     .030
                                    Poverty 2010                   .040     .003        .012       .018       .228       .004     .012
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .398     .035        .135       .660       .637      1.010     .388
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.441)   (.052)      (.195)     (.744)     (.678)    (1.123)   (.670)
 Add NA                             Poverty 1992                   .123     .123        .109       .037       .378       .006     .033
 Consumption                        Poverty 2010                   .047     .005        .017       .023       .250       .005     .016
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .382     .047        .161       .619       .662       .924     .490
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.421)   (.054)      (.190)     (.671)     (.696)    (1.047)   (.675)
 Inequality Upper Bd.               Poverty 1992                   .163     .170        .161       .057       .422       .015     .043
 Gini + 1.96 * Med.SD               Poverty 2010                   .064     .013        .037       .035       .296       .011     .022
                                   Ratio 2010/1992                 .391     .078        .223       .617       .699       .748     .523
                                 Ratio 2010/1992 UB               (.399)   (.102)      (.293)     (.661)     (.728)     (.794)   (.660)
 Conservative Forecasts       Extreme Ratio 2010/1992              .540     .116        .346      1.073       .789      2.181     .725
                             Extreme Ratio 2010/1992 UB           (.568)   (.139)      (.417)    (1.172)     (.811)    (2.598)   (.957)

    Each row of Table V presents estimates and 90% con…dence intervals (5% and 95% con…dence bounds) for poverty rates
in selected developing world regions using the estimated proxies zi as the means of the country income distributions. Data
de…nitions, inference procedures and sample selection for the sample used to compute the weights on national accounts and
survey means in the construction of zi are as in Table I. Poverty estimates are constructed using these weights for the whole




                                                             39
sample of country-years of all countries not including the OECD and countries with no household surveys, and all years in the
time period 1992-2010. Poverty estimates are obtained as the fraction of the population below $1.25 a day, with the income
distribution assumed to be lognormal with mean equal to zi and variance implied by the Gini coe¢ cient from the corresponding
household survey. All estimates obtained as means of corresponding bootstrapped distributions; estimates ratios need not equal
exactly to ratios of estimates because of Jensen’s inequality. Row 1 presents estimates in which zi is set to the survey mean
(as in CR (2010)). Row 2 presents estimates in which zi is set to national accounts GDP per capita (as in PSiM (2009)).
Row 3 presents the baseline speci…cation, where the weights corresponds to the speci…cation in the bolded cells of Table II
and Table III, and Assumption A5a is invoked to …x the overall scale of zi . Row 4 presents the baseline speci…cation with the
scale based on Assumption A5b. Row 5 presents the baseline speci…cation with the scale based on Assumption A5c. Row 6
presents the baseline speci…cation from Row 3 but with additional control variables for the estimation of the weights. (log total
population, log percentage rural population, log percentage urban population). Row 7 presents the same speci…cation as Row
6 but with further control variables for the estimation of the weights (log consumption share, log capital formation as percent
of GDP, log shares of GDP in agriculture, manufacturing and services, log export share, log import share, and log government
expenditure share of GDP). Row 8 presents the same speci…cation as Row 3 but adds national accounts consumption per capita
as an additional component of the proxy zi , and replaces assumption A5a with an analogous assumption to A5b in which the
parameters associated with national accounts consumption are normalized. Row 9 presents the same speci…cation as Row 3
but assumes all survey Gini coe¢ cients are 5.37 Gini points higher than they are recorded to be in the household surveys. The
conservative ratio in the last cell of Row 9 assumes that the survey Gini coe¢ cients in 1992 are as reported, but the survey
Gini coe¢ cients in 2010 are 5.37 points higher than reported. We also present the 95% upper bound for this ratio.




                                                               40
                                                           Table VI                                                         (VI)



                                     Developing World True Income Estimates
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                                      1992         2005        2006         2007        2008         2009        2010


        Survey Weight = 1              1149        1440         1526        1611         1681        1735         1794
        GDP Weight = 1                 2905        4286         4578        4916         5133        5199         5442
        Baseline                       2549        3701         3948        4228         4414        4479         4680
                                      (2122)      (3002)       (3197)      (3411)       (3559)      (3622)       (3775)
                                      (3034)      (4501)       (4809)      (5170)       (5398)      (5464)       (5724)
        Scale Normalized               2851        4161         4447        4772         4988        5061         5295
        to GDP                        (2771)      (3984)       (4264)      (4572)       (4787)      (4871)       (5092)
                                      (2917)      (4315)       (4607)      (4950)       (5167)      (5230)       (5477)
        Scale Normalized               1229        1691         1780        1881         1946        1976         2046
        to Surveys                    (1178)      (1624)       (1707)      (1802)       (1866)      (1896)       (1963)
                                      (1273)      (1757)       (1851)      (1960)       (2031)      (2061)       (2136)
        Year-spec. Weights             2724        3725         3583        3675         4170        3994         4414
        Recursive Scale               (2400)      (3590)       (3160)      (3344)       (3900)      (3642)       (4150)
                                      (3315)      (3910)       (4030)      (4028)       (4449)      (4288)       (4673)
        Region-spec Weights            8783       13144        15732       19774        21687       22926        23305
                                      (2168)      (2965)       (3120)      (3319)       (3465)      (3481)       (3641)
                                     (13243)     (27447)      (31861)     (37952)      (40779)     (42570)      (44475)
        Urban / Rural                  2717        3978         4246        4555         4755        4821         5043
        Covariates                    (2186)      (3108)       (3310)      (3533)       (3687)      (3751)       (3911)
                                      (3344)      (5014)       (5363)      (5778)       (6035)      (6101)       (6400)
        All Covariates                 2818        4147         4428        4755         4965        5030         5265
                                      (2158)      (3062)       (3261)      (3480)       (3631)      (3694)       (3851)
                                      (3484)      (5248)       (5615)      (6056)       (6326)      (6392)       (6709)
        Add NA                         2361        3391         3608        3853         4015        4077         4252
        Consumption                   (2232)      (3164)       (3335)      (3567)       (3711)      (3781)       (3930)
                                      (2508)      (3641)       (3903)      (4160)       (4335)      (4387)       (4584)
        Inequality Upper Bd.           2549        3701         3948        4228         4414        4479         4680
        Gini + 1.96 * Med.SD          (2122)      (3002)       (3197)      (3411)       (3559)      (3622)       (3775)
                                      (3034)      (4501)       (4809)      (5170)       (5398)      (5464)       (5724)

    Each row of Table VI presents estimates and 90% con…dence intervals (5% and 95% con…dence bounds) for developing world
true income per capita (the population-weighted average of the zi ’s) in selected years. Data de…nitions, inference procedures
and sample selection for the sample used to compute the weights on national accounts and survey means in the construction of
zi are as in Table I. Row 1 presents estimates in which zi is set to the survey mean (as in CR (2010)). Row 2 presents estimates
in which zi is set to national accounts GDP per capita (as in PSiM (2009)). Row 3 presents the baseline speci…cation, where
the weights corresponds to the speci…cation in the bolded cells of Table II and Table III, and Assumption A5a is invoked to
…x the overall scale of zi . Row 4 presents the baseline speci…cation with the scale based on Assumption A5b. Row 5 presents
the baseline speci…cation with the scale based on Assumption A5c. Row 6 presents the baseline speci…cation with additional
control variables for the estimation of the weights. (log total population, log percentage rural population, log percentage urban
population). Row 7 presents further control variables for the estimation of the weights (log consumption share, log capital
formation as percent of GDP, log shares of GDP in agriculture, manufacturing and services, log export share, log import
share, and log government expenditure share of GDP). Row 8 presents the same speci…cation as Row 3 but adds national
accounts consumption per capita as an additional component of the proxy zi , and replaces assumption A5a with an analogous
assumption to A5b in which the parameters associated with national accounts consumption are normalized. Row 9 presents
the same speci…cation as Row 3 but assumes all survey Gini coe¢ cients are 5.37 Gini points higher than they are recorded to
be in the household surveys.




                                                               41
                                                               Table VII                                                   (VII)



                                           Regional GDP per Capita Estimates
                                                                 (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)
                                                                 Dev.      East    South    Lat.      SSA     MENA         Fmr
                                                                World      Asia    Asia     Am.                           USSR
 Survey Weight = 1           GDP    per   capita   in   1992      1149      612      509    2653      664        1760     2985
 (CR 2010)                   GDP    per   capita   in   2005      1440     1281      662    3305      757        2015     2899
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      1794     1805      730    4228      810        2070     3993
 GDP Weight = 1              GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2905     1672     1250    7384      1547       5100     7624
 (PSiM 2009)                 GDP    per   capita   in   2005      4286     4020     2098    8817      1756       6704     8599
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      5442     6164     2810    10115     2017       6821     10322
 Baseline                    GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2549     1460     1104    6424      1366       4420     6681
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2005      3701     3456     1800    7721      1554       5711     7426
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      4680     5243     2352    8968      1763       5816     9058
 Scale Normalized            GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2851     1591     1191    7305      1500       4976     7623
 to GDP                      GDP    per   capita   in   2005      4161     3850     1965    8836      1713       6465     8491
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      5295     5909     2582    10325     1947       6591     10443
 Scale Normalized            GDP    per   capita   in   1992      1229      824      669    2717      747        1996     2787
 to Surveys                  GDP    per   capita   in   2005      1691     1656      986    3153      829        2445     3015
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      2046     2308     1217    3562      920        2478     3543
 Year-spec. Weights          GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2724     1572     1165    6996      1448       4852     7160
 Recursive Scale             GDP    per   capita   in   2005      3725     3479     1812    7762      1562       5756     7475
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      4414     4798     2077    9078      1746       5364     8956
 Region-spec Weights         GDP    per   capita   in   1992      8783     7554    11691     6280     2430      21022      7211
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2005     13144     17095    9882     7534     2730      40275      8095
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010     23305     33575   25960     8751     3378      41843      9763
 Urban / Rural               GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2717     1560     1173    6878      1452       4742     7126
 Covariates                  GDP    per   capita   in   2005      3978     3723     1942    8237      1650       6184     7982
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      5043     5681     2572    9506      1884       6295     9654
 All Covariates              GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2818     1620     1215    7153      1504       4936     7395
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2005      4147     3886     2028    8547      1708       6475     8320
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      5265     5950     2709    9827      1959       6590     10012
 Add NA                      GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2361     1397     1074    5812      1299       4047     6053
 Consumption                 GDP    per   capita   in   2005      3391     3199     1713    6935      1470       5169     6645
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      4252     4767     2210    8016      1660       5267     8063
 Inequality Upper Bd.        GDP    per   capita   in   1992      2549     1460     1104    6424      1366       4420     6681
 Gini + 1.96 * Med.SD        GDP    per   capita   in   2005      3701     3456     1800    7721      1554       5711     7426
                             GDP    per   capita   in   2010      4680     5243     2352    8968      1763       5816     9058

    Each row of Table VII presents estimates and 90% con…dence intervals (5% and 95% con…dence bounds) for true income per
capita (the population-weighted average of the zi ’s) in selected developing world regions. Data de…nitions, inference procedures
and sample selection for the sample used to compute the weights on national accounts and survey means in the construction of
zi are as in Table I. All row speci…cations as in Table VI.




                                                                   42
9    Figures

                                                         Figure I                                       (I)




                     Southern Africa, 2000                                   Southern Africa, 2009


   Data Source: NOAA. The symbols "AGO", "ZWE" and "BWA" show Angola, Zimbabwe and Botswana
respectively (the Zimbabwe symbol placed in Botswana near its Zimbabwean border to avoid masking Zim-
babwean lights).




                                                 43
                      Figure II    (II)




                     India, 1994




                     India, 2010


Data Source: NOAA.




                       44
                                                                                                 Figure III                                                                                                 (III)

                                                                             Developing World Poverty Estimates
                                                                                                                           Levels
                                          .4


                    $1/Day Poverty Rate   .3


                                          .2


                                          .1


                                          0
                                                1992


                                                                    1994


                                                                                      1996


                                                                                                        1998


                                                                                                                         2000


                                                                                                                                         2002


                                                                                                                                                         2004


                                                                                                                                                                        2006


                                                                                                                                                                                       2008


                                                                                                                                                                                                     2010
                                                          1993


                                                                             1995


                                                                                               1997


                                                                                                                 1999


                                                                                                                                 2001


                                                                                                                                                 2003


                                                                                                                                                                 2005


                                                                                                                                                                               2007


                                                                                                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                                                Year

                                                                       Baseline                                                  CR (2010)                                            PSiM (2009)
                                                                       GDP Normalized                                            Survey Normalized




Note: See Table IV for data and series descriptions.


                                                                                                               Figure IV                                                                                    (IV)

                                                                               Developing World Poverty Estimates
                                                                                                        As a Ratio of 1992 Level
                                          100
                    $1/Day Poverty Rate




                                           80



                                           60



                                           40
                                                   1992


                                                                      1994


                                                                                        1996


                                                                                                          1998


                                                                                                                          2000


                                                                                                                                          2002


                                                                                                                                                          2004


                                                                                                                                                                        2006


                                                                                                                                                                                       2008


                                                                                                                                                                                                     2010
                                                             1993


                                                                               1995


                                                                                                 1997


                                                                                                                  1999


                                                                                                                                  2001


                                                                                                                                                  2003


                                                                                                                                                                 2005


                                                                                                                                                                               2007


                                                                                                                                                                                              2009




                                                                                                                                 Year

                                                                           Baseline                                              CR (2010)                                            PSiM (2009)
                                                                           GDP Normalized                                        Survey Normalized




Note: See Table IV for data and series descriptions.




                                                                                                                   45
10        Appendix Tables
                                               Table AI                                            (AI)



                                          Summary Statistics
 Series                                          Mean             SD             Mean            SD
                                               Whole World    Whole World     Base Sample    Base Sample

 Log Lights per Capita                             18.06           1.66          18.11           1.21
 Log WB GDP per Capita, PPP                        8.56            1.28           8.41           .88
 Log Survey Mean, PPP                              7.54            .74            7.54           .74
 Log WB NA Consumption per Capita, PPP             8.33            1.19           8.22           .83
 Log Fraction Rural Population                     3.64            .72            3.71           .51
 Log Total Population                              15.13           2.31          16.30           1.53
 Log Fraction Urban Population                     3.87            .54            3.90           .45
 Log Services Share of GDP                         3.95            .33            3.95           .23
 Log Agricultural Share of GDP                     2.26            1.17           2.49           .70
 Log Export Share of GDP                           3.47            .67            3.47           .54
 Log Import Share of GDP                           3.69            .56            3.66           .52
 Log Manufacturing Share of GDP                    2.47            .66            2.75           .44
 Log Consumption Share of GDP                      4.16            .29            4.21           .20
 Log Government Expenditure Share of GDP           2.69            .41            2.60           .36
 Log Gross Capital Formation Share of GDP          3.05            .40            3.08           .31

    Note: Table AI presents summary statistics of key variables in the analysis. "Whole World" refers to
all countries and years in the universe of countries and from 1992 to 2010. "Base Sample" refers to the
sample of 701 country-years for which both lights data and survey means are availaible and which is used
to estimated optimal weights. Data on lights from the NOAA. All other data from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators.




                                                  46
                                                    Table AII                                                  (AII)



                                        Countries included in Calibration Sample
 Country                No. Surv.    First   Last   Log GDP      Log GDP     Log Lights    Log Lights    Log Surv.      Log Surv.
                                     Year    Year    First Yr.   Last Yr.     First Yr.     Last Yr.     First Yr.      Last Yr.
 Albania                     5       1997    2008      8.18        8.88         17.19         18.37         7.50          7.64
 Algeria                     1       1995    1995      8.63        8.63         19.00         19.00         7.27          7.27
 Angola                      2       2000    2009      7.81        8.54         16.70         17.41         6.62          6.57
 Argentina                  19       1992    2010      9.12        9.57         18.88         19.73         8.48          8.99
 Armenia                    11       1996    2010      7.51        8.49         17.21         18.59         7.16          7.18
 Azerbaijan                  3       1995    2008      7.52        8.99         18.43         18.52         6.95          7.78
 Bangladesh                  5       1992    2010      6.65        7.30         15.79         16.17         6.02          6.42
 Belarus                    13       1993    2010      8.57        9.43         18.59         19.96         7.80          8.70
 Belize                      7       1993    1999      8.53        8.53         18.90         19.07         7.97          7.73
 Benin                       1       2003    2003      7.21        7.21         16.09         16.09         6.45          6.45
 Bhutan                      2       2003    2007      8.08        8.34         16.56         17.08         7.04          7.21
 Bolivia                    10       1993    2008      8.07        8.33         18.39         18.37         7.79          7.85
 Bosnia Herzegovina          3       2001    2007      8.56        8.88         18.95         18.82         8.34          8.64
 Botswana                    1       1994    1994      8.88        8.88         18.10         18.10         7.33          7.33
 Brazil                     16       1992    2009      8.85        9.15         18.56         18.94         7.65          8.38
 Bulgaria                    7       1992    2007      8.78        9.32         18.56         18.82         8.57          8.09
 Burkina Faso                4       1994    2009      6.53        6.98         15.58         16.04         6.19          6.51
 Burundi                     3       1992    2006      6.55        6.20         14.77         14.62         5.74          5.85
 Cambodia                    5       1994    2009      6.66        7.53         14.44         15.69         6.51          6.87
 Cameroon                    3       1996    2007      7.43        7.61         16.28         15.96         6.88          7.23
 Cape Verde                  1       2002    2002      7.76        7.76         17.78         17.78         7.28          7.28
 Cent. African Rep.          3       1992    2008      6.62        6.55         15.68         14.71         5.69          6.42
 Chad                        1       2003    2003      6.84        6.84         14.88         14.88         6.20          6.20
 Chile                       8       1992    2009      8.99        9.53         18.26         18.88         8.22          8.68
 China                       7       1993    2009      7.31        8.73         16.96         17.88         6.34          7.47
 Colombia                   14       1992    2010      8.74        9.04         18.26         18.84         7.96          8.12
 Comoros                     1       2004    2004      6.94        6.94         15.10         15.10         7.03          7.03
 Congo                       1       2005    2005      8.12        8.12         17.93         17.93         6.47          6.47
 Congo, DRC                  1       2006    2006      5.64        5.64         15.39         15.39         5.56          5.56
 Costa Rica                 18       1992    2009      8.80        9.22         18.69         18.92         7.82          8.49
 Cote d’Ivoire               5       1993    2008      7.45        7.41         16.68         17.21         6.94          6.95

    Note: Table AII presents a list of countries and relevant statistics for the calibration sample of country-years,
based on which we calculate weights on national accounts and survey means in the optimal proxy for log true income
per capita. We present the number of surveys each country has in the sample, the years of the earliest and latest
survey, and values of log World Bank GDP per capita (PPP-adjusted), log survey mean, and log lights per capita
(NOAA) corresponding to these years.




                                                         47
                                                Table AII (cont.)



                                        Countries included in Calibration Sample
 Country                No. Surv.    First   Last    Log GDP     Log GDP      Log Lights    Log Lights    Log Surv.     Log Surv.
                                     Year    Year    First Yr.    Last Yr.     First Yr.     Last Yr.     First Yr.     Last Yr.
 Croatia                    6        1998    2008       9.37        9.75         19.45         19.80        8.72          9.12
 Czech Republic             2        1993    1996       9.57        9.70         19.28         19.70        8.54          8.69
 Djibouti                   1        2002    2002       7.47        7.47         16.31         16.31        7.02          7.02
 Dominican Republic         14       1992    2010       8.32        9.03         17.76         18.44        7.91          8.03
 Ecuador                    11       1994    2010       8.62        8.88         18.56         19.30        7.68          8.07
 Egypt                      4        1996    2008       8.19        8.55         18.68         18.98        7.06          7.22
 El Salvador                13       1995    2009       8.43        8.68         18.00         18.14        7.75          7.81
 Estonia                    8        1993    2004       8.90        9.62         19.42         19.59        8.09          8.21
 Ethiopia                   3        1995    2005       6.18        6.45         14.74         14.82        6.29          6.42
 Fiji                       2        2003    2009       8.31        8.34         17.57         17.54        6.99          7.43
 Gabon                      1        2005    2005       9.47        9.47         19.24         19.24        7.49          7.49
 Georgia                    14       1996    2010       7.60        8.42         16.92         18.63        7.59          7.16
 Ghana                      3        1992    2006       6.84        7.13         16.91         16.96        6.37          6.87
 Guatemala                  6        1998    2006       8.25        8.33         17.78         17.68        7.65          7.78
 Guinea                     3        1994    2007       6.71        6.88         15.73         15.34        6.21          6.52
 Guinea-Bissau              2        1993    2002       7.11        6.93         15.61         14.73        6.51          6.36
 Guyana                     2        1993    1998       7.56        7.80         17.65         18.18        7.82          7.67
 Haiti                      1        2001    2001       7.00        7.00         15.40         15.40        6.50          6.50
 Honduras                   17       1992    2009       7.91        8.15         17.46         18.17        7.15          7.79
 Hungary                    8        1993    2007       9.31        9.78         18.83         18.98        8.33          8.47
 India                      3        1994    2010       7.19        8.01         17.11         17.86        6.32          6.58
 Indonesia                  7        1993    2010       7.78        8.26         17.02         17.65        6.26          6.90
 Iran                       3        1994    2005       8.80        9.13         19.12         19.27        7.93          7.77
 Iraq                       1        2007    2007       8.01        8.01         18.65         18.65        7.17          7.17
 Jamaica                    6        1993    2004       8.90        8.85         18.72         18.76        7.31          8.11
 Jordan                     6        1992    2010       8.12        8.56         18.92         19.71        7.64          7.90
 Kazakhstan                 10       1993    2009       8.59        9.24         19.58         19.50        7.33          7.76
 Kenya                      4        1992    2005       7.19        7.20         16.07         15.73        7.01          6.66
 Kyrgyzstan                 10       1993    2010       7.40        7.61         18.55         18.82        7.63          7.30
 Laos                       4        1992    2008       6.89        7.62         15.64         16.89        6.25          6.62
 Latvia                     11       1993    2009       8.68        9.46         18.51         18.96        7.76          8.47

    Note: Table AII presents a list of countries and relevant statistics for the calibration sample of country-years,
based on which we calculate weights on national accounts and survey means in the optimal proxy for log true income
per capita. We present the number of surveys each country has in the sample, the years of the earliest and latest
survey, and values of log World Bank GDP per capita (PPP-adjusted), log survey mean, and log lights per capita
(NOAA) corresponding to these years.




                                                         48
                                                Table AII (cont.)



                                        Countries included in Calibration Sample
 Country               No. Surv.    First   Last    Log GDP     Log GDP      Log Lights    Log Lights    Log Surv.      Log Surv.
                                    Year    Year    First Yr.    Last Yr.     First Yr.     Last Yr.     First Yr.      Last Yr.
 Lesotho                   3        1993    2003       6.86        7.06         16.50         16.66        6.61           6.76
 Liberia                   1        2007    2007       5.99        5.99         15.26         15.26        5.78           5.78
 Lithuania                 8        1993    2008       8.96        9.77         18.52         19.14        7.31           8.58
 Macedonia                 10       1998    2010       8.82        9.12         18.83         19.31        7.74           8.04
 Madagascar                6        1993    2010       6.82        6.76         15.20         15.53        6.07           5.81
 Malawi                    3        1998    2010       6.51        6.65         16.25         16.64        5.86           6.27
 Malaysia                  6        1992    2009       8.95        9.47         18.12         19.04        8.01           8.47
 Maldives                  2        1998    2004       8.31        8.67         14.13         14.22        7.80           7.65
 Mali                      4        1994    2010       6.48        6.87         15.53         16.67        5.65           6.32
 Mauritania                5        1993    2008       7.48        7.70         16.72         17.05        6.74           6.92
 Mexico                    11       1992    2010       9.24        9.43         18.81         19.34        8.12           8.14
 Moldova                   14       1992    2010       7.90        7.93         19.14         18.72        6.94           7.71
 Mongolia                  4        1995    2008       7.60        8.17         17.70         18.02        6.87           7.49
 Montenegro                6        2005    2010       9.01        9.22         19.00         19.72        8.08           8.24
 Morocco                   3        1999    2007       7.97        8.24         17.71         17.99        7.35           7.56
 Mozambique                3        1996    2008       6.03        6.63         15.93         16.35        5.88           6.32
 Namibia                   2        1993    2004       8.32        8.55         18.31         18.33        7.47           7.46
 Nepal                     3        1996    2010       6.72        6.98         15.66         15.89        6.11           6.70
 Nicaragua                 4        1993    2005       7.72        8.01         17.49         17.53        7.16           7.50
 Niger                     4        1992    2008       6.44        6.48         15.70         15.54        6.02           6.45
 Nigeria                   4        1992    2010       7.28        7.66         17.98         17.51        6.17           6.17
 Pakistan                  6        1997    2008       7.49        7.74         17.74         17.70        6.32           6.67
 Panama                    11       1995    2010       8.87        9.44         18.63         19.06        8.09           8.16
 Papua New Guinea          1        1996    1996       7.76        7.76         17.15         17.15        6.94           6.94
 Paraguay                  13       1995    2010       8.38        8.43         18.76         19.10        8.13           8.14
 Peru                      15       1994    2010       8.51        9.05         17.80         18.51        7.41           8.06
 Philippines               6        1994    2009       7.81        8.12         16.58         16.66        6.90           7.12
 Poland                    15       1992    2010       8.95        9.76         18.77         20.47        8.08           8.42
 Romania                   13       1992    2010       8.75        9.29         17.64         19.38        7.92           7.87
 Russia                    12       1993    2009       9.14        9.51         19.78         19.81        8.19           8.58
 Rwanda                    2        2000    2006       6.48        6.79         14.96         14.53        6.13           6.22

    Note: Table AII presents a list of countries and relevant statistics for the calibration sample of country-years,
based on which we calculate weights on national accounts and survey means in the optimal proxy for log true income
per capita. We present the number of surveys each country has in the sample, the years of the earliest and latest
survey, and values of log World Bank GDP per capita (PPP-adjusted), log survey mean, and log lights per capita
(NOAA) corresponding to these years.




                                                         49
                                                   Table AII (cont.)



                                          Countries included in Calibration Sample
 Country             No. Surv.    First     Last   Log GDP        Log GDP    Log Lights   Log Lights   Log Surv.   Log Surv.
                                  Year      Year    First Yr.     Last Yr.   First Yr.     Last Yr.    First Yr.   Last Yr.
 Senegal                 3        1994      2005      7.23         7.42        16.43        16.50        6.39           6.68
 Serbia                  9        2002      2010      8.87         9.16        19.24        20.02        8.30           8.19
 Seychelles              2        2000      2007      9.84         9.95        18.75        18.55        8.63           8.62
 Sierra Leone            1        2003      2003      6.41         6.41        14.17        14.17        6.42           6.42
 Slovakia                8        1992      2009      9.22         9.87        19.53        19.12        8.48           8.39
 Slovenia                5        1993      2004      9.59         10.02       19.02        19.23        8.80           9.01
 South Africa            5        1993      2009      8.90         9.14        18.92        18.91        7.63           8.03
 Sri Lanka               4        1996      2010      7.84         8.43        17.21        18.16        6.90           7.25
 St. Lucia               1        1995      1995      9.01         9.01        19.00        19.00        7.07           7.07
 Sudan                   1        2009      2009      7.58         7.58        17.22        17.22        6.88           6.88
 Suriname                1        1999      1999      8.52         8.52        18.98        18.98        7.71           7.71
 Swaziland               3        1995      2010      8.30         8.58        18.07        18.76        6.02           6.86
 Syria                   1        2004      2004      8.29         8.29        18.81        18.81        7.39           7.39
 Tajikistan              5        1999      2009      6.80         7.52        17.87        16.93        6.25           7.08
 Tanzania                3        1992      2007      6.71         7.05        15.51        15.48        5.98           6.09
 Thailand                10       1992      2010      8.41         8.94        17.67        19.07        7.45           7.88
 The Gambia              2        1998      2003      7.29         7.35        16.20        15.72        6.22           6.89
 Togo                    1        2006      2006      6.77         6.77        16.00        16.00        6.51           6.51
 Trinidad Tobago         1        1992      1992      9.28         9.28        19.18        19.18        7.71           7.71
 Tunisia                 4        1995      2010      8.50         9.04        18.80        19.37        7.52           7.92
 Turkey                  10       1994      2010      9.01         9.43        18.24        19.06        7.80           8.14
 Turkmenistan            2        1993      1998      8.43         8.09        18.92        19.20        6.11           6.90
 Uganda                  6        1992      2009      6.35         7.02        14.83        15.16        6.11           6.70
 Ukraine                 13       1992      2010      8.80         8.70        19.14        19.26        7.97           8.25
 Uruguay                 5        2006      2010      9.21         9.44        18.82        19.55        8.38           8.61
 Uzbekistan              3        1998      2003      7.34         7.48        18.76        18.42        6.82           6.42
 Venezuela               10       1992      2006      9.27         9.27        19.32        19.23        7.88           7.87
 Vietnam                 6        1993      2008      6.97         7.86        15.79        17.39        6.17           6.93
 Yemen                   2        1998      2005      7.62         7.71        17.34        17.56        6.98           6.91
 Zambia                  7        1993      2010      7.10         7.24        17.32        17.80        6.22           6.14

    Note: Table AII presents a list of countries and relevant statistics for the calibration sample of country-years,
based on which we calculate weights on national accounts and survey means in the optimal proxy for log true income
per capita. We present the number of surveys each country has in the sample, the years of the earliest and latest
survey, and values of log World Bank GDP per capita (PPP-adjusted), log survey mean, and log lights per capita
(NOAA) corresponding to these years.




                                                             50
                                                   Table AIII                                                (AIII)



                                      Comparison of PovcalNet and LIS
      Country       Year     PovcalNet       PovcalNet         LIS (2013)   NA (WB 2013)      NA (WB 2013)
                             (CR 2010)       (CR 2010)         Disposable    Consumption           GDP
                           Inc. Concept    Survey Mean        Income Mean
      Brazil        2006     Income           3893.87           6043.15        7032.49            8753.23
      Colombia      2004     Income            2091             3749.59         5871.28           7083.99
      Estonia       2000   Consumption        3292.19           7381.67         8659.44          11512.50
      Guatemala     2006     Income           2399.39           4884.08        4014.18            4175.75
      Hungary       1999   Consumption        3376.67            8278          10000.29          13085.22
      Mexico        1998     Income           2747.03           5549.40        8579.94           11030.44
      Mexico        2000     Income           3330.11           6609.20        9260.07           11852.71
      Mexico        2002     Income           3311.28           6634.41        9431.04           11621.00
      Mexico        2004     Income           3498.71           6893.38        9221.80           11959.30
      Peru          2004     Income           2553.59           4149.02        4742.52            6048.31
      Poland        1999   Consumption        3580.32           8249.87         9043.51          11212.92
      Poland        2004   Consumption        4087.91           8403.37        10941.17          13297.13

    Note: Table AIII presents a list of survey means from PovcalNet (CR 2010) and from the Luxembourg Income
Study (LIS 2013), as well as a list of national accounts consumption and GDP per capita from the World Bank for
12 country-years for which both a PovcalNet survey and a LIS survey is available. It also presents the corresponding
income concept for the PovcalNet survey (the LIS income concept is household disposable income).




                                                         51
