NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADVERTISING AND ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP:
EVIDENCE FROM THE BP OIL SPILL
Lint Barrage
Eric Chyn
Justine Hastings
Working Paper 19838
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19838

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014, Revised April 2019

Previous versions of this manuscript were circulated with the title: “Advertising, Reputation, and
Environmental Stewardship: Evidence from the BP Oil Spill.” We thank Dan Silverman, three
anonymous referees, Ryan Kellogg, Matthew Kahn, Richard Schmalensee, and Jesse Shapiro for
helpful comments. Phillip Ross provided outstanding research assistance. Hastings gratefully
acknowledges funding through Brown University, Department of Economics and Population
Studies and Training Center. Chyn gratefully acknowledges support from an NICHD training
grant to the Population Studies Center at the University of Michigan (T32 HD007339). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lint Barrage, Eric Chyn, and Justine Hastings. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Advertising and Environmental Stewardship: Evidence from the BP Oil Spill
Lint Barrage, Eric Chyn, and Justine Hastings
NBER Working Paper No. 19838
January 2014, Revised April 2019
JEL No. H0,H23,L0,M3,M38,Q5
ABSTRACT
This paper explores whether private markets can incentivize environmental stewardship. We
examine the consumer response to the 2010 BP oil spill and test how BP's investment in the
2000-2008 “Beyond Petroleum” green advertising campaign affected this response. We find
evidence consistent with consumer punishment: BP station margins and volumes declined by 2.9
cents per gallon and 4.2 percent, respectively, in the month after the spill. However, pre-spill
advertising significantly dampened the price response, and may have reduced brand switching by
BP stations. These results indicate that firms may have incentives to engage in green advertising
without investments in environmental stewardship.
Lint Barrage
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
lint_barrage@brown.edu

Justine Hastings
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
justine.s.hastings@gmail.com

Eric Chyn
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904
ericchyn@virginia.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19838

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

I

Introduction

How does advertising shape consumer behavior and firm incentives to undertake costly
and hidden investment in product quality? The answer to this question informs a debate
over whether private markets can provide incentives for public goods such as environmental stewardship in production of goods and services. One view holds that advertising can
provide valuable information to consumers who seek to support firms that base production
decisions on environmental and sustainability concerns. Another view suggests firms may
use advertising as a means of creating spurious product differentiation and brand loyalty in
green markets.1
This paper provides novel evidence on the role of advertising in green markets by studying the consumer response to the British Petroleum (BP) Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill in
2010, one of the largest oil-related environmental disasters to date.2 Prior to the spill,
BP undertook one of the most successful corporate advertising campaigns entitled “Beyond
Petroleum.” Between 2000 and 2008, BP debuted a new logo – a Helios (sun) symbol – and
rebranded the BP acronym (i.e., the slogan “Beyond Petroleum” replaced the name British
Petroleum). These actions reflected a newly stated dedication to environmental stewardship
and commitment to production methods that mitigated environmental degradation. Consumers appeared to have internalized this message as surveys fielded during the campaign
consistently rated BP as the most environmentally friendly oil company during the mid2000s (Landor Associates and Cohn and Wolfe and Penn, Schoen and Berland Associates,
2007, 2008).
1

This discussion of advertising relates to two types of models of the economics of advertising (Bagwell,
2007). One type of model suggests that advertising provides information that can enhance market efficiency
when there is imperfect consumer information and costly search. A second type of model holds that advertising is persuasive, thus potentially protecting firms even in the event of negative product news (Minor and
Morgan, 2011).
2
In April 2010, an oil well blowout caused multiple explosions and led to the eventual sinking of the
Deepwater Horizon oil drilling rig. An estimated 205.8 million gallons of oil flowed from the well in the
ensuing weeks (National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling, 2011).
Despite containment efforts, the spill led to the world’s largest accidental release of oil into marine waters.
On November 5, 2012, BP formally pled guilty to charges of environmental crimes and agreed to pay $4
billion to settle its criminal case with the United States government (United States, 2013).

2

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

The Beyond Petroleum campaign and subsequent BP oil spill provide a natural setting
to study how advertising affects firm incentives to provide public goods. Absent third-party
certification, advertising is the main mechanism through which firms make environmental
quality claims to consumers. Whether consumer valuation of environmental stewardship can
successfully incentivize its provision in equilibrium depends critically on whether consumers
punish firms for deviating from advertised product attributes (Besley and Ghatak, 2007).
Our analysis proceeds in two steps. First, we estimate the consumer response to the BP
oil spill using detailed data on gasoline station prices and a select measure of sales from
January 2009 to December 2010. We identify impacts by comparing outcomes for BP and
a comparison group of stations in periods before and after the spill. This difference-indifferences approach indicates that there was an economically and statistically significant
consumer response to the oil spill. Retail prices at BP stations declined by 2.9 cents per
gallon relative to the comparison stations in the first month after the spill (May 2010).
This impact represents up to an 18 percent decline in profit margin relative to industry
standards. In addition, BP sales declined on average by 4.2 percent among our sample
of station customers (Wright Express fleet card holders). For the entire period before BP
capped the oil leak (May-September 2010), there was an average price decline of 1.1 cents
per gallon.
The second step in our analysis studies how advertising modified the consumer response
to the spill by combining station-level data with metropolitan-level data on BP advertising
during the 2000s. Our core measure focuses on corporate advertisements (i.e., ads related
to the BP Corporation, BP fuels, and environmental issues) during the Beyond Petroleum
campaign (2000-2008). To address the potential endogeneity of advertising expenditures, we
construct a novel instrumental variable (IV) based on the number of elections for mayors, U.S.
Senators, and Governors in each metropolitan statistical area (MSA) during the period of the
Beyond Petroleum campaign. Electoral calendars are legally preset and should be exogenous
to any unobserved area characteristics correlated with demand responses to the BP oil spill.

3

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

At the same time, this instrument should be relevant because political advertising displaces
other forms of advertising. This idea stems from Sinkinson and Starc (2018) who study
pharmaceutical advertising using a similar IV strategy based on the primary calendar for
the 2008 national election.
Our advertising results show that the negative impact of the oil spill on BP prices was
significantly less severe in areas with more pre-spill advertising. Moreover, this protective
effect on prices was significantly stronger in areas where consumers have “green preferences”
as captured by an index measure based on the local area share of hybrid vehicles and support
for environmental organizations.3 We also find suggestive evidence that advertising appeared
to mitigate longer-run effects of the oil spill. Utilizing an event study framework, we find
that markets with low pre-spill advertising suffered significantly greater losses in BP retail
outlet share after the spill. The losses amount to a six percent decline relative to the mean
in areas with low pre-spill advertising. Though subject to the limitations of event studies,
these results are consistent with the possibility that during-spill profit losses may have been
large enough to induce station owners to switch to alternative brands, and BP investments
in green advertising dampened those impacts.
The evidence of a mitigating effect of the Beyond Petroleum campaign suggests that advertising provides insurance against reputational costs. This may occur because advertising
and other types of corporate social responsibility shift beliefs about whether an adverse event
was due to negligence or bad luck (Minor and Morgan, 2011).4 This interpretation is consistent with the idea that advertising plays more of a persuasive rather than an informative
role.5
3
The index measure that we construct follows similar approaches by List and Sturm (2006); Kahn (2007);
Kahn and Vaughn (2009).
4
One alternative explanation is that positive brand recognition or non-environmental brand value (such
as habit formation) buoyed demand (Clark, Doraszelski and Draganska, 2009). While we only observe one
history of BP advertising, we compare the effects of core corporate and environmental advertising during
the Beyond Petroleum campaign against the effects of local and ancillary BP station product ads. We find
significantly larger protective effects of environmentally-themed corporate advertisements in areas where
consumers exhibit “green” preferences.
5
Recent empirical evidence supports the idea that persuasive advertising is effective. Bertrand et al.
(2010) find that non-informative advertising – such as an attractive woman’s photo – can affect demand

4

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

In terms of contribution, this paper stands at the intersection of three literatures. First,
we add to studies of the causal impact of advertising on consumer behavior. Recent work has
studied the impact of advertising using price and expenditure related instruments (Dube and
Manchanda, 2005; Iizuka and Jin, 2005; Chou, Rashad and Grossman, 2008; Liu and Gupta,
2011; Dinner, Van Heerde and Neslin, 2014) and experimental methods (Bertrand et al.,
2010; Lewis and Reiley, 2014; Lewis and Rao, 2015). Most closely related to our analysis
is Sinkinson and Starc (2018) who pioneered the use of an instrumental variable approach
based on political campaigns and found positive impacts of advertising on pharmaceutical
sales. Our paper complements prior studies by examining how advertising affects consumer
behavior in the aftermath of a negative event. In this sense, our analysis secondly relates
to a literature that shows accidents, regulatory violations and product recalls have negative
impacts on firm performance (Jarrell and Peltzman, 1985; Hoffer, Pruitt and Reilly, 1988;
Barber and Darrough, 1996; Borenstein and Zimmerman, 1988; Karpoff, Lott and Wehrly,
2005; Dranove and Jin, 2010; Minor and Morgan, 2011; Freedman, Kearney and Lederman,
2010). We add to this literature by examining consumer responses to a large environmental
disaster.
Third, we contribute to studies of consumer information and deception. A growing number of empirical studies find that advertising may induce consumers to make less informed
purchasing decisions. This could weaken demand responses as a market disciplining mechanism to sustain firms’ commitment to product quality. For example, Jin and Kato (2006)
find that online sellers can earn price premiums for unverified product quality claims even
when those are misleading. Similarly, Zinman and Zitzewitz (2016) document deceptive
advertising in the context of snowfall and ski reports. Bronnenberg et al. (2015) find that
misinformation accounts for a sizable portion of brand premiums for health products such
as pain relievers. Finally, Rao and Wang (2017) find that firms gained significant revenues
by making false claims about the health attributes of consumer products. They find signifsignificantly even when consumers had previously purchased the advertised product.

5

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

icant declines in demand when the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) ordered termination
of misleading claims. However, this effect is heterogeneous with large responses by newcomers and more muted effects for existing customers. Our results are consistent with the idea
that advertising may provide protective benefits to firms that make unsubstantiated product
claims.
Overall, our findings relate to public policy debates over consumer protection and regulation. A concern is that persuasive advertising affects consumer demand and weakens
incentives for firms to invest in product quality. Misleading advertising is especially policyrelevant in the environmental realm, where there are concerns about a “greenwashing” equilibrium.6 With this in mind, several policies could enhance efficiency in markets where
consumers seek to purchase environmentally friendly goods and services. For example, both
truth-in-advertising regulations and third-party evaluations of product claims have been effective in other contexts.7 Yet, a concern is that these policies may be difficult to apply to
broad environmental campaigns or marketing that includes nature-based imagery.8 These
considerations suggest that price-based regulations (e.g., pollution taxes or penalties) likely
remain a first-best policy solution to environmental externalities. We present a detailed
discussion of policy options in Section V.
II

Background

From 2000 to 2008, BP conducted a public relations and marketing campaign that sought
to align the company with environmental issues. BP introduced a new slogan, “Beyond
Petroleum,” and redesigned the company logo to a green and yellow Helios sun. BP adver6

See Laufer (2003) and references therein. Ramus and Montiel (2005) contrast firms’ environmental policy
statements and implementation. Non-governmental organizations such as TerraChoice evaluate greenwashing
at the product-level. Empirical evidence for the potential success of greenwashing has been documented based
on survey perceptions, web experiments, and media accounts (Parguel, Benot-Moreau and Larceneux, 2011;
Nyilasy, Gangadharbatla and Paladino, 2014; Berrone, Fosfuri and Gelabert, 2017).
7
For example, Jin and Leslie (2003) provide evidence on the impact of third-party evaluations by studying
restaurant hygiene ratings. For truth-in-advertising rules in the environmental realm, see Rohmer (2007).
8
For example, Parguel, Benoit-Moreau and Russell (2015) provide experimental evidence that evoking
nature in advertising misleads consumers in their evaluation of a brand’s ecological image.

6

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

tisements emphasized that the company was investing to make operations more efficient and
reduce environmental impacts (Cherry and Sneirson, 2010).9
This marketing appeared to impact industry and consumer stakeholders. The Beyond
Petroleum campaign won two PR Week “Campaign of the Year” awards and received the
Gold Effie Award from the American Marketing Association in 2007 (Solman, 2008).10 Survey data suggests consumers were aware of the environmental messaging. In 2008, Landor
Associates, a marketing firm, found that 33 percent of survey respondents believed BP was
a “green” brand. Respondents also ranked BP as the greenest of the major petroleum companies (Landor Associates and Cohn and Wolfe and Penn, Schoen and Berland Associates,
2007, 2008). A poll by Marketing Week also ranked BP third in terms of companies that
made the greatest commitment to environmental issues (Marketing Week, 2008).11
Why did BP invest in environmental branding? Prior research shows that consumers
are willing to pay for environmental stewardship as a product attribute (Nimon and Beghin,
1999; Forsyth, Haley and Kozak, 1999; Goett, Hudson and Train, 2000; Loureiro, McCluskey
and Mittelhammer, 2001; Roe et al., 2001; Teisl, Roe and Hicks, 2002; Pelsmacker et al.,
2006; Kahn, 2007; Kahn and Vaughn, 2009; Kiesel and Villas-Boas, 2013). In addition, the
literature has found that advertising increases demand for advertised products (Ackerberg,
2001; Dube and Manchanda, 2005; Bagwell, 2007; Sorensen, 2007; Bertrand et al., 2010;
Clark, Doraszelski and Draganska, 2009; Simester et al., 2009; Friberg and Grnqvist, 2012;
Hastings, Hortasu and Syverson, 2017; Gurun, Matvos and Seru, 2016; Lewis and Reiley,
2014; Garthwaite, 2014).
While there may be demand for environmental quality, consumers do not know directly
whether a product has this attribute (in the absence of third party certification). This
9

For example, one TV ad featured a narrator asking “Is it possible to drive a car and still have a clean
environment?” and “Can business go further and be a force for good?” Speaking on the behalf of BP, the
narrator affirms: “We think so” (BBC News, 2000).
10
Specifically, the campaign won the following: PR Week, Brand Development Campaign of the Year
(winner), International Campaign of the Year (honorable mention), Internal Communications Campaign of
the Year (winner) for “Taking BP Beyond” (PR Week, 2001).
11
At the same time, several environmental and advocacy groups, such as Greenpeace and Corpwatch,
already criticized BP’s re-branding as “greenwashing” (Bruno, 2000).

7

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

suggests at least two motivations for green-themed advertising. First, one class of model
shows that firms can use advertising as a sunk cost to signal their investment in product
quality (Grossman and Shapiro, 1984; Milgrom and Roberts, 1986; Cabral, 2005). Second,
advertising could play a persuasive role that convinces consumers that negative events are
accidental and due to “bad luck” (Minor and Morgan, 2011). In this sense, advertising
changes customer beliefs about firm behavior and acts as insurance. Such beliefs could
mitigate consumer punishment and thereby decrease the incentives for firms to invest in
hard-to-observe product characteristics.12
The period after the Beyond Petroleum marketing campaign provides a unique opportunity to study environmental advertising due to the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill. In April
2010, an oil well blowout sunk the Deepwater Horizon rig, and robotic monitoring devices
soon discovered that oil was leaking from the damaged well. BP sought to contain the leak,
but their efforts were unsuccessful until engineers installed a “containment dome” in July
2010 (Aigner et al., 2010). Officials declared that the damaged well was “effectively dead”
after a relief well was completed in September 2010. Scientific experts estimated that 205.8
million gallons of oil had leaked before containment (Department of Interior, 2010). Subsequent investigations found that the cause of the spill was attributable to active management
decisions on behalf of BP.13
12
More broadly, models of ex-ante unobservable product quality provision have found that firms must
face financial sanctions for false product quality claims (such as advertising) as incentives for equilibrium
quality provision (see Cabral (2005) for a survey of this literature). Models of private provision of public
goods have similarly formalized this point (Besley and Ghatak, 2007). In addition, punishment may be more
difficult if deviation is hard to detect. In our setting, negative news about environmental stewardship may
only occur probabilistically. Consumers must infer events are the result of shirking on quality promises and
decrease demand accordingly.
13
A non-partisan commission found that “the immediate cause of the blowout could be traced to a series of
identifiable mistakes made by BP” and its contractors. In addition, the commission concluded that “[w]hether
purposeful or not, many of the decisions that BP, Halliburton and Transocean made that increased the risk
of the Macondo blowout clearly saved those companies significant time (and money)” (National Commission
on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling, 2011). Officials at the Department of Justice
concluded that “the explosion of the rig was a disaster that resulted from BP’s culture of privileging profit
over prudence” (Brewer, 2012).

8

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

III

Data Sources and Sample Construction

We use several proprietary data sources to study the impact of the BP oil spill and
advertising. This section provides a summary of our sample construction and key variables.
A brief overview is as follows. We begin by creating a sample of BP and comparison group
stations using data from the Oil Price Information Service (OPIS) (2009-2010). The OPIS
data contain station-level information on regular grade retail gasoline prices, a select measure
of sales volumes based on fleet card holders (further detailed below) and brand affiliation.
Next, we match the sample of stations to wholesale gasoline prices from OPIS based on
distribution terminal (“rack”) prices aggregated at the state-week level. The linked data
allow us to compute net prices as a measure of retail margins. In addition, we link the
sample of stations to Designated Market Area (DMA) measures of BP advertising obtained
from Kantar Media.14 Finally, we link the sample of stations to local area proxies of consumer
preference for environmental protection, demographics, and elections. These measures vary
at the state or zip code level.
A

Station-Level Sample

We create a sample of gasoline stations using data from OPIS, which collects information
from two sources. First, OPIS observes stations over time based on Wright Express fleet
fuel card “swipes.”15 This information is available for stations that accept this fleet card on
days when fleet card transactions happen (i.e., an individual must use their fleet card for a
particular station on a particular day).16 The fleet card is widely accepted across the U.S.
14

A DMA is a geographic area that represents a specific television market as defined by and updated
annually by Nielsen.
15
Wright Express uses fleet card swipes and reports the last daily transaction at each station to OPIS. The
price is based on the transaction total sales amount and the volume of gallons sold. As with all scanner data,
the process can result in errors. Because only the last purchase of the day is reported, it is more difficult to
clean out errors than in scanner data for which many purchases are recorded for the same product each day.
Prices are more accurate in recent years because there are more purchases recorded for stations each week
and the data is easier for Wright Express and OPIS to clean. We drop only one percent of price observations
based on sudden and large one-day changes in prices.
16
See also Busse, Knittel and Zettelmeyer (2013) for another description of these data.

9

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Second, since 2009, OPIS has expanded its data collection to include reporting agreements
with several gasoline refiner-marketers that provide data for additional stations that do not
accept the fleet card.17 Between these two sources, OPIS has data for over 100,000 stations
across the United States.
We define the sample for our analysis based on two considerations. First most stations
are available only for a portion of the years 2009-2010 or have sporadically reported prices.
Given our interest in station-level variation in prices and fleet sales over time, we focus on zip
codes where OPIS reporting meets minimum density criteria.18 Each zip must have at least
five stations with at least three price observations per week for our entire sample period. We
keep data for all stations located in this list of zip codes.
The second consideration is to ensure sufficient geographic congruity between treatment
and control stations. Our empirical analysis compares prices at BP branded stations (the
treatment group) to a comparison group of stations in zip codes without any BP stations.
Note that the data contains information on a station’s brand over time, and we identify BP
stations based on the brand observed in January 2009. Our preferred control group excludes
non-BP stations in close proximity to BP stores as their prices were likely impacted by the
spill as well. In the United States, the BP brand has a broad presence east of the Mississippi
River, but becomes more selectively concentrated toward the West. To ensure that our
empirical analysis compares treatment and comparison stations in comparable regions, we
restrict the analyses to EIA areas where BP has a sufficient brand presence: the East Coast
(PADD 1), the Midwest (PADD 2), and the Gulf Coast (PADD 3). Based on these criteria,
we create a sample that contains 5,526 and 4,997 stations for the (separate) analyses of
station-level prices and fleet sales, respectively.19 Note that we test the robustness of the
results for prices and fleet sales to changes in the sample inclusion criteria.20
17

For a list of stations that accept the fleet card, see www.wrightexpress.com.
Further details on how we clean the data and define our sample are in the Online Appendix Section A2.
19
The number of stations with price observations is larger since some OPIS sources only report prices,
and OPIS obtains volume information solely from fleet card swipes. There are 4,975 stations in the sample
that have data on both prices and fleet card sales.
20
Online Appendix Table A3 replicates the main results in a sample that includes direct BP competitors.
18

10

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

B

Net Price, Fleet Card Sales and Brand Outcomes

For stations in the sample, the OPIS data contain station-level information on retail prices
for regular grade gasoline, sales to fleet card holders and brand affiliation. The retail prices
for each station are at the daily level, which we aggregate to a weekly measure because most
stations do not report a price every day. We construct a net price measure (an estimate of
retail price margin) after linking the sample to additional data from OPIS on wholesale prices.
The wholesale prices stem from local gasoline distribution terminals (“racks”). We use statelevel averages of minimum rack prices, averaged over the relevant retail gasoline formulations
sold in a given state-week (e.g., 10 percent ethanol reformulated gasoline where applicable or
locally relevant Reid Vapor Pressure formulations). This is a regionally appropriate measure
of wholesale prices that accounts for supply shocks at a high temporal frequency that matches
the retail price data.21 Formally, we construct the weekly station-level net price of station i
in state j during week t as:

(1)

netpricei,t ≡ AvgRetailP ricei,t − AvgW holesaleP ricej,t

As mentioned, we focus on weekly net prices because most stations do not post prices
for every day during a week (data are typically available up to six days per week). In
our regression specifications (detailed in Section IV), we weight weekly price and quantity
observations by the underlying number of daily observations within the station-week.
For stations that accept fleet cards (as opposed to stations whose parent companies only
report prices to OPIS), total gasoline sales to fleet cards are recorded at the weekly level.
While limited, these data represent, to our knowledge, the only station-level volume data
Online Appendix Tables A4 and A5 present specifications using all OPIS data regardless of whether stations
are missing large portions of data or whether most competitors in the station’s area are not in the OPIS
data. The results for this unfiltered sample are very similar. Finally, the main results are similar or larger
in the full U.S. sample (see Barrage, Chyn and Hastings (2014)).
21
In contrast, alternative wholesale price data such as from the Energy Information Administration (EIA)
are based on surveys of gasoline refiners, which are conducted at a monthly level.

11

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship
currently available.22 Fleet card drivers range from professional drivers to employees and
members of small business or other entities (e.g., municipalities). Although these customers’
preferences may differ from the broader population, these data provide a glimpse into consumer behavior.
Finally, we also use the OPIS data to create a measure of BP’s share of stations within
each zip code at the monthly level. The underlying data contain information on each station’s
brand of gasoline at the weekly level. We aggregate this information into a monthly measure
to explore longer-run brand switching behavior. (Our main analysis uses the station’s initial
brand in January 2009 to define treatment and comparison group indicators that do not vary
over time.)
C

Advertising Measures

We link each station in the sample to measures of advertising from Kantar Media’s
Ad$pender database.23 Kantar uses tracking technologies and services to monitor advertising
on television (cable and network), online, or in print publications such as business-to-business
magazines, consumer magazines and news publications, and on internet sites. Kantar also
collects outdoor and local radio advertising information from other marketing subscription
services and directly from media providers (e.g., radio stations or billboard plant operators).24
We use data on BP advertising for the years 2000-2010. The underlying observations
are at the monthly level and provide information on the media type and market (DMA).
The data also identify the parent company (e.g., BP), distinguish between brands (e.g., BP
service station vs. Amoco service station) and differentiate between the specific products
22

The alternative panel data on gasoline sales volumes of which we are aware are state-aggregated (over
all brands and suppliers) sales volumes reported to the EIA by oil companies through survey responses
(Hastings and Shapiro, 2013).
23
Kantar collects information on advertising expenditures on the following 18 types of media: network
television, spot television, cable television, Spanish language network television, syndication, magazines,
business-to-business magazines, Sunday magazines, Hispanic magazines, local magazines, national newspapers, local newspapers, Hispanic newspapers, network radio, national spot radio, local radio, internet and
outdoor activities.
24
For more details, see Ad$pender manual (Kantar Media, 2011). See also other papers that have used
these data: Saffer and Dave (2006); Chou, Rashad and Grossman (2008); Clark, Doraszelski and Draganska
(2009); Gurun, Matvos and Seru (2016).

12

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

advertised (e.g., BP energy utilities vs. BP gasoline).
Our main advertising measure is the sum of pre-spill BP advertising expenditures during
the years of the Beyond Petroleum campaign (2000-2008) at the DMA level. This measure
includes all advertising that focused on the BP Corporation, BP fuel products, and environmental issues. We aggregate advertising expenditures across all media as our measure
of advertising exposure. This specification assumes there are stock effects of advertising on
demand (Dube and Manchanda, 2005). For the robustness analysis, we also construct a
measure of all advertising during the BP oil spill period (March to September 2010). We
also construct a detailed measure of advertising for ancillary products and convenience stores
at BP stations.25
D

Elections Measure

We link each station in the sample to a measure of local area elections. This measure
allows us to construct an instrumental variable to address the concern that BP advertising
may be endogenous to each area’s unobserved preferences for the BP brand. Electoral
calendars are plausibly exogenous to spill impacts because they are preset by law. In other
words, there should be no correlation between population preferences or other unobserved
characteristics that are correlated with demand responses to the BP oil spill.26 The relevance
of this instrument stems from the effect of political campaigns on the costs of advertising.
There is cross-sectional variation in the cost of advertising due to the differences in the
number of elections each city experienced during the Beyond Petroleum campaign. This
logic follows Sinkinson and Starc (2018), who utilized variation in political advertising levels
across DMAs in the run-up to the 2008 election to instrument for pharmaceutical advertising
25

Since our analysis relies on cross-sectional variation in BP advertising across DMAs, one may be concerned about the relative importance of local versus national BP advertising, and whether our regressions
capture meaningful variation. We note that local media (non-national newspapers, spot TV, and outdoor)
account for the majority of our advertising measures (73 percent for our core 2000-2008 BP advertising
measure). See Online Appendix Figure A3 for a break-down of local, national and mixed media for each of
the three advertising measures that we use in our analysis.
26
For example, state assignment to different electoral calendars of the U.S. Senate Classes 1, 2, or 3 was
randomly determined by a coin toss or lot drawing (U.S. Senate, 2018).

13

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

exposures across states. The variation in their setting is due to displacement of non-political
advertising due to differences in primary election dates and electoral competitiveness across
states and time. In contrast, our specific instrument is the total number of elections for U.S.
Senators, Governors, and mayors that each MSA experienced during the Beyond Petroleum
campaign years (2000-2008).27
E

Local Area Characteristics and Measures of Green Preferences

Finally, we link each station to measures of local area characteristics and green preferences. Specifically, we use the 2000 U.S. Census to obtain measures of zip code level median
household income. We follow prior studies to study green preferences. For example, List and
Sturm (2006) use per capita membership in environmental organizations at the state level.
Kahn (2007) uses California Green Party registrations and shows that they are a significant
predictor of demand for green products, such as hybrid vehicle registrations. Kahn and
Vaughn (2009) create a green index based on California referendum voting outcomes and
Green Party registrations; they document that hybrid vehicles and LEED-certified buildings cluster in politically green communities. Similar to these prior studies, we collect the
following measures and aggregate them into a “Green Index” score:28
• Hybrids Cars: Share of hybrid-electric vehicle registrations in 2007 in each zip code
obtained from R.L. Polk automotive data. We chose the year 2007 to exclude hybrid
car purchases caused by the 2008 spike in gasoline prices.
• Sierra Club Membership: Per-capita Sierra Club membership in 2010 at the state level
created using data from the Sierra Club and the U.S. Census Bureau.
• LEED Buildings: The number of LEED-registered buildings per-capita in each zip,
27
We match the Kantar data, which are at the Designated Market Area (DMA) level, to zip codes using
the county-DMA correspondence provided by Gentzkow and Shapiro (2008), in conjunction with a county-zip
correspondence from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
28
We also experimented with including measures of Democratic Party committee contributions and Barack
Obama’s vote share from the 2008 presidential election. However, these measures appeared to decrease the
explanatory power of the Green Index.

14

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

obtained from the U.S. Green Building Council (accessed in June 2011).
• Green Party Contributions: Average per-capita contributions to Green Party committees in 2003-2004 and 2007-2008 at the zip code level, computed using individual level
data from the Federal Election Commission.29,30
We first aggregate these variables by computing z-scores for each measure and taking the
sum. We then create an indicator variable “Green Zip” to classify zip codes based on whether
they have above or below median Green Index scores.
F

Summary Statistics

Online Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics for all measures used for our
main analysis. Station-level weekly net prices were $0.55 on average during our sample
period (2009-2010). For the analysis, we rely on the station-level price difference between
the pre- and post-spill period averages. The mean change in price is 5 cents in our sample,
which reflects the fact that retail gas prices generally increased between 2009 and 2010.
For the 645 unique zips covered by our sample of stations, the average median household
income (based on the 2000 Census) is approximately $48,000, which was slightly higher
than the national median income of $42,000 (US Census Bureau, 2001). Online Appendix
Table A1 also shows that the average DMA in our sample received about $1.64 million of
BP advertising during the Beyond Petroleum campaign years (2000-2008). For this set of
DMAs, there was an average of 7.63 elections during this same period.
Online Appendix Figure A2 provides aggregate summary statistics for the states covered
by our sample of stations. Panel (c) shows that BP advertising prior to the spill was highest in
several Midwestern (Illinois, Indiana, Ohio) and Southeastern (Florida and Georgia) states.
Panel (d) shows that the states with the highest number of elections during the Beyond
Petroleum years were Texas, Missouri, North Carolina and Michigan. As expected, there is
29

The Federal Election Commission data cover all individual contributions over $200.
To maintain comparability with the income data, contributions are converted to 1999 dollars using the
CPI inflation calculator from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
30

15

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship
no apparent pattern of geographic clustering in our measure of elections.31
IV
A

Empirical Analysis

The Consumer Response to the BP Oil Spill

We begin by examining the impact of the BP oil spill on station prices and fleet card
sales using a difference-in-difference style approach. Our approach designates BP stations as
the treatment group, and we use non-BP stations that are not in the same zip code as a BP
station as the comparison group. As mentioned, this definition excludes non-BP stations in
close proximity because the oil spill may have had an impact on these stations as well.32
Formally, the model is a regression of station net price or fleet sales on station fixed
effects, indicators for the during- and post-spill periods, and interactions of those time period
dummies with an indicator of whether a station sells BP-branded gasoline:

yi,t = αi + β1 duringt + β2 postt + θ1 (duringt × BPi ) + θ2 (posti × BPi ) + i,t

(2)

where yi,t is an outcome for station i in period t, αi is a station-level fixed effect, duringt is
an indicator equal to one if period t is during the oil spill, postt is an indicator equal to one
if period t is after the spill (defined by the official capping of the leak in September 2010),
and BPi is an indicator of whether station i sells BP branded gasoline. We cluster standard
errors at the zip code level.33
Our preferred specification aggregates net prices and quantities sold at the time period
level. This approach addresses the possibility that autocorrelation in weekly measures of net
31

In addition, Online Appendix Table A2 shows that there are no significant correlations between the
total number of elections during 2000-2008 and MSA-level characteristics.
32
In Section B, we discuss results based on including non-BP stations within BP markets as part of the
comparison group.
33
The literature on retail gasoline competition typically defines market measures within a one-to-two mile
radius around a given station (Barron, Taylor and Umbeck, 2004; Eckert and West, 2004; Hastings, 2004;
Hosken, McMillan and Taylor, 2008; Chandra and Tappata, 2011). As the average zip code in the United
States comprises approximately 86 square miles, clustering at the zip level is appropriate given the localized
nature of retail gasoline competition.

16

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

prices or fleet sales might bias standard errors (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan, 2004).
Specifically, we address this concern by collapsing the weekly net price and fleet sales data
into averages within three time periods: a pre-spill period (January 1, 2009 through April 16,
2010), a during-spill period (April 23, 2010 through September 17, 2010), and a post-spill
period (September 18, 2010 to December 31, 2010). Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 report
results from this level of aggregation. For comparison, Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 provide
results using the disaggregated weekly net price and fleet sales data.34
[Table 1 about here.]
All specifications show a negative and statistically significant effect of the oil spill on
both prices and fleet sales at BP stations relative to the comparison group. BP stations
experienced a relative price decrease of 1.1 cents per gallon and a 4.2 percent drop in sales
from fleet customers on average in the five months after the spill.35 Table 2 estimates the
month-by-month change in BP prices and fleet sales relative to control stations. In the
month after the spill (May 2010), BP stations experienced a peak price decline of 2.9 cents
per gallon relative to comparison stations. Fleet sales impacts reached their peak in June
2010 at a 7.5 percent loss (relative to the comparison group). To put these effects in context,
the National Association of Convenience Stores (NACS) estimates that the average retail
mark-up was 16.3 cents per gallon in 2010 (NACS, 2011). Using this statistic, the largest
monthly point estimate represents an 18 percent decline in retail margins. However, we
also see that these effects are temporary. In the post-spill period, BP retail station prices
rebound, although quantities remain depressed.
[Table 2 about here.]
34

In both specifications, the aggregate observations for each station in each time period are weighted by
the number of underlying observations from the disaggregated (daily) data.
35
Because the measure of volume comes from fleet sales, we prefer reduced-form regressions for price and
quantity. Using our data to estimate structural parameters of the change in preferences resulting from the
spill would require an assumption that fleet sale demand is the same as non-fleet sale demand (which we do
not observe). In addition, as prices and sales are not available at all stations, estimating a demand system
based on a random utility model is problematic.

17

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Figure 1 illustrates our main results by displaying the mean weekly price (level) for the
BP and control stations.36 The vertical lines denote the beginning and capping of the oil
spill, respectively. Prior to the spill, our sample of BP stations has higher prices, on average,
compared to the control group. Almost immediately following the oil spill, this BP premium
collapses, consistent with the estimated relative price decline. Over the ensuing months, the
BP premium begins to recover.
[Figure 1 about here.]
We also compare these estimated impacts with a measure of public interest in the BP oil
spill. Figure 2 plots estimates from Table 2 against Google search intensity for the phrase
“oil spill.” In a given month, the Google search intensity is the ratio of searches relative to
a baseline month of January 2004. (For example, a value of 50 indicates that searches in a
month were 50 times greater than they were in January 2004.) The number of searches for
the term “oil spill” intensified dramatically in early May 2010 and peaked on June 4, which
was one day after a BP apology campaign began airing. The results suggest that public
interest in the spill was significant around the time of the spill, and the evolution of public
interest coincides with the peak price and fleet sales impacts.
[Figure 2 about here.]
B

Basic Robustness Checks

We conduct three exercises to examine the robustness of our main results to alternative
sample definitions. First, Online Appendix Table A3 shows that the results are robust to
including non-BP stations within the same zip code as BP stations in the comparison group.
The estimated average price impact is attenuated slightly (from −1.1 cents to −0.7 cents
per gallon), suggesting that nearby BP competitor stations partially matched the reduction
in prices at BP stations.
36

Figure 1 “zooms in” on the 2010 period. Online Appendix Figure A1 shows the same information for
the full sample time frame January 2009-2010.

18

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Second, Online Appendix Tables A4 and A5 repeat the main analysis on the unfiltered
sample of stations in the OPIS data (located in PADD 1, 2 and 3). Recall that we define
the sample to include only stations that are located in zips where there at least five stations
with three prices per week for our entire sample period. In the unrestricted OPIS sample,
we obtain results that are very similar in magnitude to the results in Tables 1 and 2.
Third, we also conduct an additional analysis of stations located in areas not subject to
summertime gasoline Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) standard regulations. Such gasoline content regulations can cause local seasonal increases in gasoline prices.37 This is not necessarily
a threat to our analysis of net prices because state wholesale prices incorporate all relevant
gasoline formulations sold in a given state-week. That is, this measure of cost captures state
average price increases due to seasonal gasoline content regulations. At the same time, it
is possible that, within each state, BP stations are more likely to be located in zip codes
subject to RVP requirements than comparison group stations.
Panels (a) and (b) of Appendix Figure A4 show the evolution of BP and comparison
group station price levels over time for stations located in areas that are and are not subject
to summertime RVP regulations, respectively. Both series show similar pre-spill trends
with higher average prices at BP stations. After the spill, this premium disappears in
both regulated and non-regulated areas, with an even stronger decline in the latter. Online
Appendix Table A6 expands on these results by providing difference-in-difference results
on the subset of zip codes which are not subject to RVP regulation.38 For the net price
variable, we also compute this measure after excluding restricted (RVP of 7 or 7.8) gasoline
formulations in the wholesale price computation. These results are less precise, but the
pattern of the estimates continues to show a significant decline in BP station margins and
fleet card sales after the BP oil spill. In sum, our first set of results thus suggest that, on
average, BP stations suffered losses to revenues as a result of the BP oil spill, consistent with
37

See Brown et al. (2008) and Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011) for detailed descriptions of gasoline content
regulations.
38
The restriction to stations in areas without RVP regulations decrease the sample size by around 75
percent.

19

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship
consumer punishment of BP.39
C

The Impact of Beyond Petroleum Advertising

To study the impact of past advertising on the consumer response to the oil spill, we
estimate a modified version of the regression model from Equation 2 that includes a measure of the sum of BP advertising during the Beyond Petroleum years (2000-2008) as an
independent variable. On the one hand, we might expect steeper losses at BP stations in
areas with heavier advertising if consumers believed this was a signal of BP’s commitment
to environmental stewardship. On the other hand, such advertised claims could have swayed
consumer beliefs about whether the disaster was due to bad luck or bad management, thereby
mitigating price and fleet sale impacts (Minor and Morgan, 2011).
To ease the interpretation of our results, we restrict the sample to the immediate prespill (January 1, 2009 to April 16, 2010) and during-spill (April 23, 2010 to September
17, 2010) periods. We use a regression model where the dependent variable is the stationlevel difference in average net price or total fleet sales between the pre-spill and during-spill
periods. We also include main effect and interaction terms for the Green Index and zip code
household income as control variables in this advertising analysis. We demean each of these
interaction variables and interact them with an indicator for BP brand affiliation.
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 report ordinary least squares (OLS) results. The results
suggest that greater exposure to BP advertising in 2000-2008 mitigated the impact of the oil
spill on BP station prices significantly (p-value < 0.05). We fail to detect a corresponding
impact of pre-spill advertising on BP station fleet quantity sales. There are at least two
interpretations of this pattern of results. First, a negative demand shock accompanied by
an outward supply shift (due to BP lowering prices) could result in an equilibrium with
39

This response may be surprising given that punishment is not individually rational for consumers
whose demand is not sufficient to affect aggregate outcomes or incentives. In this way, boycott behavior is
analogous to voting (Downs, 1957; Olson, 1965; Palfrey and Rosenthal, 1985; Feddersen, 2004). Peer pressure
models have been put forward as social mechanisms to overcome voting paradoxes (Gerber and Green, 2000;
Green and Gruber, 2015; Coate and Conlin, 2004). Alternatively, Fehr and Gachter (2000) study laboratory
experiments where the findings suggest that punishment may have intrinsic value.

20

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

lower prices but unchanged quantities. Second, sales to fleet card customers may not be
representative of the population segment relevant for station price setting.
[Table 3 about here.]
One concern with these OLS estimates is that advertising may be endogenous to factors
that are correlated with local demand response to the BP spill. While we control for confounders such as income and environmental preferences (as proxied by the Green Index), this
may not be sufficient. To address this endogeneity concern, we instrument for advertising
expenditures with a novel election calendar-based instrument: a count of the number of
elections scheduled in each MSA during the Beyond Petroleum campaign years (2000-2008).
Our approach stems from the idea that the number of elections is a relevant instrument
because political advertising displaces other types of advertising. Using a similar IV approach, Sinkinson and Starc (2018) showed that the political advertising during the lead up
to the 2008 national election resulted in significant displacement on advertising for pharmaceuticals. The exclusion restriction in our context is that cross-sectional variation in elections
during the Beyond Petroleum campaign years is not correlated with unobserved factors that
determine the consumer response to the BP oil spill. This assumption is plausible since the
political calendars are legally preset and should be independent of retail gasoline market
factors. (Online Appendix Table A2 shows that we fail to detect significant correlations between our election measure and MSA-level characteristics such as BP station share, median
household income or the Green Index.)
The remaining columns in Table 3 report the election-based IV results. The first stage
estimates in Columns 3 and 6 show a highly significant negative effect of scheduled elections
on BP ad spending. These results are consistent with the displacement effects detected in
Sinkinson and Starc (2018). The performance of our first stage is strong in that the relevant
F -statistics (i.e., 26.23 and 27.47 in the price and fleet sale first-stages, respectively) compare
favorably with recommended critical values.40
40

Specifically, the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F -statistic (relevant here due to the potential correlation and

21

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

The second stage results in Columns 5 show that pre-spill advertising significantly decreased the negative impact of the oil spill on net prices at BP stations (p-value < 0.05). The
results imply that a one standard deviation increase in pre-spill ad spending (+$3.6 million)
reduced the oil spill’s price impact by 1.44 cents per gallon. This is nearly equal to the total
impact of the spill.
D

Robustness Checks for Advertising IV Results

We conduct several exercises to examine the robustness of our advertising results. First,
Online Appendix Table A7 presents results where the endogenous variable is BP spot TV
advertising units as a measure of pre-spill campaign exposure. The results are similar,
namely that a one standard deviation increase in units of spot TV advertising (+11.4 ads)
is predicted to mitigate the price effect of the BP oil spill by 1.14 cents per gallon (OLS)
and 2.28 cents per gallon (IV). Note that this measure counts all spot TV advertising units
as equal whereas the expenditure measure counts advertising dollars as equal.
Second, we address the concern that there is a correlation between pre-spill (2000-2008)
and during-spill (March to September 2010) advertising. This is an important concern given
that the Kantar data show an increase in BP advertising during the spill months. Moreover,
this during spill marketing could have affected the consumer response given that it included
information about relief and mitigation efforts (Tracy, 2010).
The results in Online Appendix Table A8 show that controlling for during spill advertising does not affect our main results. We obtain similar estimates for the impact of pre-spill
advertising after we control for BP during spill advertising in the IV specification. Interestingly, Column 6 of Appendix Table A8 also suggests a marginally significant positive
association between during-spill advertising and fleet card sales during the spill (p-value <
clustering of the standard errors at the zip code level) of 26.23 exceeds the relevant critical value for a 10
percent Wald test size distortion proposed by Stock and Yogo (2005) of 7.03, or the general rule-of-thumb
value of 10. While these critical values are not derived in a non-i.i.d. error term setting, they remain the
recommended references in this setting since such critical values are unavailable Baum, Schaffer and Stillman
(2007).

22

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship
0.10).41
E

Impacts on Station Brand Affiliation

As a final analysis, we examine BP brand affiliation in the period after the Deepwater
Horizon oil spill. Depending on the severity of the impact on station profits, we might
expect to see a change in BP station shares. Most gasoline stations are owned or leased by
independent dealers who sign long-term contracts with upstream refiners to sell and market
a particular brand. If expected returns to the BP brand fall sufficiently low, station owners
may switch affiliations. To explore this idea, we measure changes in BP’s share of stations
in a zip code before and after the oil spill.
Formally, we estimate the following event study specification:

(3)

M ktSharez,t = µz +

−1
X

γm 1(m = t) +

8
X

τm 1(m = t) + z,t

m=1

m=−15

where the dependent variable is BP’s station share in zip code z in month t. The γm terms
are coefficients on dummy variables for each of the pre-spill months (before April 2010) and
the τm terms are coefficients on dummies for each month after the spill (that is, after April
2010). The term µz is a zip code fixed effect. The omitted month is thus April 2010. The
regression coefficients measure the change in station share relative to April 2010 controlling
for zip code fixed effects.
To examine the impact of advertising, we estimate Equation 3 separately for zip codes
in metropolitan areas with above or below median pre-spill advertising. Panels (a) and (b)
of Figure 3 display the resulting coefficient estimates on the monthly time dummies (with
95-percent confidence intervals) for zip codes in above and below median advertising areas,
respectively. Online Appendix Table A10 provides the corresponding regression results.
[Figure 3 about here.]
41

We also examine the impact of BP advertising in models where standard errors are clustered at the level
of the MSA (rather than at the zip code level as reported in Table 3). Online Appendix Table A9 reports
these results and shows that our main findings are the same using this more conservative clustering.

23

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

While there is a statistically significant loss in market share in below-median advertising
areas, there is no detectable decline in areas with higher levels of advertising. The loss in
station share is economically meaningful, representing a roughly six percent decline (about
0.7 percent relative to the mean BP station share of 11 percent). While our estimates
only pertain to a relatively short period after the spill, these results are consistent with
the possibility that advertising may have dampened longer-term losses to the BP brand
outside of the short-run effects on prices and fleet sales. At the same time, it is important
to note that this evidence is only suggestive given that we have limited ability to control
for additional marketing activities that BP (and competitors) may have undertaken in the
longer-run period after the spill.
F

Interpretation

Table 3 provides evidence that pre-spill exposure to the Beyond Petroleum advertising
campaign softened the negative impact of the BP oil spill. This suggests that firms who
provide (unobserved) low levels of environmental quality in production may benefit from
green advertising. This is consistent with a broader hypothesis that investments in corporate
social responsibility provide reputational insurance in case of adverse events (Minor and
Morgan, 2011).
One concern for the interpretation of our estimates is whether the observed effects are
due to environmental messaging or other advertising (e.g., local marketing by individual
service stations) that also occurred during the Beyond Petroleum campaign.42 We address
this concern by relying on detailed information on the corporate entity of the advertiser and
the product advertised in the Kantar data. Our core advertising measure focuses on corporate branding ads for the BP Corporation, BP fuels, and environmental issues during the
Beyond Petroleum campaign years (2000-2008), which are likely to contain green messaging.
To explore the underlying mechanisms further, we create a second measure that contains
42

That is, we are concerned that the Beyond Petroleum campaign is positively correlated with nonenvironmental advertising.

24

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship
advertising only for local BP service stations, BP convenience stores or ancillary products.43
We study the direct and interaction effects of both measures of advertising. Specifically,
we interact each advertising measure with the Green Zip indicator to explore whether the
effects varied with environmental preferences. A caveat for this analysis is that both types
of advertising may be endogenous, but we have one IV. Given this limitation, we report OLS
results. One reassurance for these exploratory results is that the OLS estimates in Table 3
appear to be biased toward zero relative to the IV estimates.
Table 4 shows that the protective benefit of pre-spill BP corporate advertising (i.e.,
likely to contain green marketing) appears to be higher in “greener” zip codes. Column
3 shows that the interaction term between the BP indicator, the likely green advertising
measure and the Green Zip indicator is positive and marginally significant (p-value < 0.10).
Column 4 expands on these results by including the main and interaction terms for local
and ancillary product advertising. In this specification, the point estimate for the three-way
interaction term that includes green advertising (which reflects the protective benefits of
core corporate advertising in green areas) is larger in magnitude and significant (p-value <
0.01). In contrast, the three-way interaction term that includes local and ancillary product
advertising is opposite signed and marginally significant (p-value < 0.10).44
[Table 4 about here.]
43

The ad measures are constructed as follows: First, we use all Kantar advertising data for 2000-2008 for
which BP is listed as “Ultimate Owner.” Second, we drop all advertisements for which the advertiser (i.e.,
entity paying for the ad) is clearly not related to BP or BP gas stations (i.e., ARCO and individual ARCO
stations as well as Amoco and individual Amoco stations (as these are excluded from the analysis), Castrol
and Castrol brands (Lube Express), and a handful of other entities mainly related to BP chemicals manufacturing. Third, our core corporate advertising measure includes all ads for the BP Corporation, BP fuels and
oils, and explicitly environmental advertisements such as for solar systems or explicit “Beyond Petroleum”
announcements run during 2000-2008. Fourth, all remaining ads are included in the “Local/Ancillary Ad
Spending” measure, consisting of advertisements related to BP-affiliated convenience stores and products,
individual service stations, ancillary product services, and miscellaneous items such as BP credit cards.
44
The results in Table 4 cluster standard errors at the zip code level. In Online Appendix Table A11, we
show that the standard errors for advertising estimates are similar when we cluster at the MSA level.

25

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

V

Policy Implications

The role of private firms and markets in providing public goods has been a subject of
debate going back at least to works such as Coase (1960) and Friedman (1970). Kitzmueller
and Shimshack (2012) note that the literature has broadly moved from asking whether private markets should provide corporate social responsibility (CSR) to whether the market
can provide incentives for CSR.45 One strand in this research examines how strategic market
interactions between firms and activists – “private politics” – can result in CSR provision
(Baron, 2003; Baron and Diermeier, 2007). Another set of papers analyze markets for “impure public goods” which bundle private products with public good creation or the abatement of public “bads” (Besley and Ghatak, 2001, 2007; Kotchen, 2006). In these models,
private provision of public goods requires that consumers value environmental stewardship
and punish firms for deviating from promised (advertised) product attributes.46
While consumers appear to be willing to punish BP in the aftermath of an environmental disaster, we find that pre-spill corporate advertising softened this response. These
results provide large-scale and revealed preference evidence that consumers respond to green
advertising in a way that may give firms an incentive to “greenwash” by exaggerating the environmental benefits or qualities of its products (or operations). This interpretation implies
that the market’s ability to effectively reward corporate social responsibility and provide
public goods may be limited if CSR is communicated through advertising.
There are at least three policies to address greenwashing. First, governments increasingly use truth-in-advertising regulations to reduce misleading environmental product claims
(Rohmer, 2007). For example, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) publishes a “Green
45

The majority of Americans now expect companies to engage in socially responsible practices such as
environmental stewardship in production (Fleishman-Hillard and League, 2007). Companies appear to be
responding: A 2011 KPMG study found that 95 percent of Global Fortune 250 companies publicly report
their social and environmental efforts (KPMG, 2011). In 2008, more than 3,000 companies provided reports
dedicated solely to highlighting corporate social and environmental activities (Lydenberg and Wood, 2010).
46
Other empirical evidence linking CSR investments and social bads include Kotchen and Moon (2011),
who provide backward-looking evidence that firms with past “social irresponsibility” subsequently invest in
CSR. Similarly, Eichholtz, Kok and Quigley (2010) find that firms in certain “dirty” industries, such as oil
and mining, are more likely to lease green office space.

26

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Guide” on environmental friendliness claims. Second, third parties can evaluate environmental claims. Third, governments can use price-based mechanisms such as penalties and taxes.
A few considerations suggest that price-based policies may be most effective in encouraging firms to uphold CSR promises or provide environmental stewardship in production.
Truth-in-advertising policies may have limited effectiveness because authorities often fail to
punish violations (Delmas and Burbano, 2011). In addition, marketing survey experiments
have found that simply including nature-based images, symbols, or sounds in product advertising can promote a “green” brand image (Parguel, Benoit-Moreau and Russell, 2015).
Indeed, the Beyond Petroleum campaign included elements such as changing the corporate
logo to feature a helios sun and airing commercials that featured nature-based imagery and
statements about environmental ideals. This type of “executional greenwashing” is likely
more difficult to regulate than “claim greenwashing” which is based on explicit claims about
product attributes (Parguel, Benoit-Moreau and Russell, 2015). In addition, another concern
is that consumers may have heterogeneous responses to truth-in-advertising or third party
information. For example, Rao and Wang (2017) find that new consumers are the ones who
respond most to an FTC order to terminate false ads.
Price-based mechanisms may be a first-best policy solution since penalties or taxes force
firms to internalize the costs of externalities. While third party information and truth-inadvertising regulation can mitigate greenwashing in certain contexts, they may not address
the issue comprehensively. Indeed, our results indicate that green advertising can be effective
in muting the kind of “punishment” response that is theoretically necessary to incentivize
firm investment in practices that support environmental sustainability.
VI

Conclusion

We study how environmental advertising affects consumer behavior in retail gasoline markets. After the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, we show that there were significant
and large declines in BP station prices and gasoline sales to fleet card customers. During

27

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

the decade preceding the spill, BP embarked on a large green marketing campaign, and we
find that greater exposure to this advertising significantly dampened the negative impacts
on retail station prices. We also find suggestive evidence that past advertising cushioned BP
from longer-run negative impacts on gasoline market share.
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that advertising led consumers to believe
that the spill was due to bad luck rather than to negligent practices. This supports the idea
that firm expenditures on CSR function more as insurance (Minor and Morgan, 2011). This
suggests that advertising may fail to provide incentives for firms to undertake investments in
hidden product attributes such as environmental stewardship in production. One implication
of our findings is that price-based mechanisms such as penalties may be necessary to enhance
efficiency in markets where consumer seek environmentally friendly products or services.

28

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

VII

Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Average Weekly Retail Price for BP and Comparison Group Stations
Oil Spill

2.4

Avg. Price, $/gal
2.6
2.8

3

Oil Leak Capped

Jan 10

Mar 10

Jun 10

BP

Oct 10

Jan 11

Non−BP, Non−BP Competitor

Notes: The figure illustrates average weekly prices for BP and non-BP competitor stations in the main
analysis sample. See Section III and the Online Appendix for details on the sample construction, and for a
zoomed out version of the graph starting at the beginning of our sample in 2009. Source: OPIS.

29

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Figure 2: Google Search Intensity for BP Oil Spill Searches and Retail Impacts

01 Jan 2010

−.025

Net Price ($)

.025
0

25
0

−.05

−25
−50

Google Search Intensity

50

.05

(a) Google Intensity and Price Results

01 Apr 2010

01 Jul 2010

01 Oct 2010

’Oil spill’ Searches
BP Monthly Price Point Estimate

0
01 Jan 2010

−.05

Volume (Log)

.05

25
0
−25

−.1

−50

Google Search Intensity

.1

50

.15

(b) Google Intensity and Sales Results

01 Apr 2010

01 Jul 2010

01 Oct 2010

’Oil spill’ Searches
BP Monthly Volume Point Estimate
Notes: The figures display the Google search intensity (blue) for the phrase “oil spill” relative to January 2004. For a given
month, the Google search intensity measures the ratio of searches in that month to searches during January 2004 (the baseline).
A value of 50 indicates that searches in a month were 50 times greater than in January 2004. The dots (red) plot the monthspecific coefficients presented in Table 2. The dependent variables are station weekly net prices and log-quantity, respectively.
Each dependent variable is regressed on post-spill month dummies and their interactions with a dummy for BP gas station. All
models control for station fixed effects. Sources: OPIS and Google Insights (accessed 8/16/2011).

30

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Figure 3: Impacts of the Oil Spill on BP Station Market Share
(a) Above Median Pre-spill Advertising Zips

−.01

−.005

0

.005

.01

Oil Spill

Jan 09

Jul 09

Jan 10

Point Estimate

Jul 10

Jan 11

95−Percent Conf. Interval

(b) Below Median Pre-spill Advertising Zips

−.01

−.005

0

.005

.01

Oil Spill

Jan 09

Jul 09

Jan 10

Point Estimate

Jul 10

Jan 11

95−Percent Conf. Interval

Notes: This figure displays the coefficients on month indicators from a regression of the share of BP stations in each zip codemonth indicators, an indicator for BP station status, the interaction of BP station status and month indicators, and zip code
fixed effects. The full specification is provided in Equation 3 in the text. The omitted month is April 2010, the first month
of the oil spill. Results above are provided for zip codes with above and below median BP ad spending during the Beyond
Petroleum campaign years of 2000-2008. All point estimates and standard errors are reported in Online Appendix Table A10.
Source: OPIS and Kantar Media.

31

Table 1: Oil Spill Impacts, Difference-in-Difference Estimates

Post Spill
BP*(During Spill)
BP*(Post Spill)

32
Obs.
Adjusted R-squared
S.E. Cluster
Weight
# of zips
# of stations

(2)

(3)

(4)

Average Net Price

Ln(Avg. Fleet Sales)

Weekly Net Price

Ln(Weekly Fleet Sales)

0.056***
(0.003)
0.006**
(0.003)
-0.011***
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.004)

0.026***
(0.007)
-0.019**
(0.009)
-0.042***
(0.011)
-0.033**
(0.013)

0.056***
(0.002)
0.006***
(0.002)
-0.011***
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.003)

0.039***
(0.006)
-0.011
(0.007)
-0.047***
(0.009)
-0.037**
(0.012)

15,807
0.946
Zip
Price obs.
847
5,526

14,400
0.970
Zip
Quantity obs.
836
4,997

502,094
0.608
Zip
Price obs.
847
5,526

456,244
0.855
Zip
Quantity obs.
836
4,997

Notes: The price and quantity data span January 2009 to December 2010. Columns (1) and (2) report estimates where the dependent variable is
the station’s average net price and average log-quantity computed over the entire “pre-,” “during-” and “post-” spill periods. Columns (3) and (4)
report estimates when the dependent variable is the station’s weekly net price and log-quantity. Each specification regresses the dependent variable
on dummies for the during-spill period, a dummy for the post-spill period, and their interactions with a dummy for BP gas station. All models control
for station fixed effects. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level. Source:
OPIS.

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

During Spill

(1)

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship
Table 2: Oil Spill Impacts by Month

BP*(Late Apr’10)
BP*(May’10)
BP*(Jun’10)
BP*(Jul’10)
BP*(Aug’10)
BP*(Sep’10)
BP*(Oct’10)
BP*(Nov’10)
BP*(Dec’10)

Obs.
Adjusted R-squared
Fixed Effects
S.E. Cluster
Weight
# of zips
# of stations

(1)

(2)

Weekly Net Price

Ln(Weekly Fleet Sales)

-0.005*
(0.003)
-0.029***
(0.005)
-0.015***
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.014***
(0.003)
0.005
(0.004)
-0.007**
(0.003)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.007**
(0.003)

-0.010
(0.011)
-0.042***
(0.010)
-0.075***
(0.011)
-0.053***
(0.011)
-0.067***
(0.012)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.025**
(0.012)
-0.039***
(0.012)
-0.048***
(0.013)

502,094
0.863
Station
Zip
Price obs.
847
5,526

456,244
0.863
Station
Zip
Quantity obs.
836
4,997

Notes: The price and quantity data cover the period from January 2009 to December 2010. The dependent
variables in Columns (1) and (2) are weekly net price and log-quantity, respectively. Each of these dependent
variables is regressed on post-spill month dummies and their interactions with a dummy for BP gas station.
All models control for station fixed effects. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5
percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level. Source: OPIS.

1

33

Table 3: OLS and IV Estimates of the Impact of Pre-spill Advertising on Oil Spill Impacts
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

OLS Estimates

Green Index
BP*(Green Index)
Income, Demeaned
1

34

BP*(Income, Demeaned)
Ad Spend., Demeaned
BP*(Ad Spend., Demeaned)

-0.012***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.000***
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.000)
0.001**
(0.001)

-0.035***
(0.012)
-0.005*
(0.003)
0.010**
(0.004)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.002**
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)

# Elections, 2000-2008
BP*(# Elections, 2000-2008)
Constant

Obs.
S.E. Cluster
# of zips
# of stations
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-stat.

0.052***
(0.002)

0.017**
(0.007)

3,748
Zip
645
3,748

3,424
Zip
637
3,424

(8)

Ad. Spend.
Demeaned

BP*(BP
Ad. Spend.
Demeaned)

-2.340
(3.041)
-0.069
(0.106)
0.249*
(0.143)
0.119***
(0.025)
-0.020
(0.033)

14.028***
(1.765)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.180*
(0.095)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.099***
(0.021)

-1.951***
(0.303)
0.414
(0.370)
16.367***
(2.476)

0.000***
(0.000)
-1.538***
(0.212)
-0.000***
(0.000)

3,748
Zip
645
3,748
26.23

3,748
Zip
645
3,748
26.23

Second
Stage

Price Diff.
-0.015***
(0.004)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.000)
-0.001**
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.004**
(0.002)

0.056***
(0.003)
3,748
Zip
645
3748

First Stage

Ad. Spend.
Demeaned

BP*(BP
Ad. Spend.
Demeaned)

-2.161
(3.025)
-0.079
(0.109)
0.274*
(0.145)
0.123***
(0.024)
-0.022
(0.032)

14.145***
(1.740)
0.000**
(0.000)
0.194**
(0.096)
-0.000*
(0.000)
0.101***
(0.021)

-1.932***
(0.302)
0.376
(0.368)
16.306***
(2.475)

-0.000
(0.000)
-1.557***
(0.210)
0.000
(0.000)

3,424
Zip
637
3,424
27.47

3,424
Zip
637
3,424
27.47

Second
Stage

Sales Diff.
-0.032*
(0.019)
-0.005
(0.003)
0.010**
(0.004)
0.001*
(0.001)
-0.002*
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.000
(0.007)

0.022***
(0.008)
3,424
Zip
637
3,424

Notes: The sample is restricted to stations with available data on Green Index and household income. The dependent variable is the station’s price difference or log of quantity
difference between the “pre” and “during” spill periods. The Green Index is the sum of z-scores for four variables: the hybrid share of vehicle registrations at the zip code level
in 2007, Sierra Club membership, the number of LEED-registered buildings per capita, and contributions to Green Party committees. Zip code income is in year 2000 U.S.
thousand dollars. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level. Sources: OPIS, Sierra Club, the U.S. Green
Building Council, the U.S. Census and Kantar Media.

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

BP

Sales Diff.

(7)

Election IV Estimates
First Stage

Price Diff.

(6)

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Table 4: Green (Core) and Ancillary Advertising Effects

BP
Green Index
BP*(Green Index)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Price Diff.

Price Diff.

Price Diff.

Price Diff.

-0.012***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

-0.012***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

-0.009**
(0.004)

-0.010**
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.006)
0.000***
(0.000)
-0.000*
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.003*
(0.001)

0.052***
(0.002)

0.052***
(0.003)

0.053***
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.005)
0.000***
(0.000)
-0.000**
(0.000)
0.003**
(0.001)
-0.004*
(0.002)
0.006***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.008*
(0.004)
-0.007*
(0.004)
0.053***
(0.003)

3,748
Zip
645
3,748

3,748
Zip
645
3,748

3,748
Zip
692
3,748

3,748
Zip
692
3,748

Green Zip Dummy
BP*(Green Zip Dummy)
Income, Demeaned
BP*(Income, Demeaned)
Green Ad. Spending
BP*(Green Ad. Spend.)

0.000***
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.000)
0.001**
(0.001)

0.000***
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)

BP*(Green Ad. Spend.)*(Green Zip)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)

Local/Ancillary Ad. Spend.
BP*(Local/Ancillary Ad. Spend.)
BP*(Local/Ancil. Ad. Spend.)*(Green Zip)
Constant

Obs.
S.E. Cluster
# of zips
# of stations

Notes: The dependent variable is the station-level price difference (the average net price during the pre-spill
period minus the average during-spill period). The advertising measures control for demeaned BP advertising
expenditures during the Beyond Petroleum campaign years (2000-2008). “Green Ad.” includes advertising
related to the BP Corporation, BP fuels, and environmental issues. “Local/Ancillary Ad. Spend” includes
other BP service station related ads such as for convenience stores and products and individual service
stations. The indicator “Green Zip” equals one for stations in zip codes whose Green Index measure is above
the median. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the
10 percent level. Sources: OPIS, Sierra Club, the U.S.1 Green Building Council, the U.S. Census and Kantar
Media.

35

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

References
Ackerberg, Daniel A. 2001. “Empirically Distinguishing Informative and Prestige Effects
of Advertising.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 32(2): 316–333.
Aigner, Erin, Joe Burgess, Shan Carter, Joanne Nurse, Haeyoun Park, Amy
Schoenfeld, and Archie Tse. 2010. “Tracking the Oil Spill in the Gulf.”
Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Ryan Kellogg. 2011. “Clearing the Air? The Effects of
Gasoline Content Regulation on Air Quality.” American Economic Review, 101(6): 2687–
2722.
Bagwell, Kyle. 2007. “Chapter 28 The Economic Analysis of Advertising.” In Handbook of
Industrial Organization. Vol. 3, 1701–1844. Elsevier.
Barber, Brad M., and Masako N. Darrough. 1996. “Product Reliability and Firm
Value: The Experience of American and Japanese Automakers, 1973-1992.” Journal of
Political Economy, 104(5): 1084–1099.
Baron, David P. 2003. “Private Politics.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,
12(1): 31–66.
Baron, David P., and Daniel Diermeier. 2007. “Strategic Activism and Nonmarket
Strategy.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 16(3): 599–634.
Barrage, Lint, Eric Chyn, and Justine Hastings. 2014. “Advertising as Insurance or
Commitment? Evidence from the BP Oil Spill.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 19838.
Barrage, Lint, Eric Chyn, and Justine Hastings. 2019. “Advertising and Environmental Stewardship: Evidence from the BP Oil Spill: Dataset.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy.
Barron, John M., Beck A. Taylor, and John R. Umbeck. 2004. “Number of sellers,
average prices, and price dispersion.” International Journal of Industrial Organization,
22(8): 1041–1066.
Baum, Christopher, Mark Schaffer, and Steven Stillman. 2007. “Enhanced Routines
for Instrumental Variables/Generalized Method of Moments Estimation and Testing.”
Stata Journal, 7(4): 465–506.
BBC News. 2000. “BP Goes Green.”
Berrone, Pascual, Andrea Fosfuri, and Liliana Gelabert. 2017. “Does Greenwashing
Pay Off? Understanding the Relationship Between Environmental Actions and Environmental Legitimacy.” Journal of Business Ethics, 144(2): 363–379.

36

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and
Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a
Consumer Credit Marketing Field Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
125(1): 263–306.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much
Should We Trust Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249–275.
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2001. “Government Versus Private Ownership
of Public Goods.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1343–1372.
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2007. “Retailing public goods: The economics
of corporate social responsibility.” Journal of Public Economics, 91(9): 1645–1663.
Borenstein, Severin, and Martin B. Zimmerman. 1988. “Market Incentives for Safe
Commercial Airline Operation.” The American Economic Review, 78(5): 913–935.
Brewer, Lanny A. 2012. “Assistant Attorney General Lanny A. Breuer Speaks at the BP
Press Conference.”
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dub, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M.
Shapiro. 2015. “Do Pharmacists Buy Bayer? Informed Shoppers and the Brand Premium.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1669–1726.
Brown, Jennifer, Justine Hastings, Erin T. Mansur, and Sofia B. Villas-Boas.
2008. “Reformulating competition? Gasoline Content Regulation and Wholesale Gasoline
Prices.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 55(1): 1–19.
Bruno, Kenny. 2000. “BP: Beyond Petroleum or Beyond Preposterous?”
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. “Are
Consumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic
Review, 103(1): 220–256.
Cabral, Lus M B. 2005. “The Economics of Trust and Reputation: A Primer.”
Chandra, Ambarish, and Mariano Tappata. 2011. “Consumer search and dynamic
price dispersion: an application to gasoline markets.” The RAND Journal of Economics,
42(4): 681–704.
Cherry, Miriam A., and Judd F. Sneirson. 2010. “Beyond Profit: Rethinking Corporate
Social Responsibility and Greenwashing after the BP Oil Disaster Deep Trouble: Legal
Ramifications of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill.” Tulane Law Review, 85: 983–1038.
Chou, ShinYi, Inas Rashad, and Michael Grossman. 2008. “FastFood Restaurant
Advertising on Television and Its Influence on Childhood Obesity.” The Journal of Law
and Economics, 51(4): 599–618.

37

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Clark, C. Robert, Ulrich Doraszelski, and Michaela Draganska. 2009. “The Effect
of Advertising on Brand Awareness and Perceived Quality: An Empirical Investigation
Using Panel Data.” QME, 7(2): 207–236.
Coase, Ronald H. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics,
3: 1–44.
Coate, Stephen, and Michael Conlin. 2004. “A Group RuleUtilitarian Approach to
Voter Turnout: Theory and Evidence.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1476–1504.
Delmas, Magali A., and Vanessa Cuerel Burbano. 2011. “The Drivers of Greenwashing.” California Management Review, 54(1): 64–87.
Department of Interior. 2010. “U.S. Scientific Teams Refine Estimates of Oil Flow from
BPs Well Prior to Capping.”
Dinner, Isaac M., Harald J. Van Heerde, and Scott A. Neslin. 2014. “Driving
Online and Offline Sales: The Cross-Channel Effects of Traditional, Online Display, and
Paid Search Advertising.” Journal of Marketing Research, 51(5): 527–545.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York:Harper. OCLC:
254197.
Dranove, David, and Ginger Zhe Jin. 2010. “Quality Disclosure and Certification:
Theory and Practice.” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4): 935–963.
Dube, Jean-Pierre, and Puneet Manchanda. 2005. “Differences in Dynamic Brand
Competition Across Markets: An Empirical Analysis.” Marketing Science, 24(1): 81–95.
Eckert, Andrew, and Douglas S. West. 2004. “Retail Gasoline Price Cycles across
Spatially Dispersed Gasoline Stations.” The Journal of Law & Economics, 47(1): 245–
273.
Eichholtz, Piet, Nils Kok, and John Quigley. 2010. “Why Do Companies Rent Green?
Real Property and Corporate Social Responsibility.” Berkeley Program on Housing and
Urban Policy Berkeley Program on Housing and Urban Policy, Working Paper Series.
Feddersen, Timothy J. 2004. “Rational Choice Theory and the Paradox of Not Voting.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1): 99–112.
Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gachter. 2000. “Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods
Experiments.” American Economic Review, 90(4): 980–994.
Fleishman-Hillard, and National Consumers League. 2007. “CCSR: Collaborative
Corporate Social Responsibility.”
Forsyth, Keith, David Haley, and Robert Kozak. 1999. “Will Consumers Pay More
for Certified Wood Products?” Journal of Forestry, 97(2): 18–22.

38

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Freedman, Seth, Melissa Kearney, and Mara Lederman. 2010. “Product Recalls,
Imperfect Information, and Spillover Effects: Lessons from the Consumer Response to the
2007 Toy Recalls.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(2): 499–516.
Friberg, Richard, and Erik Grnqvist. 2012. “Do Expert Reviews Affect the Demand
for Wine?” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 193–211.
Friedman, Milton. 1970. “The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits.”
New York Times Magazine.
Garthwaite, Craig L. 2014. “Demand Spillovers, Combative Advertising, and Celebrity
Endorsements.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(2): 76–104.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2008. “Introduction of Television to the
United States Media Market, 1946-1960: Version 1.” Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. type: dataset.
Gerber, Alan S., and Donald P. Green. 2000. “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone
Calls, and Direct Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment.” The American Political
Science Review, 94(3): 653–663.
Goett, Andrew A., Kathleen Hudson, and Kenneth E. Train. 2000. “Customers’
Choice Among Retail Energy Suppliers: The Willingness-to-Pay for Service Attributes.”
The Energy Journal, 21(4).
Green, Donald P, and Alan S. Gruber. 2015. Get Out the Vote. Brookings Institution
Press.
Grossman, Gene M., and Carl Shapiro. 1984. “Informative Advertising with Differentiated Products.” The Review of Economic Studies, 51(1): 63–81.
Gurun, Umit G., Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. 2016. “Advertising Expensive
Mortgages.” The Journal of Finance, 71(5): 2371–2416.
Hastings, Justine, Ali Hortasu, and Chad Syverson. 2017. “Sales Force and Competition in Financial Product Markets: The Case of Mexico’s Social Security Privatization.”
Econometrica, 85(6): 1723–1761.
Hastings, Justine S. 2004. “Vertical Relationships and Competition in Retail Gasoline
Markets: Empirical Evidence from Contract Changes in Southern California.” American
Economic Review, 94(1): 317–328.
Hastings, Justine S., and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. “Fungibility and Consumer Choice:
Evidence from Commodity Price Shocks*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, qjt018.
Hoffer, George E., Stephen W. Pruitt, and Robert J. Reilly. 1988. “The Impact of
Product Recalls on the Wealth of Sellers: A Reexamination.” Journal of Political Economy, 96(3): 663–670.

39

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Hosken, Daniel S., Robert S. McMillan, and Christopher T. Taylor. 2008. “Retail
gasoline pricing: What do we know?” International Journal of Industrial Organization,
26(6): 1425–1436.
Iizuka, Toshiaki, and Ginger Zhe Jin. 2005. “Drug Advertising and Health Habit.”
National Bureau of Economic Research w11770, Cambridge, MA.
Jarrell, Gregg, and Sam Peltzman. 1985. “The Impact of Product Recalls on the Wealth
of Sellers.” Journal of Political Economy, 93(3): 512–536.
Jin, Ginger Zhe, and Andrew Kato. 2006. “Price, Quality, and Reputation: Evidence
from an Online Field Experiment.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4): 983–1004.
Jin, Ginger Zhe, and Phillip Leslie. 2003. “The Effect of Information on Product Quality: Evidence from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 409–451.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2007. “Do Greens Drive Hummers or Hybrids? Environmental Ideology as a Determinant of Consumer Choice.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 54(2): 129–145.
Kahn, Matthew E, and Ryan K. Vaughn. 2009. “Green Market Geography: The
Spatial Clustering of Hybrid Vehicles and LEED Registered Buildings.” The B.E. Journal
of Economic Analysis & Policy, 9(2).
Kantar Media. 2011. “Ad$penderManual.”
Karpoff, Jonathan M., Jr. Lott, John R., and Eric W. Wehrly. 2005. “The Reputational Penalties for Environmental Violations: Empirical Evidence.” The Journal of Law
and Economics, 48(2): 653–675.
Kiesel, Kristin, and Sofia B. Villas-Boas. 2013. “Can information costs affect consumer choice? Nutritional labels in a supermarket experiment.” International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 31(2): 153–163.
Kitzmueller, Markus, and Jay Shimshack. 2012. “Economic Perspectives on Corporate
Social Responsibility.” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1): 51–84.
Kotchen, Matthew J. 2006. “Green Markets and Private Provision of Public Goods.”
Journal of Political Economy, 114(4): 816–834.
Kotchen, Matthew J, and Jon Jungbien Moon. 2011. “Corporate Social Responsibility
for Irresponsibility.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17254.
KPMG. 2011. “KPMG International Survey of Corporate Responsibility Reporting 2011.”
Landor Associates and Cohn and Wolfe and Penn, Schoen and Berland Associates. 2007. “Green Brands 2.0; An ImagePower Survey.”

40

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Landor Associates and Cohn and Wolfe and Penn, Schoen and Berland Associates. 2008. “2008 ImagePower Green Brands Survey.”
Laufer, William S. 2003. “Social Accountability and Corporate Greenwashing.” Journal
of Business Ethics, 43(3): 253–261.
Lewis, Randall A., and David H. Reiley. 2014. “Online Ads and Offline Sales: Measuring the Effect of Retail Advertising via a Controlled Experiment on Yahoo!” Quantitative
Marketing and Economics, 12(3): 235–266.
Lewis, Randall A., and Justin M. Rao. 2015. “The Unfavorable Economics of Measuring
the Returns to Advertising.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1941–1973.
List, John A., and Daniel M. Sturm. 2006. “How Elections Matter: Theory and Evidence from Environmental Policy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1249–
1281.
Liu, Qiang, and Sachin Gupta. 2011. “The Impact of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of
Prescription Drugs on Physician Visits and Drug Requests: Empirical Findings and Public
Policy Implications.” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 28(3): 205–217.
Loureiro, Maria L., Jill J. McCluskey, and Ron C. Mittelhammer. 2001. “Assessing Consumer Preferences for Organic, Eco-labeled, and Regular Apples.” Journal of
Agricultural and Resource Economics, 26(2): 404–416.
Lydenberg, Steve, and David Wood. 2010. “How to Read a Corporate Social Responsibility Report: A User’s Guide.”
Marketing Week. 2008. “M&S Tops WM/YouGov Green Issues Marketers Poll.”
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts. 1986. “Price and Advertising Signals of Product
Quality.” Journal of Political Economy, 94(4): 796–821.
Minor, Dylan, and John Morgan. 2011. “CSR as Reputation Insurance: Primum Non
Nocere.” California Management Review, 53(3): 40–59.
NACS. 2011. “Gas Price Kit 2011.”
National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore
Drilling. 2011. “Deep Water: The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling:
Report to the President.” National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
and Offshore Drilling, Washington, D.C. OCLC: ocn696156233.
Nimon, Wesley, and John Beghin. 1999. “Are Eco-Labels Valuable? Evidence from the
Apparel Industry.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 81(4): 801–811.
Nyilasy, Gergely, Harsha Gangadharbatla, and Angela Paladino. 2014. “Perceived
Greenwashing: The Interactive Effects of Green Advertising and Corporate Environmental
Performance on Consumer Reactions.” Journal of Business Ethics, 125(4): 693–707.
41

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press.
Palfrey, Thomas R., and Howard Rosenthal. 1985. “Voter Participation and Strategic
Uncertainty.” American Political Science Review, 79(01): 62–78.
Parguel, Batrice, Florence Benoit-Moreau, and Cristel Antonia Russell. 2015.
“Can Evoking Nature in advertising Mislead Consumers? The Power of Executional
Greenwashing’.” International Journal of Advertising, 34(1): 107–134.
Parguel, Batrice, Florence Benot-Moreau, and Fabrice Larceneux. 2011. “How
Sustainability Ratings Might Deter Greenwashing: A Closer Look at Ethical Corporate
Communication.” Journal of Business Ethics, 102(1): 15–28.
Pelsmacker, Patrick De, Wim Janssens, Ellen Sterckx, and Caroline Mielants.
2006. “Fair-trade Beliefs, Attitudes and Buying Behaviour of Belgian Consumers.” International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 11(2): 125–138.
PR Week. 2001. “PR WEEK AWARDS 2001: Campaign - Brand Development Campaign
of the Year 2001.”
Ramus, Catherine A., and Ivan Montiel. 2005. “When Are Corporate Environmental
Policies a Form of Greenwashing?” Business & Society, 44(4): 377–414.
Rao, Anita, and Emily Wang. 2017. “Demand for Healthy Products: False Claims and
FTC Regulation.” Journal of Marketing Research (JMR), 54(6): 968–989.
Roe, Brian, Mario F. Teisl, Alan Levy, and Matthew Russell. 2001. “US Consumers
Willingness to Pay for Green Electricity.” Energy Policy, 29(11): 917–925.
Rohmer, Bradford. 2007. “Greenwash Confronted - Misleading Advertising Regulation in
the EU and its Member States.”
Saffer, Henry, and Dhaval Dave. 2006. “Alcohol Advertising and Alcohol Consumption
by Adolescents.” Health Economics, 15(6): 617–637.
Simester, Duncan, Yu Hu, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Eric T. Anderson. 2009. “Dynamics of Retail Advertising: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Economic Inquiry,
47(3): 482–499.
Sinkinson, Michael, and Amanda Starc. 2018. “Ask Your Doctor? Direct-to-Consumer
Advertising of Pharmaceuticals.” The Review of Economic Studies, 1–46.
Solman, Gregory. 2008. “BP: Coloring Public Opinion?” Adweek.
Sorensen, Alan T. 2007. “Bestseller Lists and Product Variety*.” The Journal of Industrial
Economics, 55(4): 715–738.
Stock, James, and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression.” In Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of
Thomas Rothenberg. 80–108. New York:Cambridge University Press.
42

Barrage et al.: Advertising and Environmental Stewardship

Teisl, Mario F., Brian Roe, and Robert L. Hicks. 2002. “Can Eco-Labels Tune a
Market? Evidence from Dolphin-Safe Labeling.” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management, 43(3): 339–359.
Tracy, Tennille. 2010. “BP Tripled Its Ad Budget After Oil Spill.” The Wall Street Journal.
United States. 2013. “United States of America v. BP Exploration and Production, Inc.”
US Census Bureau. 2001. “Money Income in the United States: 2000.”
U.S. Senate. 2018. “U.S. Senate: Frequently Asked Questions about a New Congress.”
Zinman, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz. 2016. “Wintertime for Deceptive Advertising?”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1): 177–192.

43

