                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   VOTING TO TELL OTHERS

                                         Stefano DellaVigna
                                             John A. List
                                         Ulrike Malmendier
                                            Gautam Rao

                                        Working Paper 19832
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19832


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




We thank Nageeb Ali, David Card, Raj Chetty, Justin Fox, Andrew Gelman, Alan Gerber, Yosh
Halberstam, Mitch Hoffman, Greg Huber, Tom Palfrey, Todd Rogers, the audiences at Berkeley,
Boston University, Harvard, RAND, Stanford, Toulouse, UCSD, and at the 2011 ESA World Congress
(Chicago), the 2012 North-American ESA Tuscon Conference, the 2012 NBER Political Economy
Summer Institute, the 2013 Yale CSAP summer workshop, and the 2013 SITE Psychology and
Economics conference for helpful comments. We also thank Alec Brandon, Tristan Gagnon-Bartsch,
Sheng Li, David Novgorodsky, Jessica Shui, and Vera te Velde for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Stefano DellaVigna, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Voting to Tell Others
Stefano DellaVigna, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 19832
January 2014
JEL No. C93,P48

                                              ABSTRACT

Why do people vote? We argue that social image plays a significant role in explaining turnout: people
vote because others will ask. The expectation of being asked motivates turnout if individuals derive
pride from telling others that they voted, or feel shame from admitting that they did not vote, provided
that lying is costly. We design a field experiment to estimate the effect of social image concerns on
voting. In a door-to-door survey about election turnout, we experimentally vary (i) the informational
content and use of a flyer pre-announcing the survey, (ii) the duration and payment for the survey,
and (iii) the incentives to lie about past voting. Our estimates suggest significant social image concerns.
For a plausible range of lying costs, we estimate the monetary value of voting `because others will
ask' to be in the range of $5-$15 for the 2010 Congressional election. In a complementary get-out-the-vote
experiment, we inform potential voters before the election that we will ask them later whether they
voted. We find suggestive evidence that the treatment increases turnout.


Stefano DellaVigna                                   Ulrike Malmendier
University of California, Berkeley                   University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880                                 549 Evans Hall # 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                             and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu                           ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

John A. List                                         Gautam Rao
University of Chicago                                University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
1126 East 59th                                       530 Evans Hall # 3880
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                             grao@berkeley.edu
jlist@uchicago.edu
1       Introduction
Why do people vote? Answers to this classical question broadly fall into two classes. The first
class is pivotal voting: Individuals vote because they may aﬀect the outcome of the election
(Downs (1957), Ledyard (1984), and Palfrey and Rosenthal (1983, 1985)). This motivation can
explain voting in small elections, but less so in large-scale elections (Feddersen (2004)). The
second class of explanations is norm-based voting: Individuals vote because they believe it is
the right thing to do–even if their individual vote may not aﬀect the outcome of the election
(Riker and Ordeshook (1968), Harsanyi (1977), Blais (2000), and Feddersen and Sandroni
(2000)). This explanation has proven diﬃcult to test empirically.
   We propose a model that builds on norm-based voting, but can be estimated empirically.
We posit that one reason why individuals vote is because others will ask. Individuals care about
what others think of them. They may derive pride from telling others that they voted and they
may feel shame from admitting that they did not vote, similar in spirit to Harbaugh (1996).1
We also assume that individuals incur disutility from lying, consistent with the laboratory
evidence: in cheap talk experiments, individuals often tell the truth even when lying would
maximize their payoﬀ (Gneezy (2005), Sánchez-Pagés and Vorsatz (2007), and Erat and Gneezy
(2012)).
    In this model, an individual is motivated to vote (also) because she anticipates that others
will ask if she did. If she votes, she can advertise her ‘good behavior’ when asked. If she does
not vote, she faces the choice of being truthful but incurring shame, or saying that she voted
but incurring the lying cost. This trade-oﬀ is reflected in the fact that 25 to 50 percent of
non-voters lie when asked about their past turnout (Silver, Anderson, and Abramson, 1986).
    Our model of voting is reduced-form and does not capture the myriad of other motivations
to vote. Yet, its simplicity allows us to estimate the model parameters using field data.
We design a natural field experiment (Harrison and List, 2004) that is tightly linked to the
model, and estimate the value of voting that is due to the social image motivation described
above. This type of field experiment with parameter estimation is uncommon in the literature
(Card, DellaVigna, and Malmendier, 2011). We show the insights gained from placing greater
emphasis on parameter estimation in an environment where experiment and theory are tightly
linked.
    The main experiment took place in the summer and fall of 2011 in towns around Chicago.
We visited households and asked whether they were willing to answer a short survey, including
a question on whether they voted in the 2010 congressional election. In some cases, we posted
a flyer on the doorknob a day in advance to announce the upcoming survey. Unbeknownst to
the households, we used voting records to restrict the sample to households where either all
    1
    Gerber et al. (2012) provides evidence of social-image concerns in that survey respondents report a higher
social evaluation of voters, compared to non-voters.



                                                      1
registered members voted in the 2010 elections (henceforth, voting households) or none of the
registered members voted in 2010 (non-voting households). We did not visit households with
a mixed 2010 voting record.
    The field experiment has three main sets of treatments. In the first set, we randomize the
information on the flyer. In one group, the flyer informs households that the next day we
will ask for their participation in a door-to-door survey. In a second group, the flyer specifies
that the survey will be about “your voter participation in the 2010 congressional election.”
Changes in the share of households opening the door and completing the survey between the
first and the second group reflect the value of being asked about voting. An increase in the
participation of voting households indicates the pride of saying that they voted. A decrease
among non-voting households indicates shame from admitting that they did not vote and the
cost of lying.2
    We find that, on average, voters do not sort in. In fact, voting households are slightly less
likely to answer the door and do the survey when they are informed about the turnout question.
Non-voters sort out significantly, decreasing their survey participation by 20 percent.3
    These results may depend on the election considered. The 2010 elections were disappointing
for Democrats and positive for Republicans, including in Illinois the loss of President Obama’s
prior seat in the Senate. The lack of pride among voters may reflect disappointment, given
that the neighborhoods visited were largely Democratic. Indeed, if we restrict the analysis to
voters registered for the Republican primaries, we find evidence of sorting in.
    The findings on sorting provide prima facie evidence of social-image utility. In order to
quantify the utility value, we need to measure the cost of sorting in and out of answering
the survey. To do so, we introduce a second set of (crossed) randomizations, in which we
vary the promised payment for the survey ($10 versus $0) and the pre-announced duration (5
minutes versus 10 minutes). We find that the eﬀect of reducing payment by $10 is comparable
to the sorting response of non-voters to the election flyer, implying significant social-image
(dis)utility.
    In order to estimate the value of voting ‘because others will ask,’ we need additional coun-
terfactual social-image values, such as the shame that voters would feel were they to say they
did not vote. These counterfactuals are not provided by the sorting moments.
   We thus introduce a third set of crossed treatments. We randomize incentives to provide a
diﬀerent response to the turnout question. Specifically, we inform half the respondents of the
ten-minute survey that the survey will be eight minutes shorter if they state that they did not
   2
    This randomization also includes a group with no flyer, as well a group with an opt-out box.
   3
    We also randomize the information provided by the surveyor at the door. For half of the households, they
indicated a survey “on your voter participation in the 2010 congressional election.” This manipulation, which
was crossed with all other manipulations, did not have a significant eﬀect on survery take-up for either voters
or non-voters.



                                                      2
vote in the 2010 congressional election. For voters, this treatment amounts to an incentive to
lie and permits us to quantify the disutility of voters were they to say (untruthfully) that they
did not vote. For the 50 percent of non-voters who lie, this treatment provides an incentive to
tell the truth. We provide a parallel $5 incentive in the 5-minute survey to state that one did
not vote.
    The results reveal that non-voters are significantly more sensitive to these incentives than
voters. When incentivized, the share of non-voters who lie decreases significantly, by 12 per-
centage points, while the share of voters who lie increases only insignificantly, by 2 percentage
points. The results are similar for time and monetary incentives, and reveal a strong preference
of voters for saying that they voted.
    We combine the moments from the three sets of treatments to estimate the parameters of
our model using a minimum-distance estimator. The benchmark estimates provide no evidence
of pride in voting. On average, voters get negative utility from saying that they voted. However,
voters obtain an even lower utility, by $15, from untruthfully saying that they did not vote.
Non-voters are estimated to be on average indiﬀerent between saying truthfully that they did
not vote or lying and saying that they voted, with negative average utility from either option.
We estimate substantial heterogeneity in social image utility, especially among voters.
    These estimates identify the key parameters up to an additive lying cost, which remains
unidentified. Since the lying cost is an integral part of the social-image value of voting, we
adopt two approaches to address this limitation. First, we compute the value of voting for a
range of values of the lying cost, including one we estimate from the laboratory evidence in Erat
and Gneezy (2012). In this range, the implied value of voting ‘because of being asked once’ is
in the range of $1-$3 for voters. Second, we identify the subsample of households with similar
turnout histories prior to 2010, but diﬀerent turnout in 2010. Voters and non-voters (in 2010)
in this subsample are likely to be similar, and we assume that they have the same social-image
and lying parameters. Under this assumption, we estimate lying costs of $5, leading to a value
of being asked once of $150. Hence, the estimates are quite similar under both approaches.
    To compute the overall value of voting due to being asked, we scale up the estimated value
of being asked once by the average number of times asked. Our survey respondents report being
asked, on average, five times whether they voted in the 2010 congressional election, implying an
estimated value of voting ‘because others will ask’ in the range of $5-$15, a sizeable magnitude.
Note that this estimate likely understates the value of voting due to being asked, since it is
based on being asked by a (previously unknown) surveyor. The social-image utility and the
lying cost from interactions with family, friends, and co-workers are likely to be larger.
    Two implications are worth emphasizing. First, for a reasonable range of lying costs, the
value of voting ‘because others ask’ is larger for voters than for non-voters, consistent with
cross-sectional diﬀerences in turnout. Second, while the estimates are based on a congressional
election, our survey respondents report being asked nearly twice as often about voting in


                                               3
presidential elections. Hence, assuming similar social-image values, the social-image value of
voting in presidential elections is about twice as high, in the range of $10-$30, consistent with
the observed higher turnout in presidential elections.
   The main field experiment was designed to measure the value of voting without aﬀecting
voting itself. Instead, we rely on sorting, survey completion, and survey responses. Yet,
the model suggests an intervention to increase turnout: individuals with social-image motives
are more likely to vote the more they expect to be asked. Experimentally increasing such
expectation should thus lead to an increase in turnout.
    In November of 2010 and of 2012, we did just that. A few days before the election, a flyer
on the doorknob of treatment households informed them that ‘researchers will contact you
within three weeks of the election [...] to conduct a survey on your voter participation.’4 A
control group received a flyer with a mere reminder of the upcoming election. The results are
consistent with the model, though statistically imprecise. In 2010, the turnout of the treatment
group is 1.3 percentage points higher than the control group (with a one-sided p-value of 006).
In 2012, the turnout diﬀerence is just 01 percentage points (not significant). The results are
consistent with the contemporaneous results of Rogers and Ternovski (2013), who also inform
a treatment group that they may be called after the election about their voting behavior, and
also find a positive (marginally significant) impact on turnout.
    Finally, we would like to mention some caveats and alternative interpretations. First, the
results are specific to their time and location–the 2010 congressional elections in Illinois. As
we discussed, the lack of estimated pride in voting is likely related to the disappointing results
for Democrats in 2010. It will be interesting to apply this methodology to other elections.
    Second, the benchmark estimates rely on a number of assumptions, some of which are
restrictive. In a series of robustness checks, we relax these assumptions, including allowing
for measurement error in the voting record. We also address the concern that the observed
‘sorting out’ among non-voters may reflect a dislike of talking about politics, independent of
their non-participation in the election. When we allow for such distaste, we lose the ability to
estimate one of the social-image parameters. Still, the value of voting ‘due to being asked’ is
identified and in fact remains unchanged, since it is identified by the lying treatments, which
are immune to these concerns.
   Third, the estimation of the parameters relies on the full set of 100 moments from the field
experiment, making it diﬃcult to highlight which moments play the most important role for
the key parameter estimates. To address this issue, we plot the Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013)
sensitivity measures, highlighting the critical role of the lying interventions.
   This paper complements a substantial literature on get-out-the-vote field experiments (e.g.,
Green and Gerber (2000)), summarized in Green and Gerber (2008). Most closely related is
  4
      We follow up with a door-to-door visit, as advertised.



                                                        4
Gerber, Green, and Larimer (2008): a mailer announcing that voter participation will be
made public to neighbors leads to a large increase in turnout, presumably because individuals
care about being seen as voters as opposed to non-voters. This social-pressure intervention is
extended in follow-up papers, including Rogers and Ternovski (2013). We build on Gerber,
Green, and Larimer (2008), but introduce post-election treatments and focus on the link be-
tween model and experiment, allowing us to quantify the underlying social-image parameters.
    The paper also contributes to the vast literature on why people vote. Our main contribution,
in addition to proposing the model of voting ‘because others will ask’, is to provide an estimate
of the value of voting, which is rare in the literature. Among the few papers, Coate and Conlin
(2004) and Coate, Conlin and Moro (2008) estimate, respectively, a group-rule utilitarian model
and a pivotal-voting model on alcohol-regulation referenda data. Their estimates are up to a
scaling for the voting cost, which is not identified. Levine and Palfrey (2007) estimate a pivotal-
voting model, but use laboratory elections where parameters can be controlled. In contrast,
we obtain estimates of the value of voting by virtue of the design of the field experiment.
    The paper also relates to the literature on social image. The theoretical papers micro-found
social-image concerns as signaling models (Benabou and Tirole, 2006; Andreoni and Bernheim,
2010; Ali and Lin, 2013). The empirical papers show that workers become more productive
when they earn public rewards for their output (Ashraf, Bandiera, and Jack (2013)), that con-
tributions to public goods increase when rewards are public (Ariely, Bracha, and Meier, 2009;
Lacetera and Macis, 2010), that campaign contributions depend on social comparisons (Perez-
Truglia and Cruces, 2013), and that energy consumption declines when social comparisons of
energy usage are provided (Schultz et al. (2007); Allcott (2011)). Our study attempts to bring
these literatures closer by providing estimates of the social-image parameters. We hope that
future research strengthens the ties, providing estimates of the underlying signaling game.
    Finally, this paper also complements a small but growing literature which emphasizes the
role of models in field experiments (Banerjee et al. (2013), DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier,
2012) as well as to the literature on structural behavioral economics (Laibson, Repetto, and
Tobacman (2007), Conlin, O’Donoghue, and Vogelsang (2007)). We envision the combination
of these two literatures–where this paper resides–to be a growth area.
   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section introduces the model.
Section 3 summarizes the experimental design. Sections 4 and 5 present, respectively, the
reduced-form results and structural estimates for the main experiment. Section 6 introduces
the get-out-the-vote experiment. Section 7 concludes.


2    Model
Voting. Voting depends on four factors: pivotality, warm glow, cost of voting, and expected



                                                5
social image. Individuals vote if the net expected utility of doing so is positive:

                   +  −  +  [max (   − ) − max (   − )] ≥ 0                 (1)

The first three terms in expression (1) capture the standard model of voting. The first term is
the expected utility of being pivotal (Downs, 1957), with a pivotality probability  and value
 assigned to deciding the election. The second term,  is the warm glow from voting (as
in Riker and Ordeshook (1968)). The third term, − is the transaction cost of going to the
polls. Since our experimental design does not focus on these components, only their sum will
matter, which we denote by  =  +  −  We assume − has c.d.f. .
    The crux of the model is the fourth term, the social-image motivation to vote (in the spirit
of Harbaugh (1996)). An individual expects to be asked whether she voted  times, and has
to decide whether to be truthful or to lie. Assume first that she has voted. In this case, she
can (truthfully) state that she voted, which earns her utility  ; or she can lie and look like a
non-voter, which earns her utility  minus a psychological lying cost . Therefore, the utility
a voter receives when being asked about her turnout is   ≡ max (   − ). Now assume
that she did not vote. In this case, she can either state the truth and obtain the utility from
appearing to be a non-voter,  , or lie and obtain  minus the lying cost  Hence, the utility
of being asked for a non-voter is   ≡ max (   − )  The term in square brackets in (1)
is therefore the net utility gain from voting due to being asked once.
   The terms  and  capture how much the individual cares about being seen as a public
good contributor (voter), or not, by others. These terms can be understood as reduced-form
representations of a signalling model, such as Benabou and Tirole (2006) and Ali and Lin
(2013). Experimental evidence suggests that information about whether a person votes aﬀects
how favorably they are viewed by others (Gerber et al. 2012).
    The term  captures the utility cost of lying. We assume that the cost of lying is non-
negative,  ≥ 0 and additive with respect to the social-image term. The assumption of positive
lying costs is motivated both by introspection and by experimental evidence documenting that
in cheap talk communication games, which are similar to survey questions, a sizeable portion
of subjects prefer to tell the truth even when lying is profitable.
   In the general case, we do not impose any restrictions on  and  , but we consider two
special cases: (i) Pride in Voting (  0): individuals care (positively) about stating that
they are voters; (ii) Stigma from Not Voting (  0 and  −   0): individuals dislike
both (truthfully) admitting to being non-voters and (untruthfully) saying that they are voters.
Notice that both conditions could hold, for   0   , provided  is large enough.
   Using the abbreviated notation  for the other reasons to vote, we can rewrite the voting




                                                6
condition (1) as  Φ ( −   ) +  ≥ 0 where
                                       ⎧
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪                 if  −  ≥ 
                                       ⎨
                    Φ ( −   ) =    −       if −  ≤  −                          (2)
                                      ⎪
                                      ⎪
                                      ⎩   −            if  −   −

    As expression (2) shows, voting depends on the net social-image value  −  and on the
cost of lying . Figure 1 displays Φ ( −   ) as a function of  − for  = 10 and makes
it clear that, in order for social image to contribute to voting, the net utility  −  must be
non-zero and the lying cost  must be positive. If either of these conditions is not met, then
the individual either does not care about image, or can always signal the best-case scenario,
irrespective of her true actions. Also notice that as long as individuals prefer to signal that
they are voters ( −   0) the net value of being asked for voting is weakly positive.
    Door-to-Door Survey. To estimate this model, we design a door-to-door survey in which
individuals are asked, among other questions, whether they voted. We model the behavior of
an individual whose home is visited by a surveyor. If the visit is pre-announced by a flyer
and the person notices the flyer (which occurs with probability  ∈ (0 1]), she can alter her
probability of being at home and opening the door. A “survey flyer” (denoted by  ) informs
the reader when the surveyor will visit, but leaves the content of the survey unspecified. An
“election flyer” (denoted by  ) additionally informs the reader that the survey will be about
her voter participation in the previous election.
    Once the surveyor visits the home, the respondent opens the door with probability . If she
did not notice the flyer (or did not receive one),  is equal to a baseline probability 0 ∈ (0 1).
If she noticed the flyer, she can optimally adjust the probability to  ∈ [0 1] at a cost  (),
with (0 ) = 0 0 (0 ) = 0 and 00 (·)  0. That is, the marginal cost of small adjustments is
small, but larger adjustments have an increasingly large cost. We allow for corner solutions at
 = 0 or  = 1. In the estimation, we assume  () = ( − 0 )2 2
    If the individual is at home at the time of the surveyor’s visit, she must decide whether to
complete the survey. Consumers have a baseline utility  of completing a generic 10-minute
survey for no monetary payment. The parameter  can be positive or negative to reflect that
individuals may find surveys interesting, or they may dislike surveys. In addition, individuals
receive utility from a payment  and disutility from the time cost , for a total utility from
survey completion of +−. The time cost  equals    where  is the duration of the survey
in fraction of hours, and  is the value of one hour of time. In addition, as in DellaVigna,
List and Malmendier (2012), the respondent pays a social pressure disutility cost  ≥ 0 for
refusing to do the survey when asked in person by the surveyor. There is no social pressure if
the individual is not at home when the surveyor visits. We further assume that the respondent
is aware of her own preferences and rationally anticipates her response to social pressure. In
addition to the baseline utility  +  −  of doing a survey, there is the additional utility from

                                                 7
being asked about voting,   for voters and   for non-voters, as defined above.
    We also vary whether the survey content is announced to the respondent when she opens
the door with two ‘announcement’ treatments,  ∈ {  }. When informed that the survey
will ask about her voter participation ( = ), an individual will consider the utility of being
asked about voting,   , while deciding whether to complete the survey. If she is instead not
informed at the door ( =  ), she will neglect   - provided she has not already seen an
election flyer. This announcement treatment is in the spirit of the election flyer treatment, but
by design can only aﬀect survey completion, not the probability of answering the door.
    Finally, in some treatment cells we provide an incentive for the respondents to say that
they did not vote; the incentive is either in terms of time–an 8-minute shortening of the
survey duration–or money–an extra $5 for 1 more minute of questions. We denote by  the
monetary value of the incentive. By incentivizing the respondent to say she did not vote, a
voter is provided an incentive to lie, and will lie if  −  +  ≥   In contrast, a non-voter
is provided an incentive to tell the truth, and will do so if                
                                                                 +  ≥  −   By comparing
the treatments with and without incentive  we estimate the distribution of  −  +  for
voters and of  −  −  for non-voters. Note that this treatment is unanticipated, and hence
does not appear in the respondent’s decision to answer the door or participate in the survey.
    Solution. Conditional on answering the door, the respondent of type  ∈ { } agrees to
the survey if  +  −  +   ≥ −  assuming the respondent knows that the survey is about
election and if  +  −  ≥ −  otherwise. Working backwards, consider a respondent of type
 who sees a survey flyer (which does not mention the election questions). The decision prob-
                                                                           ¡                   ¢
lem of staying at home (conditional on seeing a flyer) is max∈[01]  max  +  −   −  −
                                                     £  £             ¡                  ¢ ¤ ¤
( − 0 )2 2   leading to the solution ∗ = max min 0 +   max  +  −   −   1  0 
An increase in pay  or a decrease in the time cost  will increase the probability of being
at home and completing a survey. The parameter  determines the elasticity with respect to
incentives of home presence. Alternatively, for a respondent who sees the election flyer the
                                   £    £           ¡                    ¢ ¤ ¤
solution is given by ∗ = max min 0 +   max  +  −  +    −   1  0  If    0, the
respondent will stay at home with a weakly higher probability with the election flyer, compared
to the survey flyer, and vice versa if    0
   Finally, for both the survey flyer and the election flyer, there is a variant with an opt-out
box which makes avoidance of the surveyor easier. In this condition, agents can costlessly
reduce the probability of being at home to zero. Formally,  (0) = 0 and  () is as above for
  0.5 The optimal probability of being at home ∗ remains the same as without the opt-out
option if there is no social pressure and, hence, no reason to opt out (since the respondent
can costlessly refuse to do the survey) or if the agent expects to derive positive utility from
completing the survey. In the presence of social pressure, however, the respondent opts out if
   5
    This formalization allows a costless reduction of  to 0 but not to other levels. This is not a restriction
because agents who prefer to lower  below 0 (at a positive cost) will strictly prefer to lower  to 0 at no cost.


                                                        8
the interaction with the surveyor lowers utility.
    The following Propositions summarize the testable predictions about the impact of the
election flyer (Propositions 1 and 2), about the incidence of lies about past turnout (Proposition
3) and about the expected number of times asked (Proposition 4).6
   Proposition 1. (Pride in Voting) With Pride in Voting, the probability of home presence
 () and of survey completion  ( ) for voters is higher under the election flyer than under
the survey flyer:  ()  ≥  () and  ( )  ≥  ( )  Parallel results hold for the
opt-out flyers:  () ≥  () and  ( ) ≥  ( ) The probability of survey
completion for voters is higher when informed at the door that the survey is about voting:
 ( ) ≥  ( )  .
    Proposition 2. (Stigma from Not Voting) With Stigma from Not Voting, the prob-
ability of home presence  () and of survey completion  ( ) for non-voters is lower un-
der the election flyer than under the survey flyer:  ()                            
                                                                   ≤  () and  ( )  ≤
 ( )                                                                             
          Parallel results hold for the opt-out flyers:  () ≤  () and  ( ) ≤
        
 ( )  The probability of survey completion for non-voters is lower when informed at the
door that the survey is about voting:  ( )               
                                                 ≤  ( ) .
   Proposition 3. (Lying about Voting). If the net social-image utility is positive, the
probability of lying about past voting,  ()  should be zero for voters and larger for non-voters
assuming no incentives to lie ( = 0):  () = 0 ≤  () for  −   0 For any social-
image utility, the probability of lying is (weakly) increasing in the incentive  for voters and
(weakly) decreasing in  for non-voters:  ()  ≥ 0 and  ()  ≤ 0.
    Proposition 4. (Times Asked) The probability of voting is increasing in the number of
times asked  if the social-image utility is positive and lying costs are positive:  ( )  ≥ 0
for  −   0 and   0


3       Experimental Design
Logistics and Sample. We employed 50 surveyors and many flyer distributors, mostly
undergraduate students at the University of Chicago, who were paid $10.00 per hour. All
surveyors conducted surveys within at least two treatments, and most over multiple weekends.7
The distribution of flyers took place on Fridays and Saturdays, and the field experiment took
place on Saturdays and Sundays between July 2011 and November 2011. The locations are
towns around Chicago shown in Figure 2.8 Each surveyor is assigned a list of typically 13
    6
      The proofs are in the Appendix.
    7
      Additional details about the experiment, including the recruitment process, are in the Online Appendix.
    8
      Arlington Heights, Elk Grove Village, Evanston, Glenview, Hoﬀman Estates, Lincolnwood, Mount Prospect,
Northbrook, Oak Park, Park Ridge, Schaumburg, Skokie, Streamwood, Wilmette, and Winnetka. On almost
all days, we visited one or two towns on a given day.



                                                     9
households per half-hour on a street (constituting a surveyor-route), for a daily workload of 8
routes (10am-12pm and 1-3pm). Every half-hour, the surveyor moves to a diﬀerent street in
the neighborhood and begins a new route of 13 homes, typically entering a diﬀerent treatment
in the next route. Surveyors do not know whether a treatment involves a flyer, though they
can presumably learn that information from observing flyers on doors.
    To determine the sample in each of the towns visited, we obtain voting records from the
Election unit of the Cook County Clerk’s oﬃce in January 2011. We begin with the full
sample of addresses with at least one adult registered to vote. We then reduce the sample to
households with homogeneous voting records in the congressional elections of November 2010:
either every registered voter at the address voted in 2010, or no one did. Next, we randomize
these households to a treatment at the surveyor-route level. Houses are grouped into surveyor-
routes, which are then randomized to treatments. The treatment is a combination of four
crossed interventions: (i) flyer treatments, (ii) payment and duration of the survey, (iii) survey
content announcement at the door, and (iv) incentives to claim non-voter status.
    Treatments. Each household was randomized into five flyer treatments with equal weights:
No Flyer, Survey Flyer, Election Flyer, Opt-Out Flyer, and Election Opt-Out Flyer. Households
in the No Flyer treatment receive no flyer. Households in the Survey Flyer treatment receive
a flyer on the doorknob announcing that a surveyor would approach the home the next day
within a specified hour (e.g., 3pm - 4pm, see top left example in Figure 3). Households in the
Election Flyer treatment receive a similar flyer, with the added information that the survey will
be about ‘your voter participation in the 2010 congressional election’ (second flyer from left in
Figure 3). Households in the Opt-Out Flyer treatment receive a flyer as in the Survey Flyer
treatment, except for an added check-box which the household can mark if it does not wish
to be disturbed (third flyer from left in Figure 3). Similarly, the flyer in the Election Opt-Out
Flyer treatment has an added opt-out check box. The flyers were professionally produced.
    A second crossed randomization involves the duration of the survey as well as the compen-
sation oﬀered (if any) for completing the survey. The bottom row of Figure 3 displays flyers for
the three treatments: (5-Minutes, No Payment), (10-Minutes, $10 Payment), and (5-Minutes,
$10 Payment), each sampled with equal probability. In each of these treatments we reiterated
the compensation and duration at the door.
    The third set of crossed treatments involves how the surveyors described the survey once,
after a knock on the door, a household member answered. The respondents were told “We
are conducting confidential        minute surveys in         today. [You would be paid $
for your participation.]”, with the empty fields filled depending on the payment and duration
treatments and the assigned town. The No Information group was then simply asked “Do
you think you might be interested?”. The Information group was instead told “The survey is
about your voter participation in the 2010 congressional election. Do you think you might be
interested?”. Hence, the Information treatment provides information about the content of the


                                               10
survey in a similar way to the Election Flyer treatment. Respondents in the Election Flyer or
Election Opt-out Flyer already knew about the content, provided they read the flyer. The top
part of Figure 4 summarizes this first set of crossed treatments.
   The fourth set of crossed treatments, summarized at the bottom of Figure 4, involves
incentives to aﬀect the response to a turnout question. In control surveys, individuals are
simply asked whether they voted in the 2010 congressional election. For a subject in a 10-
minute, $10 survey in the treatment group, we oﬀer an 8-minute incentive to the respondent
to state that he or she did not vote. After the first question in the survey, the surveyor
reads aloud: ‘We have 10 minutes of questions about your voter participation in the 2010
congressional election, but if you say that you did not vote then we only have 2 minutes of
questions. Either way you answer you will be paid $10. That is, we have 10 minutes of
questions, but if you tell us no to the question “did you vote in the 2010 congressional election
” then we only have 2 minutes of questions to ask. Regardless of your answer you will earn
$10.’ The surveyor then points to where the survey ends if the respondent answers ‘no’, in
which case the survey is indeed much shorter.
    For respondents assigned to a 5-minute survey, we did not assign a time discount which
could only have been a modest 3-minute reduction. Instead, we provide a monetary incentive to
the treatment group as follows (with the material in brackets applying only to the (5-Minutes,
$10 Payment) conditions): ‘We have 5 minutes of questions about your voter participation
in the 2010 congressional election, but if you say that you did not vote then we have 1 extra
minute of questions and we will pay you an extra $5 for answering these additional questions
[.IF PAID: for a total of $15]. If you say that you voted then we will just ask you the original
5 minutes of questions. [.IF PAID: and pay you $10 as promised.] That is, we have 5 minutes
of questions, but if tell us no to the question “did you vote in the 2010 congressional election”
then we have 1 extra minute of questions and you will earn an additional $5 for answering these
questions.’ Conditional on a 5-minute or a 10-minute survey, we determined the incentive or
no-incentive treatment with equal weights.
   Finally, we followed the promises made: we pay the individuals as promised, and we con-
ducted a longer survey when the survey was advertised as lasting 10 minutes rather than 5
minutes. Further, in the treatments with a lying incentive, if the subject responded ‘no’ to the
turnout question, the survey duration and payment were altered as promised.
    Sample. We reached a total of 14,475 households. From this initial sample, we exclude
1,278 observations in which the households displayed a no-solicitor sign (in which case the
surveyor did not contact the household) or the surveyor was not able to contact the household
for other reasons (including, for example, a lack of access to the front door or a dog blocking
the entrance). The final sample includes 13,197 households.




                                               11
4       Reduced-Form Estimates
Answering the door and survey completion. We present graphical evidence in Figure 5
on the share of households answering the door and completing the survey as a function of the
survey details, pooling across the five flyer treatments. Voters are very responsive to incentives,
going from 33 percent answering the door for a $0, 5-minute survey to 39 percent for the $10,
5-minute survey. Hence, a $10 incentive induces a 6 percentage point (20 percent) increase
in the share answering the door. The eﬀect is similarly large for the share completing the
survey, a 6 percentage points (45 percent) increase. The elasticity of non-voters with respect
to incentives is smaller with regards to answering the door, but is large with respect to survey
completion: 5 percentage points (62 percent).
    Having established that households are responsive to the survey incentives, we turn to
the key flyer treatment–whether the flyer informs the household about the election question.
Figure 6a plots the results for voters, pooling across the diﬀerent survey durations and payment
incentives. We do not observe much diﬀerence for voters in the share answering the door, or the
share completing the survey, between the Survey Flyer and the Flyer Election treatments. In
the Opt-out treatments, we observe a decrease in the share answering the door and in the share
completing a survey when the survey informs about the election. Thus, there is no evidence
of pride from voting, and it appears that voters prefer not to be asked whether they voted.
    For non-voters (Figure 6b), the diﬀerence between the Flyer and the Flyer Election treat-
ments is large: there is a 6 percentage point drop (20 percent) in the probability of answering
the door. The size of this eﬀect is comparable to the eﬀect of a $10 incentive to complete the
survey. There is a similar 3 percentage point (25 percent) decrease in the share completing a
survey when the flyer announces the election question. The impacts are consistent but smaller
in the opt-out treatments, with a 1.5 percentage point (15 percent) decrease in the share an-
swering the door when the flyer mentions elections. These results indicate strong avoidance of
non-voters, pointing to shame from admitting to not voting and disutility from lying.
   These findings may depend on the context. The results of the 2010 congressional elections
were very disappointing for Democrats, including in Illinois the loss of President Obama’s
seat in the Senate, and correspondingly positive for Republicans. The lack of evidence for
pride among voters may well be due to disappointment, given that the neighborhoods visited
were largely Democratic. While our results are from a single election, we can diﬀerentiate
the response based on the primary registration. In Figure 7 we present separate results for
households with voters who participated in Republican primaries (left panel) versus households
with voters registered in Democratic primaries (right panel).9 Indeed, we detect sizeable sorting
    9
   We record the most recent participation in primary elections by any registered member of the household.
We define as ‘households with registered Republican voters’ households where at least one voter has voted in a
Republican primary, and no voter has voted in a Democratic primary. Vice versa for the definition of households



                                                      12
in by Republican voters in response to the election flyer, indicative of pride in voting in an
election with positive results for the party. Among Democratic voters, instead, we observe
sorting out as in the overall results, consistent with disappointment about the election. Among
voters who did not participate in a primary (not shown), we also detect sorting out.
    We now examine the eﬀects of announcing the survey content at the door. Figure 8 plots
survey completion rates by the door announcement type (Informed or Not Informed), pooling
across all the flyer treatments. For voters, the eﬀects of the door announcements are similar
to those of the flyer announcements: there is no increase in survey completion from being
informed about the voting question, and thus no evidence of pride. But non-voters also show
essentially no eﬀect on survey completion from being informed at the door. This is in contrast
to the flyer treatments, where the election flyer leads to a sharp drop in answering the door
and in survey completion by non-voters. We speculate that the diﬀerence (not captured in the
model) could be that the flyer gives individuals time to think through the decision problem,
while they must respond immediately when warned only at the door.
    In Table 1, we present the regression analysis underlying Figures 5, 6a and 6b, 7, and 8
both with no controls and with fixed eﬀects for surveyor  day-town  and hour-of-day . We
estimate, separately for voters and non-voters, the OLS regression:

                               =  + Γ +  +  +  +                               (3)

where the dependent variable  is, alternatively, an indicator for whether individual 
opened the door (  ) or agreed to complete the survey ( ). The vector  contains indica-
tors for the various survey treatments, with the baseline No-Flyer treatment for a $0, 5 minute
survey as the omitted group. We cluster the standard errors at the surveyor×date level.10
Table 1 shows that the results shown in the previous figures are robust to the inclusion of the
surveyor, date-location, and hour fixed eﬀects. In the Online Appendix we present two sets of
robustness results. In Online Appendix Table 1 we allow for diﬀerent eﬀects of a surveyor on
diﬀerent dates and location by including surveyor*date*location fixed eﬀects; the results are
unaﬀected. In Online Appendix Table 2 we present separate estimates for the first two month
of the experiment (July and August 2011) and the next two months (October and November
2011); the results are comparable.11 Finally, in Online Appendix Table 3 we present the results
split by political registration, as in Figure 7.
   Lying about voting. Next, we estimate the rates at which voters and non-voters mis-
represent their voting behavior, and how these lies respond to the randomized incentives to lie
with registered Democrats.
  10
     For space reasons, the specification in Table 1 assumes an additive eﬀect between the flyer treatments, the
payment and duration treatments and the door information treatments. The empirical moments used for the
estimation, listed in Appendix Table 1, are more disaggregated.
  11
     We did not run the experiment in September 2011.



                                                      13
(for voters) or to tell the truth (for non-voters). For the sample of individuals who completed
the survey, we estimate the OLS regression

                                         =  + Γ +  +                                        (4)

where  = 1 if individual  lied about her voting behavior to surveyor , and 0 otherwise,
and  is an indicator for whether respondent  is provided an incentive to say she did not
vote. Due to the smaller sample, only surveyor fixed eﬀects  are included in regressions.
    In Table 2 and Figure 9, we present the results from these estimations. Recall that the
incentive was always to say that one did not vote. Thus, we expect voters in the treatment
condition to lie more than in the control, and non-voters to lie less. In Panel A of Table 2, to
maximize power we pool across all survey treatments and across the 8-minute and $5 incentive.
Note first that non-voters, in the absence of any lying incentive, lie about 46 percent of the
time about past turnout. This rate is within the range of previous results using the American
National Election Studies and validated voter records (Silver, Anderson, and Abramson, 1986),
and indicates that non-voters care about the social image that they convey. We also observe a
12 percent lying rate for voters, which could be explained by measurement error in the match
to the voting records, or by a genuine preference among some voters to look like a non-voter.12
    Turning to the eﬀect of the incentives, the treatments have a small eﬀect on voters: they lie
2.7 percentage points more when incentivized to do so, which is not statistically significant at
conventional levels. For non-voters, in contrast, the eﬀect is a highly significant 12 percentage
point (25 percent) decrease in lying rates. Thus, voters appear to greatly dislike lying and
claiming to be non-voters (relative to telling the truth), while non-voters are more easily
moved between telling the truth and falsely claiming to be voters.
   Do the results diﬀer for the 8-minute time discount versus the $5 incentive? Figure 9 shows
that the results are very similar for the two types of incentives, especially for non-voters,
suggesting an implied value of time of about $35 per hour. Panels B-D in Table 2 further show
that the results are similar whether the 5-minute survey was paid or unpaid.
    Summary. To summarize the reduced form results, among voters we find little sorting on
average into the home in the election flyer treatment, and therefore little evidence of pride in
voting on average (though there is evidence among Republicans). But this does not imply that
social image does not motivate their voting behavior. In fact, even with substantial incentives
of $5 earned or 8 minutes saved, over 85% of voters refuse to say they did not vote. This
indicates that voters have a high lying cost  , a low social-image value of being a non-voter
 , or both. Both these factors induce a high social-image value of voting. For non-voters,
we find substantial sorting out in the election flyer treatment, indicating that that non-voters
  12
    Notice that non-registered voters do not appear in our voting records. Hence, some of the households which
we classify as ‘voting households’ may include some non-voters, accounting for some of the lying rate for these
households. In the Structural Estimates, we present results which allow for measurement error.


                                                      14
experience stigma on average from not-voting. Further, close to half of non-voters lie and claim
to be voters when asked. This implies that on average they are indiﬀerent between the options:
           
  −  =  . A $5 incentive reduces lying by 25%, indicating that a substantial share of
non-voters are close to the margin in their decision to tell the truth or lie. In the next section,
we utilize all the experimental treatments to estimate the social-image value of voting.


5    Structural Estimates
Set-up. To estimate the model of Section 2, we impose additional assumptions, some of
which are relaxed below. Since all parameters are allowed to diﬀer between voters and non-
voters, for simplicity we omit the superscript  = { }. We assume that the social-image
variables  and  are independently normally distributed across individuals, with diﬀering
means  and  but the same standard deviation,  =  , which we denote by  . The
normality assumption allows for individuals who prefer the social image associated with not
voting (   ). We also assume a normal distribution with parameters  and  for the
utility  of completing an unpaid 10-minute survey, as well as a quadratic cost of changing
plans to be at home,  () = ( − 0 )2 2.
   The key parameters of interest are: (i)  , the mean social-image utility from saying
that one voted; (ii)   the mean social-image utility of saying one did not vote; (iii)  ,
the standard deviation of the social-image utilities; (iv)  the lying cost. In the benchmark
specification, the parameters are identified up to the cost of lying; we thus display the results
as a function of an assumed lying cost.
   We also identify the following auxiliary parameters: (i) 0 , the baseline probability of
opening the door; (ii) , the probability of observing (and remembering) the flyer; (iii) , the
responsiveness of the probability of opening the door to the desirability of being at home; (iv)
 and  , the mean and standard deviation of the baseline utility of doing a survey; (v)   ,
the value of one hour of time; (vi)  , the social pressure cost associated with saying no to the
survey request. The total number of parameters is 11, including  for voters and as many for
non-voters for a total of 22 parameters.
    To estimate the model, we use a classical minimum-distance estimator. Denote by  ()
the vector of theoretical moments as a function of the parameters , and by ̂ the vector of
observed moments. The minimum-distance estimator chooses the parameters ̂ that minimize
the distance ( () − ̂)0  ( () − ̂)  As a weighting matrix  , we use the diagonal of the
inverse of the variance-covariance matrix. Hence, the estimator minimizes the sum of squared
distances, weighted by the inverse variance of each moment. As a robustness check, we also
use the identity matrix as the weight. We discuss further details in Appendix A.
   To list the moments  ()  we introduce the following indices:  ∈ { } indicates voters
and non-voters,  ∈ {      } indicates the flyer treatments,  indexes the

                                                15
payment and duration treatments,  ∈ {$0 5; $10 10; $10 5},  indicates the
treatments on survey information at the door,  ∈ {  }, and  indexes incentives to lie,
 ∈ {  8 min $5}. The moments  () are: (i) the probability opening the door in survey
treatments  ,  () ; (ii) the probability of completing the survey in survey treatments
 ,  ( ) ; (iii) the probability of checking the opt-out box in the Opt-Out treatments,
 () for  ∈ { } (iv) the probability of completing the survey in the survey
content treatments, given the flyer treatments:  () and (v) the probability of lying about
past turnout conditional on completing the survey, given incentive ,  () .13 The empirical
moments ̂ 100 in total, are estimated in a first stage model using the same controls as in the
main regressions, and are listed in Appendix Table 1.
    Benchmark Estimates. The benchmark estimates (Table 3) provide no evidence of pride
for voters: voters on average dislike informing others that they voted:  = −586 (se 194).
However, voters dislike lying even more:  −  = −2481 (se 514) is the disutility from
saying that they did not vote. Notice that we cannot parse the extent to which this disutility
is due to a large net social-image utility  −  or a large lying cost   There is substantial
heterogeneity in these signalling values:   = 1235 (se 310), implying that 32 percent of

voters do take pride in saying they voted.
   For non-voters, we estimate significant stigma on average from admitting that they did not
vote: 
         = −461 (se 240). On average, non-voters are nearly indiﬀerent between admitting
they did not vote and lying and claiming they voted ( − = −423, se 220), consistent with
the finding that about half of non-voters lie in the control treatments. Heterogeneity across
                                                       = 620 (se 129).
individuals is sizeable but smaller than for voters: 
    Turning to the auxiliary parameters, we estimate that on average neither voters nor non-
voters like unpaid surveys, but there is a substantial heterogeneity, with voters being more
likely to complete unpaid surveys. (Voters are likely public good providers generally). The
estimated time value is $65 per hour for voters and $19 for non-voters, a diﬀerence consistent
with the strong positive correlation between income and turnout. Voters are also estimated to
incur higher social pressure costs from declining to participate in the survey ( = $176 versus
 = $006) and a lower elasticity of home presence (  = 013 versus   = 286), although
the elasticity for non-voters is imprecisely estimated.14
   Value of Voting. Using the estimates, we compute the average social-image value of
                               R
voting due to being asked once, Φ ( −   )  (   )  Since the benchmark model is
  13
     We present pooled moments across some of the treatments for two reasons. In some cases we do not expect
any impact of the treatment on the relevant moment, such as of the lying incentives on the probability of
opening the door or completing the survey. In other cases, we pool to keep the list of moments readable and
to guarantee a sizeable sample in each cell, when the model does not imply important diﬀerences across the
pooled treatments; for example, we do not consider the impact of the survey content treatment separately as a
function of the survey duration and payment.
  14
     We discuss the imprecision of the estimates of  and  in Appendix C.


                                                     16
identified up to the lying cost, we cannot point identify this value. We can, however, plot the
social-image value of voting as a function of the lying cost  for a range of plausible values,
shown in Figure 10a for both voters and non-voters. If lying is entirely costless ( = 0), the
social-image value is zero, since non-voters and voters can costlessly claim their preferred social
image. As the underlying cost of lying increases, the value of voting is inverse-U-shaped for
voters, while it rises monotonically for non-voters. The intuition for voters is as follows. As
 rises, as Figure 1 illustrates, the value of voting (weakly) increases in  for a given positive
 −  , since lying becomes costlier. However, as  increases, the net estimated social image
 − mechanically declines. (The data pins down the value for voters of saying that they did
not vote,  − ; as  increases,  must increase to compensate, lowering  −  ) Initially,
the first force dominates since the lying cost is likely to be binding. For high enough lying
cost, however, the second force shifting the net social image dominates, ultimately leading to
a negative value of voting for high enough  The intuition for non-voters is parallel.
    The social-image value of voting in Figure 10a has two important implications for voting.
First, even if we do not know the lying cost, for a range of plausible values the correspondent
value of voting is quite flat. For a lying cost in the range between $2 and $15, the value of voting
due to being asked once for voters lies between $1.5 and $4. To provide a benchmark estimate
from a diﬀerent context, In Appendix D we estimate the lying cost using the data from Erat
and Gneezy (2012), a representative cheap talk laboratory experiment, and obtain an estimate
for the lying cost in this range, of $7. Hence, even though we are not point identified, the
range of uncertainty for the value of voting is not too large provided one agrees on the range
for . (For non-voters instead the estimates of the value of voting increase sharply with ).
Second, we can contrast the value of voting for voters and non-voters, provided we assume the
same lying cost. For values of the lying cost up to $7, the estimated value of voting is larger
for voters than non-voters, consistent with observed cross-sectional diﬀerences.
    To obtain the ultimate value of voting because others ask, we scale up the value of being
asked once by the expected number of times asked,  . We measure this parameter with survey
questions on how often the survey respondents has been asked whether they voted in the 2010
congressional election by friends, relative, coworkers, and other people. The Online Appendix
Figure 1 displays the c.d.f. of the total number of times asked: 60 percent of respondents
report being asked at least once, and 20 percent report being asked more than 10 times. On
average, hence, respondents report being asked around 5 times for the 2010 congressional
election, with similar magnitudes for voters and non-voters (  = 489 and   = 533). The
Figure also reports the number of times people report being asked for the 2008 presidential
election: the average is about twice as high, with 40 percent of people reporting to be asked
at least 10 times. This number is consistent with the corresponding figures in the Cooperative
Congressional Election Study as reported in Gerber et al. (2012).
   To obtain the total value of voting because others ask in the 2010 election, we multiply the


                                                17
value of voting due to being asked once by the average times asked, leading to an overall value
of voting for voters, for the range of lying costs, between $6.5 and $15, sizeable magnitudes
(Figure 10b and Table 3).15 We can also use these estimates to conjecture the social-image value
of voting for presidential elections. Assuming that the social-image parameters for presidential
elections are at least comparable to the ones in congressional elections, we can multiply the
value of voting due to being asked once by the number of times people report being asked
in the 2008 presidential election. The implied value of voting in presidential elections, also
plotted in Figure 10b, is about twice as large, in the range of $13-$30. The model is therefore
also consistent with the observed higher turnout in presidential elections.
   Finally, we turn to the welfare eﬀect of being asked once if one has voted (Table 3). For
voters, this is the average value of   = max (   −  ), and is estimated to be −463 (se
198). Interestingly, non-voters are estimated to have a less negative utility from being asked,
−092 (se 215) because non-voters’ social-image utility distribution is closer to zero.
    Identification and Sensitivity Analysis. We next discuss the intuition for the main
sources of identification, and provide supporting evidence by calculating the sensitivity of the
estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). In particular,
we compute a sensitivity matrix , each element  of which is the derivative of the estimated
parameter b with respect to the moment  .16 We further normalize the measure so each
element can be interpreted as the eﬀect of a one standard deviation increase in the moment
 on the expected value of the estimated parameter b , holding other moments fixed and
measured in units of the asymptotic standard deviation of b . This calculation reveals the local
sensitivity of the parameter estimates to each of the individual moments, and thus allows us to
provide evidence on which features of the data and the experiment (locally) identify the model.
Alternatively, the measure can be interpreted as revealing the sensitivity of the estimates to
model misspecification.
    First, consider the key social-image parameters,  ,  and  . The diﬀerence in home
presence and survey completion between the Flyer and Flyer-election, and between the Opt-
Out and Opt-Out election treatments, play an important role. For voters, they help identify
the mean social-image utility  . For non-voters, given that on average half of non-voters lie in
our sample (absent incentives to do otherwise), the average social-image utility from admitting
to not voting  must approximately equal the utility from lying,  −  . Hence, the sorting
response for non-voters to the election surveys identifies both  and  −   A similar role
  15
     We estimate the social-image utility when asked by a surveyor. If social-image concerns or lying costs when
interacting with friends, family and colleagues are higher than those in a one-shot interaction with a surveyor,
then our estimates are likely to be lower bounds of the social-image value of voting.
  16
     We first compute the absolute sensitivity matrix  = (̂0  ̂)−1 ̂0  , where  is the weighting matrix
                                                           P
used in the minimum distance estimation, and ̂ ≡  −1 =1 ∇  (b) is the Jacobian of the moments with
                                                                                    r               ³ ´
                                                                        e = 
respect to the parameters. We then normalize the sensitivity measure as             Var ( ) Var b .



                                                      18
is played by the diﬀerence in survey completion between the Information and No Information
treatments. Finally, the response to the lying incentives is crucial for identifying the hetero-
geneity in social image  and the average utility diﬀerence between answering truthfully and
lying. For example, an 8 minute incentive reduces the share of non-voters lying by 12 per-
centage points (Table 2, Panel D), implying Pr (      
                                                      − 
                                                                  + (860)   ) = 012 or
                                                                                  
Pr (0  
           −    −   (860)  ) = 012, where  −  −  is normally distributed with
                                                            
            2 .
variance 2
    The parameter sensitivity calculations at the estimated values largely confirm these intu-
itions. Appendix Figure 1a plots the normalized sensitivity measures for voters for  ,  and
   as a function of each of the 50 empirical moments for voters. The home presence (PH) and

survey completion (PSV) moments for the Flyer Election (WE) and Opt-Out Election (OOE)
treatments largely show the expected eﬀect: an increase in the moment (holding fixed the
corresponding moments in the Flyer and Opt-Out treatments) leads to an increase in the esti-
mated  and  values.17 The opposite pattern obtains for the Flyer and Opt-Out moments
(holding constant the Fyer Election and Opt-Out Election moments), since it is the diﬀerence
between the two that is most relevant. As predicted, an increase in survey completion in the In-
formation treatment relative to the No Information treatment also increases  and  , since
it implies a larger relative attractiveness of answering a survey about voter turnout. Finally,
the estimated heterogeneity in signaling values   responds strongly to the lying incentive

moments. More lying by voters in the incentive-to-lie treatments implies a greater mass of
individuals close to the margin, and thus a lower estimate of   (i.e. a negative sensitivity

value). More lying by voters when incentivized also implies a higher social-image value of not
voting  relative to voting ( ).
    Appendix Figure 1b plots the parallel analysis for non-voters. Similarly to the case of voters,
the lying incentive moments play an important role, in the expected direction. Recall that non-
voters are incentivized to tell the truth. Thus, a ceteris paribus increase in lying in the incentive
treatment implies a smaller response to the incentive, and thus fewer marginal respondents due
               . Conversely, an increase in lying in the control group implies a larger response
to a higher 
to incentive, and thus a lower    . Higher lying in the control additionally implies a higher

value of  relative to  . Compared to to the case of voters, the Information treatments
play a more important role for identification of  and  for non-voters. As we discussed
above, the Information treatments do not provide evidence of sorting out, in contrast to the
strong sorting out patterns in both the Flyer Election and the Opt-Out Election treatments.
At the estimated parameters, since we explain the response to the Information treatments
  17
     An exception occurs in each case for the unpaid 5 minute survey, where a ceteris paribus increase in the
WE moments generally reduces the mean social image parameters. The fact that this decrease occurs not just
for WE but also for W and the PSV NW moments suggests that is through a mechanism unrelated to the one
described above, and involves instead other important parameters which feed back to the estimation of  and
 .


                                                     19
poorly for non-voters, the estimates become quite sensitive to these moments. This motivates
a robustness check below in which we do not utilize these moments.
    As for the auxiliary parameters, the mean and standard deviation of the value of completing
a survey,  and  , are identified from the survey completion rates for diﬀerent monetary
incentives (Online Appendix Figures 2a and 2b). The value of time  is identified from
the comparison between payment increases (from $0 to $10) and duration decreases (from
10 to 5 minutes), and partly also by the response to the 8 minute time saving oﬀered in
the lying incentive (Online Appendix Figure 3). The baseline probability of answering the
door, 0 , is pinned down by the share opening the door in the no-flyer treatments, and less
directly by the share opting out in the opt-out treatments, since respondents are predicted to
opt out only if they expect to be home in the first place (Online Appendix Figure 4). The
probability of observing and remembering the flyer, , is mainly identified by the fraction of
households checking the opt-out box in the Opt-out treatment (10 to 13 percent), which equals
0  ( − ), and by the fraction opening the door in these treatments (Online Appendix
Figure 5). The elasticity of opening the door  with respect to incentives, and the social
pressure  , are related to the share opening the door in the diﬀerent survey treatments.18
Identifying them separately is not obvious, since they often appear in the model in the product
 Indeed, Online Appendix Figure 6 shows that the two parameters respond in opposite
directions to each moment, and also are identified by a wider range of moments. The diﬃculty
in separately estimating  and  motivates the robustness checks below where we fix .
    Decomposing the Benchmark Estimates. To further highlight the identification, in
Table 4 we re-estimate the model using subsets of the moments. When we use only the
lying moments (Column 2), the levels of the social-image parameters  and  are not
identified, but we can estimate the average diﬀerence  −  (given a lying cost), as well
as the heterogeneity  . Hence, holding  fixed, we can estimate the other social-image
parameters. The implied value of voting is then essentially the same as when using the much
richer set of moments. This highlights the key role that the lying treatments play in estimating
the value of voting.
    Alternatively, we utilize all the moments other than the experimental variation in incentives
to lie (Columns 3 and 4). (We include the lying rates in the control group) These moments
suﬃce to estimate all of the ancillary parameters as well as  for voters. However, the other
parameters are not identified because the heterogeneity term  is unidentified. Thus, we
present two special cases with fixed low heterogeneity (Column 3,   =   = $5) and fixed
                                                                             
high heterogeneity (Column 4,     =   = $20). The estimates reveal substantial sensitivity
                                          
to the assumed . The key contribution of these sorting moments is not to the value of voting,
  18
    Consider a respondent of type  who dislikes answering a survey and hence will say no and incur the social
pressure cost  . In the flyer treatment  , she will choose to be at home with probability 0 −     (barring
corner solutions for ).



                                                         20
but to the levels of the social-image terms and thus the welfare eﬀect of being asked, which is
not identified using only the lying moments.
    Finally, in Column 5 we report estimates excluding the moments split by whether house-
holds are informed at the door about the election topic. When we exclude these moments,
the estimated social-image parameters indicate a larger dislike of being asked about voting,
especially for non-voters. This change, however, has essentially no eﬀect on the estimated value
of voting which, as we showed, largely depends on the lying incentives.
   Robustness. In Table 5, we explore the robustness of the parameter estimates to alter-
native assumptions. First, we consider an alternative explanation of the results: the sorting
out of non-voters may be due to a dislike of talking about politics, rather than any stigma
from admitting to not voting. We thus allow for a utility of talking about politics which is
independent of whether one voted or not (Column 2). With this extra parameter, we lose
the ability to estimate a social-image parameter, but the estimated value of voting, which is
identified by the lying treatments (provided a value of time), is unchanged.
    Next, we consider two forms of measurement error. First, notice that the voting records
do not include information about non-registered adults in a household. Since these individuals
are necessarily non-voters, the person answering the door in an apparent voting household may
actually be a non-voter. (This would explain why 10% of voting households appear to lie about
voting even absent incentives to lie). In Column 3, we assume that 10% of respondents in voting
households are actually non-voters. In Column 4, we allow for measurement error for both
groups of households, and assume that 10% of respondents in a voting (or respectively, non-
voting) household are non-voters (respectively, voters). Both specifications lead to a somewhat
larger value of voting for a given lying cost.
    We also consider a number of other robustness checks in Appendix Table 2. We show that
the results are very similar if (i) we equally weight the moments instead of utilizing the inverse
of the variances of each moment as weights; (ii) we assume positively correlated  and  ,
with correlation coeﬃcient  = 05; (iii) we assume negatively correlated  and  , with
 = −05. We can also, instead of estimating the elasticity of sorting , fix it at either a large
value (  =   = 10) or a small value (  =   = 002); these specifications are associated
with a substantially worse fit, with some shifts in the social-image parameters.
    Full Estimation. Thus far, we have been unable to identify the psychological cost of
lying  separately from the utility terms  and  . However, we would be able to estimate
all parameters, including the lying cost, if we made the additional assumption that voters and
non-voters share the same social-image parameters. To see this, consider that the estimates
allow us to identify  and  − for voters, and                          
                                                       and  − ; if one assumes  =  ,
                                                                                            

 =               
         and  =  , the value of the lying cost is identified.
   In general, the assumption of equality for voters and non-voters is unpalatable. Diﬀerent
social-image parameters might be the very diﬀerence between voters and non-voters. The


                                               21
assumption, however, is less problematic in a subsample of voters and non-voters with similar
voting histories. We eliminate always-voters and never-voters and consider households with
individuals who vote some of the time, some of whom happened to vote in 2010, while others
happened not to. Within this sub-group, individuals who voted in 2010 and individuals who
did not vote in 2010 are more likely to be similar.
    Formally, we use the individual-level voting records for all elections from 2004 to 2010,
primaries included, to predict the probability that an individual will vote in November of 2010.
We then restrict the sample to households where all registered individuals have a predicted
probability of voting between 25 and 75 percent, leaving us with a sample of 5,901 households.
Column 1 of Table 6 reports the estimation results. The mean utility of truthfully saying
one voted ( ) is estimated near zero, with a net signalling utility  −  of 4.50. The
estimated lying cost is  = $463 (se $108), in the ballpark of plausible values. The implied
total signaling value of voting in the 2010 elections is estimated at $828 for voters and $8.80
for non-voters (since the average number of times asked is slightly higher for non-voters).
    The estimates in Column 1 require that not only the social signaling and lying parameters
be the same across voters and non-voters, but that the auxiliary parameters be the same as
well. In Column 2, we remove the latter assumption. Allowing for diﬀerences in the auxiliary
parameters has very little eﬀect on the key parameter estimates, but improves the fit of the
model quite a bit, from an SSE of 132.49 (Column 1) to an SSE of 100.79. Finally, in Column
3 we report estimates where we allow all parameters to diﬀer between voters and non-voters.
This is the parallel of the benchmark specification in Table 3, and hence does not allow for
point identification of all parameters, but is restricted to this special subsample. Allowing for
this extra diﬀerence leads to only a relatively small increase in the fit, to an SSE of 97.20.
    For the preferred specification in Column 2, we again calculate the Gentzkow-Shapiro sensi-
tivity measures, but this time including the estimated lying cost parameter . Appendix Table
7 shows that  is locally identified mainly by the lying incentives. A higher lying rate for voters
when incentivized to lie results in a smaller estimated lying cost. Conversely, higher lying by
non-voters when unincentivized implies a smaller lying cost. Greater survey completion in the
unpaid election surveys (WE and OOE) also play a role, though with smaller eﬀects. The
sensitivity of the social-image parameters  ,  and    and of the auxiliary parameters is

similar to that reported for the benchmark estimates.


6    Get-out-the-vote Experiment
The experiments described above are designed to measure the value of voting without aﬀecting
voting itself. Instead, we rely on the sorting of households, the willingness to complete a survey,
and incentivized responses, conditional on a past voting behavior (which we observe). Yet,
the model suggests a natural treatment to increase voter turnout. As Proposition 4 states,


                                                22
individuals with social-image motives are more likely to vote the more frequently they expect
to be asked about voting, an expectation which we can manipulate experimentally.
   In November of 2010 and of 2012, we set out to do just that for towns surrounding Chicago.
In the five days before the election date, we posted a flyer on the doorknob of households in
the treatment group informing them that ‘researchers will contact you within three weeks of
the election [...] to conduct a survey on your voter participation’. Figure 11 shows the flyer for
the 2012 election. (After the election, we follow up with a door-to-door visit, as advertised).
Since this flyer could also impact turnout through a reminder eﬀect, we compare this group to
a group which received a flyer with a mere reminder of the upcoming election, also displayed in
Figure 11. Finally, a control group received no flyer. After the election, we obtain the voting
record for all individuals with residence at the addresses targeted in this experiment and we
examine the impact on voter turnout.
    Table 7 reports the results for both the November 2010 and the November 2012 intervention
using an OLS specification: the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the individual
voted in the specific election. Notice that there may be multiple individuals at one address,
each of which is a separate observation. The November 2010 experiment has a sample size of
31,306 individuals targeted. The turnout in the control group (which received no flyers) is 60.0
percentage points. Compared to this control group, the mere reminder had no eﬀect, leading
to an estimated decrease of .2 percentage point. Compared to the flyer with a mere reminder,
the flyer with announcement of future question about voting raises turnout by 1.4 percentage
points, a sizeable eﬀect, if insignificant. In Column 2, we add controls for the full history of
voting of the households in all elections between 2004 and the election in question. Adding
controls in a randomized experiment should not aﬀect the point estimates if the experiment is
conducted properly, but can reduce the residual variance, and hence increase precision. Indeed,
the controls have very little impact on the point estimates, but they nearly halve the standard
errors since past voting is highly predictive of future voting (the R2 increases from 0.00 to 0.40).
In this specification, the estimated eﬀect of the flyer with announcement of future asking is an
extra 1.3 percentage points in turnout, with a two-sided p-value of 0.12 (one-sided p-value of
0.06). While not quite statistically significant, the sizeable eﬀect is certainly consistent with
the predictions of the model.
    Columns 3 and 4 display the estimates for the November 2012 election. In this later
election, we were able to deploy a larger flyering team, guaranteeing a sample size of 93,805
individuals. Given the diﬀerent nature of the election (presidential versus congressional), the
baseline turnout in the control group is higher, at 73.1 percentage points, leaving a smaller
share of non-voters to be convinced. We find suggestive evidence that the reminder flyer
itself may have increased turnout, with little evidence of a diﬀerential eﬀect of the flyer with
announcement of the future visit. In the specification with controls (Column 4), the diﬀerential
eﬀect is estimated to be 0.1 percentage points, not significant. The smaller eﬀect in this second


                                                23
election is consistent with two interpretations. The more competitive election is likely to have
reduced the number of individuals on the margin of voting. Alternatively, the point estimates
for the 2010 election may overstate the magnitude of the result.
    Overall, the evidence is qualitatively consistent with the predictions of the model, if statisti-
cally imprecise. The results are consistent with the contemporaneous and independent results
of Rogers and Ternovsky (2013) who similarly inform a treatment group that they may be
called after the election about their voting behavior, and find a similarly positive (marginally
significant) impact on turnout.


7    Conclusion
We have presented evidence from field experiments designed to provide estimates for a model
of turnout: individuals vote because they expect to be asked, and they anticipate the disutility
associated with admitting to not voting, or with lying about voting. The combination of
three crossed experimental arms allows us to estimate all but one of the key parameters. We
show that for a range of assumptions about the unidentified lying cost we obtain estimates
of the value of voting due to being asked in the range of $5-$15, a sizeable magnitude for a
congressional election. For a subsample with medium propensity to vote, we identify a value
of voting due to being asked of $8. We conjecture larger magnitudes for presidential elections.
   A methodological ingredient of this paper is the tight link between a simple model and
the experimental design. This allows us not only to derive reduced-form results, but to use
such results to estimate the underlying parameters. As such, this paper attempts to bridge
a gap between two thriving, but largely separate literatures: the theoretical literature on
voting and the reduced-form field experiments on get-out-the-vote and turnout. We hope that
methodologies similar to the ones in this paper will be useful in providing further insights.

References
 [1] Allcott, Hunt. (2011). “Social Norms and Energy Conservation.” Journal of Public Eco-
     nomics, 95 (9-10), 1082-1095.
 [2] Ali, Nageeb and Charles Lin. (2013). “Why People Vote: Ethical Motives and Social
     Incentives”, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5 (2), 73-98.
 [3] Andreoni, James, B. Douglas Bernheim. “Social Image and the 50—50 Norm: A Theoretical
     and Experimental Analysis of Audience Eﬀects” Econometrica, 77 (5), 1607—1636.
 [4] Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha and Stephan Meier. (2009). “Doing Good or Doing Well? Im-
     age Motivation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially” American Economic
     Review, 99(1), 544-555.
 [5] Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera and Kelsey Jack. (2013) “No Margin, No mission? A field
     experiment on incentives for pro-social tasks” Working paper.


                                                 24
 [6] Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, Mathew Jackson. (2013). “The
     Diﬀusion of Microfinance” Science 341, 363-370.
 [7] Benabou, Roland and Tirole, Jean, (2006). “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American
     Economic Review, 96(5), 1652-1678.
 [8] Blais, Andre, (2000). To Vote or Not to Vote: The Merits and Limits of Rational Choice
     Theory, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
 [9] Card, David, DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier, (2011). “The Role of Theory
     in Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), pp. 39-62.
[10] Coate, Stephen and Michael Conlin. (2004). “A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to Voter
     Turnout: Theory and Evidence” American Economic Review, 94(5), 1476-1504.
[11] Coate, Stephen, Conlin, Michael, and Moro, Andrea. (2008). “The Performance of Pivotal-
     Voter Models in Small-Scale Elections: Evidence from Texas Liquor Referenda,” Journal
     of Public Economics, 92: 582-596.
[12] Conlin, Michael, O’Donoghue, Ted, and Vogelsang, Timothy J., (2007). “Projection Bias
     in Catalog Orders,” American Economic Review, 97: 1217-1249.
[13] DellaVigna, Stefano, List, John. A., & Malmendier, Ulrike. (2012). “Testing for Altruism
     and Social Pressure in Charitable Giving.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1-56.
[14] Downs, Anthony, (1957). An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York, Harper.
[15] Erat, Sanjiv and Gneezy, Uri. (2012). “White Lies,” Management Science, 58(4): 723-733.
[16] Feddersen, Timothy .(2004), “Rational Choice Theory and the Paradox of Not Voting,”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 99-112.
[17] Feddersen, Timothy and Alvaro Sandroni, (2006), “A Theory of Participation in Elec-
     tions,” American Economic Review, 96(4), 1271-1282.
[18] Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro. (2013) “Measuring the sensitivity of parameter
     estimates to sample statistics.” Unpublished Manuscript.
[19] Gerber, Alan S. and Donald P. Green. (2000) “The Eﬀects of Canvassing, Telephone
     Calls, and Direct Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment” American Political Science
     Review, 94(3), 653-663.
[20] Gerber, Alan S., Green, Donald P., and Larimer, Christopher W., (2008). “Social Pressure
     and Voter Turnout: Evidence from a Large-scale Field Experiment,” American Political
     Science Review, 102(1): 33-48.
[21] Gerber, Alan S., Gregory A. Huber, David Doherty, and Conor M. Dowling. (2012.)
     “Social Judgments and Political Participation: Estimating the Consequences of Social
     Rewards and Sanctions for Voting.”
[22] Green, Donald P. and Alan S. Gerber. (2008). Get Out the Vote: How to Increase Voter
     Turnout, Brookings Press.
[23] Gneezy, Uri, (2005). “Deception: The Role of Consequences,”American Economic Review,
     95 (1): 384-394.


                                             25
[24] Harbaugh, William T., (1996). “If People Vote Because They Like to, Then Why Do So
     Many of Them Lie?” Public Choice, 89(1-2): 63-76.
[25] Harrison, Glenn and List, John A., (2004). “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic
     Literature, 42: 1009-1055.
[26] Harsanyi, John, (1977). “Morality and the Theory of Rational Behavior,” Social Research,
     44(4): 623-56.
[27] Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, (2007). “Estimating Discount
     Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle,” Working paper.
[28] Lacetera, Nicola, and Mario Macis. (2010). “Social image concerns and prosocial behav-
     ior: Field evidence from a nonlinear incentive scheme” Journal of Economic Behavior &
     Organization, 76 225—237.
[29] Ledyard, John O., (1984). “The Pure Theory of Large Two-Candidate Elections,” Public
     Choice, 44: 7—41.
[30] Palfrey, Thomas, and Rosenthal, Howard, (1983). “A Strategic Calculus of Voting,” Public
     Choice, 41: 7—53.
[31] Palfrey, Thomas, and Rosenthal, Howard, (1985). “Voter Participation and Strategic Un-
     certainty,” American Political Science Review, 79: 62—78.
[32] Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces. (2013) “Social Incentives in Contributions:
     Field Experiment Evidence from the 2012 U.S. Presidential Campaigns”, unpublished
     manuscript.
[33] Powell, M.J.D., “Variable Metric Methods for Constrained Optimization,” Mathemati-
     cal Programming: The State of the Art, (A. Bachem, M. Grotschel and B. Korte, eds.)
     Springer Verlag, pp 288-311, 1983.
[34] Riker, W.H. and Ordeshook, P.C. (1968). “A theory of the calculus of voting.” American
     Political Science Review 62: 25-42.
[35] Rogers, Todd and John Ternovski. (2013). “We May Call Post-Election to Ask if You
     Voted: Accountability and a Behavior’s Importance to the Self.” Working paper.
[36] Sánchez-Pagés, Santiago and Vorsatz, Marc, (2007).“An Experimental Study of Truth-
     Telling in a Sender-Receiver Game,” Games and Economic Behavior, 61(1): 86-112.
[37] Schultz, Wesley, Nolan, Jessica, Cialdini, Robert, Goldstein, Noah, Griskevicius, Vladas.
     (2007). “The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms.” Psy-
     chological Science 18, 429—434.
[38] Silver, Brian D., Barbara A. Anderson, and Paul R. Abramson. (1986). “Who Overreports
     Voting?” American Political Science Review 80:613—24.
[39] Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M. (2002). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data.
     Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.




                                             26
A     Appendix A - Mathematical Appendix
Proof of Propositions 1 and 2. We consider first the probability of being at home. As dis-
cussed in the text, the probability of being at home
                                                  £     £will be: (i) 0¡ in the absence of¢flyer,
                                                                                                 ¤ or¤ if the
person does not see the flyer; (ii) ∗ = max min   £
                                                         £0 +    max    ¡
                                                                             +  −   −   1  0 if the
                                                                                                    ¢ ¤ ¤
person saw a survey flyer, and (iii) ∗ = max min 0 +   max  +  −  +    −   1  0
if the person saw an election flyer. Under Pride in Voting,   = max (   −  ) ≥  is
positive. Hence, ∗ will be at least as high under   than under  for voters. Conversely,
under Stigma from Not Voting,   = max (                
                                                     −    ) is negative, and hence  will be
                                                                                                   ∗
lower under   than under  for non-voters. Under opt-out, a person who sees the flyer will
opt out (and hence set ∗ = 0) if  +  −   0 under  and if  +  −  +    0 under
. Under Pride in Voting,   is positive; hence, for any set of parameters, if the person
opts out under  she will also do so under  (but not the converse). Hence, for any
given set of parameters treatment, the probability of being at home is lower under  than
under  and thus  () ≥  () . Conversely, under Stigma from Not Voting,  
is negative so the converse result applies and  ()                       
                                                            ≤  () follows.
    Turning to the probability of answering a survey, conditional on answering the door, an
individual will agree to the survey if  +  −  +   ≥ −  assuming she knows that the
survey has an election topic and if  +  −  ≥ −  in case she does not know. By the
same token as above, holding constant the selection into being at home, the person will be
more likely to complete the survey if informed about the election topic under Pride and if
not informed under Stigma. Hence, the conclusion  ( ) ≥  ( )  under Pride and
 ( )              
          ≤  ( ) under Stigma hold (remember that the treatments  and   take place
after the sorting decision).
    To consider the eﬀect of  and   on  ( ) we need to take into account the selection into
answering the door. We consider separately the following four exhaustive cases: (i) ( +
 −  +     +  −  )  −   In this case,  ( ) = 0 under any condition; (ii) min( +
 −  +     +  −  ) ≥ −   In this case, the person will complete the survey conditional
on being at home, so  () =  ( ), and the comparison follows from the results above on
 (); (iii)  +  −  +    −  ≤  +  −   In this case, which occurs for non-voters
under Stigma,  ( )  = 0 ≤  ( ) =  () ; (iv)  +  −   −  ≤  +  −  +   
In this case, which occurs for voters under Pride,  ( ) = 0 ≤  ( )  =  ()  .
Under Pride, cases (i), (ii), and (iv) apply and pairwise comparisons for all these cases show
 ( )  ≥  ( )  Under Stigma, cases (i), (ii), and (iii) apply and pairwise comparisons
for all these cases show  ( )                
                                     ≤  ( ) 
    Turning to  ( ) and  ( )  consider that, conditional on seeing the flyer, any
person who answers the door will complete the survey. (Otherwise, this person could have
costlessly opted out.) Therefore, the results on  ( ) and  ( ) follow directly from
the results on  () and  () .
    Proof of Proposition 3. A voter will lie if  −  +  ≥  or − ( −  ) −  ≥ −.
Under the assumption  −  0 and given  ≥ 0 the left-hand side in the second expression
is always negative; hence, a voter will never lie with no inducement ( = 0). And increase in
 makes it more likely that the expression will be satisfied and thus (weakly) increases lying.
    We consider then a non-voter. The lying condition for non-voters is             −
                                                                                               ≥  + 
                                                                                                      
                
or ( −  ) −  ≥  The left-hand side can be positive or negative depending on whether
the net signalling utility or the lying cost is larger; hence, non-voters may lie even absent
incentives  Increased incentives  make it less likely that the inequality will be satisfied and
hence (weakly) reduce lying.
    Proof of Proposition 4. Individuals vote if the net expected utility in (1) is positive.


                                                     27
Remembering that  is the c.d.f of − ( +  − )  we can rewrite the probability of voting as
 [ [max (   − ) − max (   − )]]. Under the assumptions  −   0 and   0
it follows that max (   − ) =  and that   max (   − )  Hence, the term in
square brackets is positive and the conclusion follows.


B     Appendix B - Experiment Implementation
Each flyer distributor’s participation in the study followed two steps: (1) an invitation to
work as a paid volunteer for the research center and (2) participation as a distributor of flyers
in the door-to-door campaign. Each surveyor’s participation in the study typically followed
four steps: (1) an invitation to work as a paid volunteer for the research center, (2) an in-
person interview, (3) a training session, and (4) participation as a surveyor in the door-to-door
campaign.


C     Appendix C - Estimation Appendix
The classical minimum-distance estimator chooses the parameters ̂ that minimize the distance
given by ( () − ̂)0  ( () − ̂)  As a weighting matrix  , we use the diagonal of the
inverse of the variance-covariance matrix. Hence, the estimator minimizes the sum of squared
distances, weighted by the inverse of the variance of each moment. (Given the large number
of moments, weighting the estimates by the inverse of the full variance-covariance matrix is
problematic computationally. As a robustness check, we also use an identity weighting matrix,
as reported in Appendix Table 2.)
    To compute the theoretical moments  (), we derive closed-form expressions for the mo-
ments when possible (for example, the probability of being at home and completing the survey
in the no flyer, survey flyer, and survey opt out treatments). When this is not possible, we
use two types of numerical integration algorithms to calculate the moments. When integrating
over a single random variable such as   = max{   −  } or   = max{       
                                                                                   −  }, we
                                                                   
first derive expressions for the probability density function of  and then use highly accurate
numerical integration algorithms based on adaptive Simpson quadrature, pre-implemented in
Matlab as the quadl and quadgk routines. When double integrating over the distributions of
two random variables with dependent limits of integration - the survey utility  and the social-
image taste   - we use a 12-point non-adaptive Gaussian quadrature method for computational
eﬃciency.
    The empirical moments ̂ are estimated in a first-stage model using the same controls as
in the main regressions, and are listed in Appendix Table 1. In particular, all the moments
other than the lying moments are calculated conditional on fixed eﬀects for surveyor, day-
town, and hour-of-day. We run OLS regressions with the relevant dependent variable (such
as answering the door or completing the survey), treatment indicators for each of the relevant
treatments, interacted with voters and non-voters indicators, as well as the demeaned fixed
eﬀects indicated above. (That is, we assume that the fixed eﬀects have the same impact on
voters and non-voters). We estimate these models jointly on the entire sample of voters and
non-voters. For the probability of lying moments, no fixed eﬀects are used, given the smaller
sample of survey respondents.
    Under standard conditions, the minimum-distance estimator using weighting matrix 
achieves asymptotic normality, with estimated variance (̂0  ̂)−1 (̂0  Λ̂ ̂)(̂0  ̂)−1 ,
                   P            ˆ                                                               ˆ
where ̂ ≡  −1     =1 ∇  () and Λ̂ ≡  [(̂)] (Wooldridge, 2002). We calculate ∇ ()
numerically in Matlab using an adaptive finite diﬀerence algorithm.
    To calculate the minimum distance estimate, we employ a common sequential quadratic


                                               28
programming algorithm (Powell, 1983) implemented in Matlab as the fmincon routine. We
impose the following constraints:  ∈ [−999 999] for  ∈ { } and  ∈ {  } (finite
                            0 (positive standard deviation of social-image utilities),  ≥ 0
social-image utilities), 
(non-negative lying costs),   ≥ 0 (social pressure non-negative),   0 (positive standard
deviation of altruism), 0   ∈ [0 1] (probabilities between zero and one),  ∈ [0 99] (finite
elasticity of home presence) and  ∈ [0 999] (finite and non-negative value of time). We begin
each run of the optimization routine by randomly choosing a starting point, drawn from a
uniform distribution over the permitted parameter space. The algorithm determines successive
search directions by solving a quadratic programming sub-problem based on an approximation
of the Lagrangian of the optimization problem. To avoid selecting local minima, we choose the
run with the minimum squared distance of 120 runs. For the results presented here, the best
estimate is achieved in about 15-40 percent of all runs, depending on the specification.
     In the benchmark specification, the estimates for two closely related auxiliary parameters -
the elasticity of home presence  and the social pressure cost  - are worth discussing in more
detail. First, note that social pressure is largely identified by the fact that those who see the
survey flyer and intend to say no to the surveyor optimally choose a home presence probability
∗ = 0 − (barring corner solutions). Taking into account that only a share  sees the flyer,
the observed probability of home presence under a flyer, assuming that all respondents intend
to turn down the survey and again ignoring corner solutions, is 0 −  . Of this expression,
0 is precisely estimated from the share answering the door in the no flyer treatment, and 
from the share checking the opt out box. Thus, the amount of sorting out between the no
flyer and survey flyer treatments helps identify  . To disentangle these terms, the elasticity
 is identified from the sorting in and out of the home as a function of the survey payment
and duration. Interestingly, the benchmark estimate for  (Table 3) is similar for voters and
non-voters, but the estimates of the individual parameters are very diﬀerent. For voters,  
is reasonably small (0.13, se = 0.09), and the social pressure cost sizeable, if smaller than in
DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012):  ($1.76, se = 1.20). For non-voters, however,  
is extremely large and very imprecisely estimated, with then a tiny social pressure estimate.
For such large value of  non-voters are in practice always at corner solutions, and the exact
value of  is not pinned down, given that any large  gives essentially the same solution.
Notice that when we impose a fixed, small value of  (Column 6 in Appendix Table 2), the
fit is substantially worse, but ultimately the estimated value of voting is about the same. The
parameters  and  do not play a critical role for the estimate of the value of voting.


D     Appendix D - Estimation of Lying Cost in Laboratory Ex-
      periment
Erat and Gneezy (2012) study lying behavior by conducting a sender-receiver game in the
lab with 517 subjects. The game provides incentives for the “sender” to lie to the “receiver”,
for either altruistic or selfish motives. First, the sender is informed about the true outcome
from rolling a six-sided die. She is then asked to send a cheap-talk signal of the outcome to
the receiver. Next, the receiver chooses one of the six possible outcomes and, if this choice
matches the state, payoﬀ bundle A is implemented; otherwise, payoﬀ bundle B is implemented.
Importantly, the sender knows the payoﬀs A and B, while the receiver does not. The payoﬀs
are varied to examine how lying by the sender depends on whether the lie is likely to help the
receiver at a cost to the sender (an altruistic lie), help both the sender and receiver (a pareto
lie), or help the sender at the cost of the receiver (a selfish or spiteful lie).
    The payoﬀs for lying and truth-telling in each of five decisions are listed in Online Appendix
Table 4, with the sender’s payoﬀ listed first. Thus, in Decision 1, lying results in a payoﬀ of
(19,30) - $19 to the sender and $30 to the receiver (assuming that the receiver chooses the
signaled number). We assume a model of simple altruism with lying costs and model the sender


                                               29
as maximizing the utility function:

                           max  = { +    +  −  + }
                           {}

where  is the sender’s monetary payoﬀ in outcome  ∈ { }   is the receiver’s payoﬀ,  is
the sender’s altruism towards the receiver,  is the psychological cost of lying and  is a mean-
zero utility shock to payoﬀ bundle B (or equivalently, to payoﬀ bundle A). To estimate the
model, we impose the following assumptions: Lying cost  and altruism  are both assumed
to be identical across individuals. The utility shock  is distributed normally with mean zero
and standard deviation  . We also assume that the receiver always follows the sender signal.
    We estimate the model using a classical minimum distance estimator, with the shares
lying in each decision as the five moments. The moments are weighted by the inverse of the
variance of each moment. The intuition for the identification is straightforward. Conditional
on altruism, the response of lying rates to the sender and receiver’s monetary payoﬀs from
lying identifies the lying cost as well as the variance of the error term.
    The results suggests a substantial cost of lying,  = $70 (se $1.4). The estimated lying
cost is consistent with the reduced form observation that a third to a half of subjects choose
not to lie even when the private gain from doing is $10 (Decisions 3 and 5). The estimated
altruism is  = 029 (se 0.17) — senders value a dollar to the receiver as much as 29 cents to
themselves. Finally, the standard deviation of the error term is  = $186 (se $40). This
heterogeneity is consistent with the fact that increasing the private incentive to lie from $1 to
$10 increases lying by only 16 percentage points (Decision 2 vs. 3), suggesting a relatively low
local density. At these estimated parameter values the fit of the moments is good, as Online
Appendix Table 4 shows.
    Extrapolated to the setting of our field experiment, this mean lying cost would imply a
substantial social-image motivation for voting. In the benchmark specification, a lying cost
of $7 implies a social-image value of voting in congressional elections of $16.9 for voters and
$18.8 for non-voters. Of course, we must be cautious in translating the lying cost estimated in
this experiment to that in our survey experiments. One diﬀerence is that in our setting, the
surveyor does not actually know if the respondent is lying (since our surveyors were blinded
to the true voting status of the respondents and since the respondents likely are unaware that
we know their voting status). In Erat and Gneezy (2012), in contrast, the sender knows that
her lying or truth-telling is observed by the experimenter. In addition, the sample in Erat and
Gneezy (2012) consists of undergraduate students, while our sample consists of adult voters
and non-voters in Chicago suburbs.




                                               30
 Figure 1. Social-Image Value of Voting per Interaction (L = $10)


                                20


                                15




Social-image value of voting,
                                10


                                  5
        Φ(sV - sN,L)
                                  0


                                 -5


                                -10


                                -15


                                -20
                                  -20   -15   -10   -5     0       5   10   15   20
                                                         sV - sN

    Note: Figure 1 plots the social-image value of voting due to the anticipation of being asked
    once, as a function of the net social image utility sV-sN and assuming a cost of lying L of $10.




                                                         31
                                                           Figure 2. Area Survey
                                                                               yed




 Note: Figgure 2 displays in color
                              c     (light grey in black/white) the to
                                                                     owns visited in Coook County, Ill., as part of the door-too-door field experim ment. The lo-
cations off the households vissited within the tow
                                                 wns are displayed inn darker color. For reference, Chicagoo, which we did noot visit, is located oon the bottom-
right corneer.




                                                                          32
                                         Figure 3.
                                                3 Flyer Sam
                                                          mples




Note: The top three flyers are for (5-min.,
                                   (        $0) surveys in treatm
                                                                ments Flyer (lefft), Flyer electiion (center), annd
Opt Out
    O (right). Thee bottom three flyers are for Flyer
                                                  F     treatmennts (5-min., $0)), (10-min., $110), and (5-minn.,
$10).



                                                       33
                                 Fig
                                   gure 4. Expeerimental T
                                                         Treatments




Note: Figure 4 preseents the crossed   d experimentall randomizatioons, with samplle sizes in pareentheses. On toop
are thee five arms of the flyer treatmment, crossed with
                                                    w whether rrespondents at the door are innformed that thhe
surveyy is about partiicipation in thee 2010 congressional electionn, crossed with survey duratioon and paymennt.
At thee bottom are th he arms of thee lying incentivves, indicatingg both the initiial sample sizee and [in squaare
brackeets] the samplee size among individuals
                                      i          whho responded too the survey. A All arms are equally weighteed
and crrossed.




                                                       34
                    Figure 5. Response
                              R        to Survey
                                          S      Durration and P
                                                               Payment




Note: Figure 5 preseents the share of
                                   o households answering the door and the ((unconditional)) share compleet-
     he survey acro
ing th            oss the three different
                                   d        combbinations of paayment and duuration, separaately for votinng
househholds and non-voting househ  holds. The aveerages are poolled across the different flyerr treatments fea-
tured in
      i Figure 4.




                                                     35
                 Fig
                   gures 6. Resp
                               ponse to Infformation aabout Electiion in Flyer




Note: Figure 6 preseents the share of households answering thee door, the (unnconditional) shhare completinng
the surrvey, and (wheen applicable) the share optin
                                                  ng out, separattely for each oof the five flyerr treatments annd
separaately for voting
                     g households and
                                   a non-voting households. T   The averages aare pooled acrooss the three diif-
ferent payment and duration
                     d        treatm
                                   ments featured in
                                                  i Figure 4.




                                                       36
                Figu
                   ure 7. Respo
                              onse to Flyerr by Party R
                                                      Registration
                                                                 n (for voterss)




Note: Figure 7 preseents the data from
                                    fr    Figure 6a for voting houuseholds (omittting for space reasons the noo-
flyer treatment)
      t          splitt into two grou
                                    ups. In the left group, at leastt one householld member votted at a Republli-
can prrimary between n 2004 and 201 10. In the right group, at leastt one member vvoted at a Dem
                                                                                               mocratic primarry
between 2004 and 2010. Househollds with neitheer, or with voteers participatinng in different party primariees,
     ot included.
are no




               Figurre 8. Respon
                               nse to annou
                                          uncement oof survey con
                                                                ntent at dooor




Note: Figure 8 preseents the (uncon  nditional) share of householdds completing the survey, sepparately for voot-
     nd non-voting households. The
ing an                              T householdss in the Not-Innformed treatm    ment are not innformed ex annte
about the survey con  ntent at the doo
                                     or. The househ holds in the Infformed treatmeent are told at tthe door that thhe
surveyy will be aboutt their voter paarticipation in the 2010 conggressional elecction. The averrages are pooleed
acrosss the different flyer
                      f     treatmentss featured in Figure 4.




                                                        37
                               Figu
                                  ure 9. Respo
                                             onse to Lyin
                                                        ng Incentivees




Note: Figure 9 preseents the share of o households completing
                                                      c            thee survey whosee response to thhe question “Did
you vo  ote in the 2010 congression   nal election?” differs
                                                      d       from thhe official votiing record, dennoted as “Shaare
who Lie.”
      L      The sharees lying are commpared across treatments witth an incentive to say that onee did not vote to
the treeatments with non such incentiive. The incenttives are desiggned to induce voters to lie annd non-voters to
tell thee truth. The av
                      verages are poo  oled across thee different flyeer and paymentt treatments featured in Figuure
4. Thee sample sizes refer
                       r     to the sub
                                      bsamples who answered
                                                       a         the ssurvey includinng the voting qquestion.




                                                        38
           Figure 10.
                  1 Social-Im
                            mage Valuee of Voting aas a function of Lying C
                                                                          Cost

                                  gure 10a. Vallue of being asked once
                                Fig




                              Figu
                                 ure 10b. Overall value off being askedd




Note: Figure 10a plots the estimatted value of vo  oting due to beeing asked oncce for voters annd non-voters at
the beenchmark estimmate of the parrameters, as a function of thee lying cost L (which is not identified). Thhe
bars reepresent 95% confidence
                     c           inteervals. Figure 10b plots the ssame social-im
                                                                                mage value of vvoting for voteers
due to
     o being asked once
                     o     (same as Figure 10a), but
                                                   b also the tottal values for P
                                                                                Presidential and Congressionnal
electio
      ons. The latter estimates are the value due to being askedd once, multipllied by the aveerage number oof
times asked, taken frrom survey responses.
                                                      39
                          Figure 11
                                  1. Flyer Sam
                                             mples for G
                                                       GOTV Treattment




Note: Figure 11 show ws the door-kn nob flyers used  d in the Get-Ouut-The-Vote treeatments in thee days before thhe
2012 presidential
      p           eleection. The leftt flyer is for thee treatment witth Voting Rem minder, the righht flyer is for thhe
treatm
     ment with Annoouncement Willl Ask About Voting. V        Flyers ffor the 2010 eleection are simiilarly styled.




                                                          40
                                                                            Table 1. Survey Treatments

    Specification:                                                                                    OLS Regressions
    Dependent Variable:                                                 Indicator for Answering the Door            Indicator for Completing Survey
    Group:                                                                 Voters                          Non-Voters                               Voters                        Non-Voters
                                                                     (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                 (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
Constant                                                        0.3458***                           0.3206***                            0.0909***                         0.0457***
                                                                 (0.017)                             (0.017)                              (0.012)                           (0.010)
$10/10min Treatment                                             0.0337**           0.0364**          0.0251            0.0243             0.0109           0.0132          0.0226***         0.0231***
                                                                 (0.016)            (0.015)          (0.016)           (0.015)            (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.008)           (0.009)
$10/5min Treatment                                              0.0515***          0.0596***         0.0227            0.0204            0.0602***        0.0683***        0.0465***         0.0467***
                                                                 (0.017)            (0.017)          (0.015)           (0.015)            (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.009)           (0.009)
Simple Flyer Treatments                                          0.0145             0.0128           0.0306            0.0286            0.0907***        0.0960***        0.0522***         0.0496***
                                                                 (0.018)            (0.018)          (0.019)           (0.018)            (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.010)           (0.010)
Flyer Treatments with Opt-out                                    -0.0195            -0.0232          0.0055            0.0052            0.0673***        0.0695***        0.0354***         0.0325***
                                                                 (0.019)            (0.019)          (0.018)           (0.018)            (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.010)           (0.010)
Mention of Election in Flyer                                     -0.0158            -0.0143         -0.0276**        -0.0278**            -0.0200*         -0.0194*        -0.0236*** -0.0238***
                                                                 (0.013)            (0.013)          (0.014)          (0.014)              (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.008)    (0.008)
Voters Informed at Door of Election                                                                                                        -0.0024          0.0001           0.0042     0.0047
Topic                                                                                                                                      (0.009)          (0.009)          (0.008)    (0.008)

Omitted Treatment                                                          No Flyer, $0/5min Treatment                                   No Flyer, $0/5min, Not Informed Treatment
Fixed Effects for Solicitor, Date-
                                                                                        X                                  X                                    X                                 X
Location, and Hour
R2                                                                0.0032            0.0279            0.0018           0.0338              0.0116           0.0350           0.0080           0.0269
N                                                                 6,873             6,873             6,324            6,324               6,873            6,873             6,324           6,324
Notes: Estimates for a linear probability model with standard errors, clustered by solicitor-date, in parentheses. The table summarizes the result of three crossed treatments. The first is on duration and
payment of the survey: $0/5min (the omited category), $10/10min, and $10/5min. The second is the flyer content: No flyer (the omitted category), Simple Flyer, Flyer with Opt-out. Each of the two flyer
treatments is randomized into containing a mention of the election question in the flyer, or not. Hence, the coefficient on "Mention of Election in Flyer" captures the differential effect of the mention,
compared to a simple flyer or a flyer with opt-out. Finally, we randomize whether, at the door, we announce the election question in the survey, with the omitted category being no mention. The regressions
include fixed effects for the solicitor, for the date-town combination, and for the hour of day whenever indicated.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                    41
                                     Table 2. Lying Incentives

     Specification:                                                 OLS Regressions
                                                        Indicator for Lie (Stated Voting Does not
     Dependent Variable:                                     Match Official Voting Record)
     Group:                                                   Voters               Non-Voters
                                                           (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
Panel A. All Survey Respondents
Constant                                              0.1210***                        0.4677***
                                                       (0.014)                          (0.031)
Time or Monetary Incentive                             0.0273           0.0225        -0.1204*** -0.1190***
   To say Did Not Vote                                 (0.020)          (0.019)         (0.040)    (0.040)
N                                                        1,136           1,136             597             597
Panel B. $0, 5min. Treatments
Constant                                              0.1479***                        0.3971***
                                                       (0.028)                          (0.061)
5-Dollar Incentive to Say                              -0.0302          -0.0394         -0.0918          -0.1105
   Did Not Vote                                        (0.034)          (0.037)         (0.075)          (0.076)
N                                                         329             329              163             163
Panel C. $10, 5min. Treatments
Constant                                              0.1280***                        0.4623***        0.3389**
                                                       (0.024)                          (0.046)          (0.152)
5-Dollar Incentive to Say                              0.0480           0.0550         -0.1452**       -0.1313**
   Did Not Vote                                        (0.036)          (0.034)         (0.059)          (0.065)
N                                                         427             427              229             229
Panel D. $10, 10min. Treatments
Constant                                              0.0909***                        0.5281***
                                                       (0.022)                          (0.053)
8-Minute Incentive to Say                              0.0561*          0.0487          -0.1143          -0.0864
   Did Not Vote                                        (0.031)          (0.034)         (0.069)          (0.071)
N                                                         380       380         205        205
Omitted Treatment                                           No incentive to say did not vote
Fixed Effects for Location-Day                                       X                       X
Notes: Estimates for a linear probability model with standard errors, clustered by solicitor-date, in parentheses. The
regressions include fixed effects for location-day in Columns 2 and 4.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                         42
               Table 3. Minimum-Distance Estimates, Benchmark Results
                                                                                                    Benchmark Estimates
Voting Parameters                                                                                     Voter                Non-Voter
Mean Value of saying voted                                                                             -5.86                  -4.61
(µV for voters, µV-L for non-voters)                                                                  (1.94)                  (2.4)
Mean Value of saying didn't vote                                                                     -24.81                   -4.23
(µN-L for voters, µN for non-voters)                                                                 (5.14)                   (2.2)
Std. Dev. Of sV and sN                                                                                12.35                    6.20
                                                                                                      (3.1)                   (1.29)
Total Signaling Value of Voting, as a Function of Lying
Cost (times asked: voters=5.13, non-voters=6.03)
L=0                                                                                                   0.00                    0.00
L=2                                                                                                   6.84                    1.75
L=5                                                                                                  14.60                   11.53
L=10                                                                                                 19.13                   38.25
Average Utility From Being Asked About Voting                                                          -4.63                   -0.92
                                                                                                      (1.98)                  (2.15)
Auxiliary Parameters                                                                                  Voter               Non-Voter
Mean Utility (in $) of Doing 10-Minute Survey                                                        -25.01                -31.62
                                                                                                      (3.92)               (5.51)
Std. Dev. of Utility of Doing Survey                                                                  29.90                 28.09
                                                                                                      (7.57)               (6.73)
Value of Time of One-Hour Survey                                                                      65.04                 19.09
                                                                                                     (14.86)               (8.58)
Social Pressure Cost (in $) of declining survey                                                        1.76                 0.06
                                                                                                       (1.2)               (0.45)
Elasticity of Home Presence (η)                                                                        0.13                 2.86
                                                                                                      (0.09)               (20.2)
Probability of seeing the flyer                                                                        0.38                 0.30
                                                                                                      (0.02)               (0.02)
Baseline Probability of being home                                                                     0.38                 0.36
                                                                                                      (0.01)               (0.01)
SSE                                                                                                              135.15
Notes: Estimates from minimum-distance estimator using the moments in Appendix Table 1 with weights given by the inverse of the
diagonal of the variance-covariance matrix. The sample consists of 6,873 voting households and 6,324 non-voting households. A [non-
]voting household is a household in which all registered voters did [not] vote in the 2010 congressional election. Standard errors are in
parentheses. SSE reports the Weighted Sum of Squared Errors.




                                                                     43
                                                         Table 4. Minimum-Distance Estimates, Identification with Different Sets of Moments
                                                                                                                                                          Sorting Only (Low                      Sorting Only (High                      No Survey Content
                                                                                Benchmark Model                       Lying Rates Only                        Heterog.)                               Heterog.)                         Announcement at Door
                                                                                      (1)                                    (2)                                  (3)                                    (4)                                    (5)
                                                                                                                                 Non-
Voting Parameters                                                                Voter         Non-Voter               Voter     Voter                     Voter         Non-Voter                 Voter         Non-Voter                 Voter            Non-Voter
Mean Value of saying voted                                                       -5.86           -4.61                 0.00      0.00                      -5.25           -3.75                 -8.7071          -19.791                   -9.92            -13.60
(µV for voters, µV-L for non-voters)                                             (1.94)          (2.4)                (Assumed Value)                      (3.02)         (1.74)                  2.0275           2.4118                  (3.46)            (4.48)

Mean Value of saying didn't vote                                                 -24.81             -4.23              -22.68            0.72              -13.33             -3.17              -36.477           -17.887                 -31.89              -12.41
(µN-L for voters, µN for non-voters)                                             (5.14)             (2.2)              (9.41)           (0.79)             (3.11)            (1.74)               2.9201            2.3937                 (7.73)              (3.91)

Std. Dev. Of sV and sN                                                           12.35              6.20               16.01             6.97               5.00     5.00                         20.00     20.00                           15.93                8.40
                                                                                 (3.1)             (1.29)              (8.23)            (1.7)             (Assumed Value)                        (Assumed Value)                           (4.7)               (2.29)
Total Signaling Value of Voting, as a Function
of Lying Cost
L=0                                                                               0.00              0.00                0.00            0.00                0.00             0.00                  0.00              0.00                   0.00                0.00
L=2                                                                              6.84              1.75                6.55            1.24                 6.19             1.90                 6.54              0.03                    6.40                0.65
L=5                                                                              14.60             11.53               14.40           9.73                 7.99             13.17                14.79             2.61                    13.98               7.37
L=10                                                                             19.13             38.25               21.16           34.91                -8.29            41.55                23.69             13.32                   20.15               29.71

Average Utility From Being Asked About Voting                                    -4.63             -0.92                   Unidentified                     -4.81             -0.63               -6.27              -7.53                  -7.96                3.46
                                                                                 (1.98)            (2.15)                                                  (3.03)            (1.72)               (2.07)             (2.25)                (8.24)               (3.71)
Auxiliary Parameters                                                             Voter          Non-Voter               Voter       Non-Voter               Voter        Non-Voter                Voter          Non-Voter                  Voter           Non-Voter
Mean Utility (in $) of Doing 10-Minute Survey                                    -25.01    -31.62                           .               .             -37.53     -30.72                       -29.23     -34.75                       -21.29        -22.36
                                                                                 (3.92)    (5.51)                                                          (9.5)      (4.28)                      (5.64)     (6.44)                        (2.87)        (3.12)
Std. Dev. of Utility of Doing Survey                                             29.90      28.09                           .               .              51.77      26.31                       35.55      31.63                         25.07         20.50
                                                                                 (7.57)    (6.73)                                                         (18.42)     (4.92)                     (10.26)     (8.01)                         (5.4)        (3.64)
Value of Time of One-Hour Survey                                                 65.04      19.09                                14.63                     80.44      30.15                       94.68      35.17                         78.36         27.01
                                                                                (14.86)    (8.58)                               (10.41)                   (18.15)    (15.33)                     (23.37)    (25.29)                       (16.09)       (11.28)
SSE                                                                                   135.15                                     5.32                           121.64                                 154.78                                     103.25
Notes: Estimates from minimum-distance estimator using the moments in Appendix Table 1 with weights given by inverse of diagonal of variance-covariance matrix. The sample consists of 6,873 voting households and 6,324 non-voting households. Standard errors are in
parentheses. SSE reports the Weighted Sum of Squared Errors. The Benchmark Model uses all the moments - answering the door, opting out, completing the survey, and lying rates under different incentives. The Lying Rates Only model uses only the lying rate
moments under different incentives to lie, and drops the moments for answering the door, opting out and completing the survey. The Sorting Only models use as moments the shares of voters and non-voters answering the door, opting out and doing the survey under the
various survey length, payment and advance warning / opt out treatments, the survey content announcement at door treatments, as well as the baseline lying rate - i.e. the model does not exploit the experimental variation in incentives to say one did not vote. Within the
Sorting Only model, we vary the assumed heterogeneity in signaling utility, which is unidentified without the lying incentives. The No Survey Content Announcement at Door model drops the moments for the treatment varying the announcement at the door.




                                                                                                                                    44
                                                   Table 5. Minimum-Distance Estimates, Robustness Table
                                                                    Benchmark                           Allowing Utility               Assuming 10% Non-
                                                                   Model: Sorting                       from Talking                   Registered in Voting                        Assuming 10%
                                                                     and Lying                          About Politics                    Households                                Misclassified
                                                                        (1) Non                              (2) Non                           (3)                                       (4)
Voting Parameters                                                  Voter           Voter               Voter           Voter               Voter         Non-Voter                Voter           Non-Voter
Mean Value of saying voted                                          -5.86          -4.61                     0.00                         -5.18             -4.52                 -5.13              -4.08
(µV for voters, µV-L for non-voters)                               (1.94)          (2.4)                  (Assumed)                       (1.95)            (2.43)               (1.92)             (2.77)
Mean Value of saying didn't vote                                  -24.81           -4.23              -18.99           0.39               -27.46            -4.06                -26.79              -2.59
(µN-L for voters, µN for non-voters)                              (5.14)           (2.2)              (3.79)          (0.64)              (6.19)            (2.18)               (5.73)             (2.47)
Std. Dev. Of sV and sN                                             12.35           6.20                12.38           6.21               11.40              6.27                10.52               5.63
                                                                   (3.1)          (1.29)               (3.06)         (1.29)              (3.29)            (1.27)               (2.89)             (1.25)
Utility of Talking about Politics                                                                       -5.87          -5.39
                                                                                                       (1.94)          (2.4)
Total Signaling Value of Voting, as a Function of Lying
Cost (times asked: voters=5.13, non-voters=6.03)
L=0                                       0.00       0.00                                               0.00           0.00                 0.00             0.00                 0.00               0.00
L=2                                       6.84       1.75                                               6.84           1.75                 8.11             1.65                 8.34               0.61
L=5                                      14.60     11.53                                               14.61          11.52                18.17            11.24                18.69               9.67
L=10                                     19.13     38.25                                               19.17          38.24                26.97            37.80                27.40               36.48
Average Utility From Being Asked          -4.63      -0.92                                              -4.61          -0.91               -4.57            -0.75                 -7.48              -0.16
About Voting                             (1.98)     (2.15)                                             (1.98)         (2.14)                (2.)            (2.12)               (4.13)              (2.3)
Survey Parameters                                                  Voter Non-Voter                     Voter Non-Voter                    Voter Non-Voter                        Voter    Non-Voter
Value of Time of One-Hour Survey                                   65.04    19.09                      65.14    19.13                     76.13    17.11                         75.91      13.39
                                                                  (14.86) (8.58)                      (14.68) (8.58)                     (16.75)   (8.63)                       (16.14)     (9.46)
SSE                                                                    135.15                              135.15                             132.31                                  132.63
Notes: Estimates from minimum-distance estimator using the moments in Appendix Table 1 with weights given by the inverse of the diagonal of the variance-covariance matrix. The sample consists of 6,873
voting households and 6,324 non-voting households. Standard errors are in parentheses. SSE reports the Weighted Sum of Squared Errors. The Allowing Utility from Talking About Politics model adds a
parameter capturing taste for talking about politics, independent of whether the respondent states that she voted or not. This requires either the mean value of saying one voted or of of saying one did not vote
to be fixed. We normalize the mean utility of saying one voted to zero. The Assuming 10% Non-Registered in Voting Households model assumes that 10% of households classified as all-voters from
registration data actually include non-registered adults who are non-voters by definition, but are misclassified as voters by us. The Assuming 10% Misclassified model assumes measurement error of 10% in
the voter turnout data or our matching of it to households in our sample. Thus, 10% of voting households are assumed to be non-voters, and vice versa.




                                                                                                       45
                                   Table 6. Full Estimation - Subset with Intermediate propensity to vote
                                                                                     Assuming Voters =                     Assuming Voters =                      Voters and Non-Voters
                                                                                         Non-Voters                        Non-Voters Partially                          Different
                                                                                              (1)                                   (2)                                     (3)
Voting Parameters                                                                    Voters = Non-Voters                   Voters = Non-Voters                     Voters     Non-Voter
Mean Utility from truthfully saying voted (µV)                                               -1.06                                -2.34                             -4.85        1.06
                                                                                            (3.13)                                (2.75)                            (4.14)      (4.76)
Mean Utility from truthfully saying didn't vote (µN)                                         -5.56                                -6.79                            -12.45        -4.12
                                                                                            (3.21)                                 (2.9)                            (6.93)      (4.64)
Cost of Lying (L)                                                                                 4.63                                  5.17                         5.00      5.00
                                                                                                 (1.08)                                (1.29)                     (Assumed) (Assumed)
Std. Dev. Of Sv and Sn                                                                            7.34                                  8.68                        12.68      5.93
                                                                                                 (1.62)                                (2.05)                       (4.86)    (1.47)
                                                                                       Voters Non-Voters                     Voters        Non-Voters                Voters         Non-Voters
Total Signaling Value of Voting (times asked:
voters=5.50, non-voters=5.85)                                                            8.28             8.80                 7.82             8.32                   8.92              12.88
Average Utility From Being Asked About Voting                                            0.02             -1.48               -0.82             -2.25                 -2.31              -0.69
Survey Parameters                                                                    Voters = Non-Voters                     Voters Non-Voter                        Voters     Non-Voter
Mean Utility (in $) of Doing 10-Minute Survey                                               -46.62                            -34.81    -53.98                        -37.78      -47.69
                                                                                           (12.99)                           (10.14)    (21.13)                      (12.08)     (21.85)
Std. Dev. of Utility of Doing Survey                                                         51.63                            34.73      61.14                        38.30        52.08
                                                                                           (17.49)                           (14.42)    (29.85)                      (16.88)     (29.13)
Value of Time of One-Hour Survey                                                             28.85                            55.09      12.58                        70.92        15.36
                                                                                            (9.99)                           (18.72)    (17.12)                      (28.42)     (11.53)
SSE                                                                                        132.49                                  100.79                                    97.20
Notes: Estimates from minimum-distance estimator with weights given by the inverse of the diagonal of the variance-covariance matrix. Standard errors are in parentheses. SSE reports the Weighted
Sum of Squared Errors. The sample includes only households with intermediate voting propensity, excluding always-voters and never-voters. Specifically, for each registerd voter in the household we
compute the predicted probability of voting in the Nov. 2010 congressional elections using a probit model with indicators for participation in the following elections: March 2004 (primary), Nov. 2004,
Feb. 2005, March 2006 (primary), Nov. 2006, April 2007, Feb. 2008 (primary), Nov. 2008, April 2009, and Feb. 2010 (primary). We then keep only the 5,901 households in which all registered voters
have a predicted probability of voting between 25 percent and 75 percent. We re-estimate the moments on this sample. Column 1 reports estimates assuming that voters and non-voters in this
sample have the same parameters. Column 2 reports estimates assuming that voters and non-voters in this sample share the same voting parameters, but may differ in their other parameters. The
restrictions imposed in Columns 1 and 2 allow us to identify also the cost of lying. Finally, in Column 3 we allow voters and non-voter to differ with respect to all parameters, as in the benchmark
specification but on a restricted sample.




                                                                                                 46
                               Table 7. Results for Get-Out-The-Vote Treatments

     Specification:                                                              OLS Regressions
     Dependent Variable:                                                        Indicator for Voting
                                                              Congressional Elections in      Presidential Elections in
     Election:                                                       Nov. 2010                       Nov. 2012
                                                                     (1)                    (2)                     (3)                      (4)
Constant                                                         0.6000***                                       0.7312***
                                                                 (0.0109)                                        (0.0033)
Flyer with Voting Reminder                                        -0.0020               -0.0031                   0.0060                  0.0046
                                                                 (0.0152)               (0.0083)                 (0.0056)                (0.0034)
Flyer with Announcement                                           0.0120                 0.0102                   0.0023                  0.0056
    Will Ask About Voting                                        (0.0157)               (0.0084)                 (0.0056)                (0.0034)

Omitted Treatment                                                           No Flyer                                         No Flyer
Control for past Voting since 2004                                                           X                                                X
Difference (Flyer Will Ask - Flyer
Reminder)                                                        0.0140                  0.0133                   -0.0037                0.0010
p-value for test of equality, 2-sided                            p=0.365                p=0.120                   p=0.561                p=0.811
p-value for test of equality, 1-sided                            p=0.182                p=0.060*                                         p=0.405
R2                                                               0.0001                 0.4024                    0.0000                 0.3251
N                                                              N = 31,306             N = 31,304                N = 93,805             N = 93,805
Notes: Estimates for a linear probability model with standard errors, clustered by flyering route, in parentheses. The omitted treatment is the No-Flyer
condition. The regressions in Columns 2 and 4 include indicators for participation in the following elections: March 2004 (primary), Nov. 2004, Feb. 2005,
March 2006 (primary), Nov. 2006, April 2007, Feb. 2008 (primary), Nov. 2008, April 2009, and Feb. 2010 (primary). In addition, Column 4 includes
indicators for participation in the Nov. 2010, April 2011, and March 2012 (primary) elections.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                           47
                         Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation




                  -0.3
                                -0.2
                                           -0.1
                                                             0
                                                                 0.1
                                                                             0.2
                                                                                         0.3



                                           PH_V_NW_0d5m
                                         PH_V_Nw_10d10m
                                          PH_V_Nw_10d5m
                                             PH_V_W_0d5m
                                          PH_V_W_10d10m
                                           PH_V_W_10d5m
                                           PH_V_We_0d5m
                                         PH_V_We_10d10m
                                          PH_V_We_10d5m
                                            PH_V_Oo_0d5m
                                          PH_V_Oo_10d10m
                                           PH_V_Oo_10d5m
                                           PH_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                         PH_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                          PH_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                          PSV_V_NW_0d5m
                                         PSV_V_Nw_10d10m
                                          PSV_V_Nw_10d5m
                                            PSV_V_W_0d5m
                                          PSV_V_W_10d10m
                                           PSV_V_W_10d5m




     µ_V_voters
                                           PSV_V_We_0d5m
                                         PSV_V_We_10d10m
                                          PSV_V_We_10d5m




48
                                           PSV_V_Oo_0d5m
                                         PSV_V_Oo_10d10m
     µ_N_voters


                                          PSV_V_Oo_10d5m
                                          PSV_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                               µv, µN and σSI for voters




                                        PSV_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                         PSV_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                          POO_V_Oo_0d5m
     σ_voters




                                         POO_V_Oo_10d10m
                                         POO_V_Oo_10d5m
                                         POO_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                        POO_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                         POO_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                          PSV_V_Nw_NoInfo
                                            PSV_V_Nw_Info
                                           PSV_V_W_NoInfo
                                              PSV_V_W_Info
                                          PSV_V_We_NoInfo
                                            PSV_V_We_Info
                                          PSV_V_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                           Appendix Figure 1a. Sensitivity of Estimated Voting Parameters to the Moments: Voters




                                             PSV_V_Oo_Info
                                         PSV_V_Ooe_NoInfo
                                           PSV_V_Ooe_Info
                                           PL_V_5m_Control
                                         PL_V_5m_Incentive
                                          PL_V_10m_Control
                                        PL_V_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                           Appendix Figure 1b. Sensitivity of Estimated Voting Parameters to the Moments: Non-Voters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       µv, µN and σSI for non-voters
                                                                  0.7
  Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation




                                                                  0.5




                                                                  0.3




                                                                  0.1
                                                                                         PH_NV_Nw_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                            PH_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                            PH_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                           PH_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                            PH_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                           PH_NV_W_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_W_10d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POO_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POO_NV_Oo_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_NV_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_NV_W_Info




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PL_NV_5m_Control


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PL_NV_10m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          POO_NV_Oo_10d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PL_NV_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_Oo_Info
                                                                         PH_NV_NW_0d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_NV_Oo_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_Nw_Info




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_Oo_NoInfo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PL_NV_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                            PH_NV_We_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_Ooe_0d5m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PH_NV_We_10d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_Oo_10d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_NV_Ooe_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_NV_Nw_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_We_0d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POO_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_NV_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_NV_Oo_10d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_NV_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_NV_Oo_0d5m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POO_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POO_NV_Ooe_10d10m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                  -0.1




                                                                  -0.3




                                                                  -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        µ_V_nonvoters                                                                                                             µ_N_nonvoters                                                                                                                    σ_nonvoters
 Note: Appendix Figures 1a and 1b present the sensitivity of the estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). The plotted lines in-
dicate the local sensitivity of the given parameter estimate to an individual moment. A positive bar indicates that a (local) increase in the moment would increase the
estimated value of the parameter. Higher bars indicate more influential moments for the identification of the parameter. For each moment, we plot the influence es-
timate for the mean value of saying one voted (in blue), the mean value of saying one did not vote (in orange) and the standard deviation of such values (in orange)
respectively for voters (Appendix figure 1a) and for non-voters (Appendix Figure 1b).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      49
                                                      Appendix Table 1. Empirical Moments and Predicted Moments at Benchmark Estimates
                                        Voters                                                                                                                                Non-Voters
                            Empiri Predict                           Empiric Predict                                                                                Empiri Predict                                                                 Empiric Predict
                             cal     ed                                 al     ed                                                                                     cal    ed                                                                       al     ed
                            Mom. Mom.                                 Mom. Mom.                                                                                     Mom. Mom.                                                                       Mom. Mom.
Flyers: Home Presence          P(Home)     Flyers: Survey Compl.      P(Do Survey)                                                      Flyers: Home Presence          P(Home)     Flyers: Survey Compl.                                            P(Do Survey)
No Flyer, $0,5min           0.3499 0.3799 No Flyer, $0,5min           0.1145 0.1023                                                     No Flyer, $0,5min           0.3674 0.3581 No Flyer, $0,5min                                                 0.0827 0.0503
No Flyer, $10,10min         0.4081 0.3799 No Flyer, $10,10min         0.0993 0.1215                                                     No Flyer, $10,10min         0.3298 0.3581 No Flyer, $10,10min                                                0.048 0.0781
No Flyer, $10,5min          0.3827 0.3799 No Flyer, $10,5min           0.127 0.1398                                                     No Flyer, $10,5min          0.3046 0.3581 No Flyer, $10,5min                                                0.0804 0.0846
Survey Flyer, $0,5min       0.3491 0.3740 Survey Flyer, $0,5min       0.1624 0.1499                                                     Survey Flyer, $0,5min       0.3664 0.3376 Survey Flyer, $0,5min                                             0.0894 0.0751
Survey Flyer, $10,10min     0.3890 0.3893 Survey Flyer, $10,10min     0.1757 0.1797                                                     Survey Flyer, $10,10min     0.3524 0.3569 Survey Flyer, $10,10min                                           0.1163 0.1172
Survey Flyer, $10,5min      0.4066 0.4041 Survey Flyer, $10,5min      0.2537 0.2083                                                     Survey Flyer, $10,5min       0.413 0.3614 Survey Flyer, $10,5min                                            0.1664 0.1271
Election Flyer, $0,5min     0.3686 0.3583 Election Flyer, $0,5min     0.1665 0.1383                                                     Election Flyer, $0,5min     0.3049 0.3238 Election Flyer, $0,5min                                           0.0718 0.0633
Election Flyer, $10,10min   0.3701 0.3807 Election Flyer, $10,10min   0.1691 0.1757                                                     Election Flyer, $10,10min   0.3333 0.3387 Election Flyer, $10,10min                                         0.1035 0.1016
Election Flyer, $10,5min    0.4233 0.4030 Election Flyer, $10,5min    0.2332 0.2123                                                     Election Flyer, $10,5min    0.3247 0.3487 Election Flyer, $10,5min                                          0.1168 0.1172
Survey Opt Out, $0,5min     0.3586 0.3263 Survey Opt Out, $0,5min     0.1557 0.1497                                                     Survey Opt Out, $0,5min     0.2869 0.2935 Survey Opt Out, $0,5min                                           0.0642 0.0747
Survey Opt Out, $10,10min 0.3553 0.3447 Survey Opt Out, $10,10min      0.172 0.1796                                                     Survey Opt Out, $10,10min 0.3565 0.3169 Survey Opt Out, $10,10min                                           0.1148 0.1166
Survey Opt Out, $10,5min    0.3794 0.3625 Survey Opt Out, $10,5min    0.2213 0.2083                                                     Survey Opt Out, $10,5min    0.3184 0.3224 Survey Opt Out, $10,5min                                          0.1226 0.1265
Election Opt Out, $0,5min   0.2643 0.3065 Election Opt Out, $0,5min   0.1099 0.1337                                                     Election Opt Out, $0,5min   0.2785 0.2796 Election Opt Out, $0,5min                                         0.0429 0.0633
Election Opt Out, $10,10min 0.3457 0.3318 Election Opt Out, $10,10min 0.1506 0.1710                                                     Election Opt Out, $10,10min 0.3511 0.2986 Election Opt Out, $10,10min                                        0.093 0.1018
Election Opt Out, $10,5min 0.3926 0.3580 Election Opt Out, $10,5min 0.2034 0.2086                                                       Election Opt Out, $10,5min   0.346 0.3096 Election Opt Out, $10,5min                                        0.1211 0.1174
                                             Informed at Door of                                                                                                                     Informed at Door of
Opting Out                                   Survey Content
                                           P(Opt Out)                     P(Do Survey)                                                  Opting Out                                   Survey Content
                                                                                                                                                                                   P(Opt Out)                                                        P(Do Survey)
Opt Out, $0,5min                         0.1330 0.1061
                                             Not Informed, No Flyer       0.1097 0.1289                                                 Opt Out, $0,5min                         0.1058 0.0914
                                                                                                                                                                                     Not Informed, No Flyer                                          0.0736 0.0720
Opt Out, $10,10min                       0.0874 0.0988
                                             Informed, No Flyer            0.115 0.1135                                                 Opt Out, $10,10min                        0.063 0.0830
                                                                                                                                                                                     Informed, No Flyer                                              0.0647 0.0700
Opt Out, $10,5min                        0.0681 0.0918
                                             Not Informed, Survey Flyer 0.1947 0.1912                                                   Opt Out, $10,5min                        0.0559 0.0810
                                                                                                                                                                                     Not Informed, Survey Flyer                                      0.1245 0.1099
Election Opt Out, $0,5min                0.1358 0.1108
                                             Informed, Survey Flyer       0.1993 0.1673                                                 Election Opt Out, $0,5min                0.1456 0.0918
                                                                                                                                                                                     Informed, Survey Flyer                                          0.1223 0.1029
Election Opt Out, $10,10min              0.1043 0.1042
                                             Not Informed, Election Flyer 0.1844 0.1802                                                 Election Opt Out, $10,10min              0.0966 0.0837
                                                                                                                                                                                     Not Informed, Election Flyer                                    0.0855 0.0947
Election Opt Out, $10,5min               0.0864 0.0979
                                             Informed, Election Flyer     0.1898 0.1707                                                 Election Opt Out, $10,5min                0.079 0.0818
                                                                                                                                                                                     Informed, Election Flyer                                        0.1061 0.0933
                                             Not Informed, Opt Out        0.1814 0.1883                                                                                              Not Informed, Opt Out                                           0.0858 0.1099
Lying                        P(Lie | Survey) Informed, Opt Out            0.1764 0.1702                                                 Lying                        P(Lie | Survey) Informed, Opt Out                                               0.1111 0.1020
                                             Not Informed, Election Opt                                                                                                              Not Informed, Election Opt
5 min survey, control        0.1360 0.1042 Out                            0.1573 0.1759                                                 5 min survey, control        0.4335 0.4815 Out                                                               0.0834 0.0949
5 min survey, $5 incent.     0.1489 0.1440 Informed, Election Opt Out     0.1507 0.1663                                                 5 min survey, $5 incent.     0.3088 0.3055 Informed, Election Opt Out                                         0.084 0.0935
10 min survey, control       0.0909 0.1044                                                                                              10 min survey, control       0.5281 0.4817
10 min survey, 8 min incent. 0.1471 0.1464                                                                                              10 min survey, 8 min incent. 0.4138 0.3781
Notes: The Table presents the empirical moments and the predicted moments from a minimum-distance estimator. The empirical moments are obtained as regression estimates after controlling for the randomization fixed effects. The minimum-distance estimates are in Table
3, shown are the predicted moments at those parameter values.




                                                                                                                                   50
                                                  Appendix Table 2. Minimum-Distance Estimates, Robustness Table - Appendix
                                                                                                                            Pos. correlated                Neg. correlated                   Large Sorting                   Small Sorting
                                                               Benchmark                 Identity Weighting                   sV and sN                      sV and sN                         Elasticity                      Elasticity
                                                                 Model                          Matrix                        (ρ = 0.5)                      (ρ = -0.5)                         (η = 1)                       (η = 0.02)
                                                                  (1)                             (2)                             (3)                            (4)                              (5)                             (6)
                                                                           Non-                             Non-                           Non-                            Non-                            Non-                            Non-
Voting Parameters                                            Voter         Voter            Voter           Voter            Voter         Voter            Voter          Voter             Voter         Voter            Voter          Voter
Mean Value of saying voted                                  -5.86          -4.61           -5.83            -5.98           -6.30          -5.20           -5.69           -4.37            -6.00          -4.61           -15.18          -6.18
(µV for voters, µV-L for non-voters)                        (1.94)         (2.4)           (2.05)          (2.68)           (2.15)         (2.49)          (1.87)         (2.28)            (1.89)         (2.3)           (10.47)        (3.12)

Mean Value of saying didn't vote                            -24.81         -4.23           -24.23           -5.63           -22.49         -5.03           -26.58          -3.81            -24.70        -4.21            -34.23         -5.43
(µN-L for voters, µN for non-voters)                        (5.14)         (2.2)           (5.23)          (2.38)           (4.71)         (2.3)           (5.41)           (2.)            (4.94)        (2.04)           (12.47)        (2.78)

Std. Dev. Of sV and sN                                       12.35         6.20            11.72            6.34            13.87           7.95           11.66           5.44             12.44          6.25             10.87          7.30
                                                             (3.1)        (1.29)           (3.09)          (1.43)           (3.47)         (1.48)          (2.88)         (1.17)            (3.01)        (1.27)            (3.54)         (1.8)
Total Signaling Value of Voting, as a Function of Lying Cost
(times asked: voters=5.13, non-voters=6.03)
L=0                                         0.00      0.00                                   0.00          0.00               0.00          0.00            0.00          0.00               0.00          0.00             0.00          0.00
L=2                                         6.84      1.75                                   6.94          1.74               7.10          2.18            6.67          1.45               6.74          1.72             7.50          1.15
L=5                                       14.60 11.53                                       14.73          11.38             14.63         13.01           14.47          10.48             14.31         11.42             16.18         9.28
L=10                                      19.13 38.25                                       18.84          37.91             16.36         40.76           20.30          36.32             18.53         38.06             21.42         33.89

Average Utility From Being Asked                            -4.63         -0.92             -4.72           -2.22            -5.47         -1.94           -4.12           -0.33            -4.70         -0.88            -14.38          -1.68
About Voting                                                (1.98)        (2.15)            (2.1)           (2.3)           (2.19)         (2.25)          (1.92)         (1.93)            (1.94)        (1.98)           (10.5)         (2.69)
                                                                           Non-                             Non-                           Non-                            Non-                            Non-                            Non-
Survey Parameters                                            Voter         Voter            Voter           Voter            Voter         Voter            Voter          Voter             Voter         Voter            Voter          Voter
Value of Time of One-Hour Survey                            65.04 19.09                    61.72     14.54                  50.57 18.36                    71.97   19.61                    67.95 19.30                     35.12   17.11
                                                           (14.86) (8.58)                 (14.84)     (9.6)                (12.38) (8.03)                 (15.59) (8.87)                   (14.45) (8.61)                  (12.08) (10.44)
Elasticity of Home Presence (η)                              0.13    2.86                   0.14      9.31                   0.11    1.45                   0.14   8.03                           1                             0.020
                                                            (0.09) (20.2)                  (0.11) (637.01)                  (0.08) (11.35)                 (0.1) (379.73)                    (Assumed)                        (Assumed)
SSE                                                             135.15                           3.82                              145.44                          130.15                      139.709                             172.17
Notes: Estimates from minimum-distance estimator using the moments in Appendix Table 1 with weights given by inverse of diagonal of variance-covariance matrix (except for Column 2). The sample size for the field experiment consists of 6,873
voting households and 6,324 non-voting households. The Identity Weighting Matrix model uses equally weighted moments. The estimation assumes bivariate normal distribution for signaling values of saying voted/didn't vote, with correlation zero in
models 1, 5, and 6, correlation +0.5 in model 3, and -0.5 in model 4. Models 5 and 6 exogenously fix the sorting elasticity to high and low values respectively, and force the same elasticity for voters and non-voters. Standard errors are in
parentheses. SSE reports the Weighted Sum of Squared Errors. All models use the entire set of empirical moments used in the benchmark estimation.




                                                                                                                        51
                                                        Online Appendix Figure 1. Number of Times Asked about Voting

                                                             CDFs of number of times asked about turnout




                                          1        .8
                              Probability <= value
                                  .4       .6
                                          .2
                                          0




                                                        0                  20                     40                    60
                                                                                Number of times asked

                                                                   2010 Congr. Elections            2008 Presid. Elections


Note: Online Appendix Figure 1 plots the cumulative distribution function of the self-reported number of times asked among the respondents to the 2011 door-to-
door survey. The continuous line refers to the 2010 Congressional election, and the dotted line refers to the 2008 Presidential election.




                                                                                      52
                                 Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation                                                                          Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.3
                                                                                                                                                                              ‐0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                          ‐0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3




                          ‐0.5
                                    ‐0.4
                                           ‐0.3
                                                      ‐0.2
                                                             ‐0.1
                                                                        0
                                                                            0.1
                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                    0.5
                                                     PH_NV_NW_0d5m                                                                                                                      PH_V_NW_0d5m

                                                   PH_NV_Nw_10d10m                                                                                                                    PH_V_Nw_10d10m

                                                    PH_NV_Nw_10d5m                                                                                                                     PH_V_Nw_10d5m

                                                      PH_NV_W_0d5m                                                                                                                       PH_V_W_0d5m

                                                    PH_NV_W_10d10m                                                                                                                     PH_V_W_10d10m

                                                     PH_NV_W_10d5m                                                                                                                      PH_V_W_10d5m

                                                     PH_NV_We_0d5m                                                                                                                      PH_V_We_0d5m

                                                   PH_NV_We_10d10m                                                                                                                    PH_V_We_10d10m

                                                    PH_NV_We_10d5m                                                                                                                     PH_V_We_10d5m

                                                     PH_NV_Oo_0d5m                                                                                                                       PH_V_Oo_0d5m

                                                   PH_NV_Oo_10d10m                                                                                                                     PH_V_Oo_10d10m

                                                    PH_NV_Oo_10d5m                                                                                                                      PH_V_Oo_10d5m

                                                    PH_NV_Ooe_0d5m                                                                                                                      PH_V_Ooe_0d5m

                                                  PH_NV_Ooe_10d10m                                                                                                                    PH_V_Ooe_10d10m

                                                   PH_NV_Ooe_10d5m                                                                                                                     PH_V_Ooe_10d5m

                                                    PSV_NV_NW_0d5m                                                                                                                     PSV_V_NW_0d5m

                                                  PSV_NV_Nw_10d10m                                                                                                                    PSV_V_Nw_10d10m

                                                   PSV_NV_Nw_10d5m                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Nw_10d5m

                                                     PSV_NV_W_0d5m                                                                                                                      PSV_V_W_0d5m

                                                   PSV_NV_W_10d10m                                                                                                                    PSV_V_W_10d10m

                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_W_10d5m
                                                    PSV_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                               µ_survey_voters



                                                    PSV_NV_We_0d5m




     µ_survey_nonvoters
                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_We_10d10m
                                                  PSV_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_We_10d5m
                                                   PSV_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                    PSV_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                  PSV_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                   PSV_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                   PSV_NV_Ooe_0d5m




53
                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              µsurvey and σsurvey for voters




                                                  PSV_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                               σ_survey_voters




                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                  PSV_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                          µsurvey and σsurvey for non‐voters




                                                                                                                                                                                       POO_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                    POO_NV_Oo_0d5m




     σ_survey_nonvoters
                                                                                                                                                                                     POO_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                  POO_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                      POO_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                   POO_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                      POO_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                   POO_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                     POO_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                              POO_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                     POO_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                  POO_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_Nw_NoInfo
                                                   PSV_NV_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_Nw_Info
                                                      PSV_NV_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_W_NoInfo
                                                    PSV_NV_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_V_W_Info
                                                       PSV_NV_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_We_NoInfo
                                                   PSV_NV_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_We_Info
                                                      PSV_NV_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_Oo_NoInfo
                                                   PSV_NV_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_Oo_Info
                                                      PSV_NV_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                   PSV_NV_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_V_Ooe_Info
                                                     PSV_NV_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                       PL_V_5m_Control
                                                    PL_NV_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                      PL_V_5m_Incentive
                                                   PL_NV_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                      PL_V_10m_Control
                                                   PL_NV_10m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                     PL_V_10m_Incentive
                                                  PL_NV_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Online Appendix Figures 2a-b. Sensitivity of Estimated Parameters to the Moments: Willingness to Complete a Survey
 Note: Online Appendix Figures 2a and 2b present the sensitivity of the estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). The plotted
lines indicate the local sensitivity of the given parameter estimate to an individual moment. A positive bar indicates that a (local) increase in the moment would in-
crease the estimated value of the parameter. Higher bars indicate more influential moments for the identification of the parameter. For each moment, we plot the in-
fluence estimate for the mean value of completing a 10-minute survey (in blue) and the standard deviation of this willingness to complete a survey (in orange) re-
spectively for voters (Online Appendix figure 2a) and for non-voters (Online Appendix Figure 2b).




                                                                                  54
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             deviation




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‐0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‐0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‐0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PH_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PH_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PH_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Ooe_0d5m




     timate for the value of time for voters (in blue) and for non-voters (in orange).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                             timeval_nonvoters




55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                             timeval_voters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POO_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Value of Time for voters and non‐voters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POO_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POO_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POO_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POO_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POO_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POO_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POO_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POO_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POO_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POO_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            POO_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Online Appendix Figure 3. Sensitivity of Estimated Parameters to the Moments: Value of time




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PL_V_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PL_V_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PL_V_10m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PL_V_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PL_NV_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PL_NV_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PL_NV_10m_Control
     cate the local sensitivity of the given parameter estimate to an individual moment. A positive bar indicates that a (local) increase in the moment would increase the
     estimated value of the parameter. Higher bars indicate more influential moments for the identification of the parameter. For each moment, we plot the influence es-
     Note: Online Appendix Figure 3 presents the sensitivity of the estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). The plotted lines indi-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PL_NV_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                                                            ‐0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‐0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PH_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PH_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PH_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PH_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PH_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PH_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PH_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PH_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PH_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PH_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PH_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PH_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PH_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PH_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PH_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PH_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PH_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PH_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PH_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PH_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PH_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PH_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PH_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PH_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PH_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PH_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PH_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                             h0_nonvoters

                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_NV_W_0d5m




56
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                             h0_voters




                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            POO_V_Oo_0d5m
     timate for the baseline probability of being at home for voters (in blue) and for non-voters (in orange).



                                                                                                                                                                                                         POO_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          POO_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          POO_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                       POO_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                         POO_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          POO_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                      POO_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                        POO_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                        POO_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                     POO_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Baseline probability of being home (h0) for voters and non‐voters




                                                                                                                                                                                                      POO_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_V_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_V_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_V_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PSV_V_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_V_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_V_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_V_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_V_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_NV_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_NV_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_NV_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_NV_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PSV_NV_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PL_V_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Online Appendix Figure 4. Sensitivity of Estimated Parameters to the Moments: Probability of Being at Home




                                                                                                                                                                                                          PL_V_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PL_V_10m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PL_V_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PL_NV_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PL_NV_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PL_NV_10m_Control
     cate the local sensitivity of the given parameter estimate to an individual moment. A positive bar indicates that a (local) increase in the moment would increase the




                                                                                                                                                                                                      PL_NV_10m_Incentive
     estimated value of the parameter. Higher bars indicate more influential moments for the identification of the parameter. For each moment, we plot the influence es-
      Note: Online Appendix Figure 4 presents the sensitivity of the estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). The plotted lines indi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       deviation




                                                                                                                                                                                           ‐0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ‐0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ‐0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PH_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PH_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PH_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                             r_nonvoters




57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                             r_voters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_Oo_10d10m
     timate for the probability of observing the flyer for voters (in blue) and for non-voters (in orange).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PSV_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PSV_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POO_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                POO_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POO_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POO_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                              POO_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                POO_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POO_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             POO_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Probability of seeing the flyer (r) for voters and non‐voters




                                                                                                                                                                                                               POO_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               POO_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                            POO_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                             POO_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_NV_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PSV_NV_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PL_V_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PL_V_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PL_V_10m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Online Appendix Figure 5. Sensitivity of Estimated Parameters to the Moments: Probability of Observing the Flyer




                                                                                                                                                                                                               PL_V_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PL_NV_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PL_NV_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PL_NV_10m_Control
     cate the local sensitivity of the given parameter estimate to an individual moment. A positive bar indicates that a (local) increase in the moment would increase the
     estimated value of the parameter. Higher bars indicate more influential moments for the identification of the parameter. For each moment, we plot the influence es-




                                                                                                                                                                                                             PL_NV_10m_Incentive
      Note: Online Appendix Figure 5 presents the sensitivity of the estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). The plotted lines indi-
                              Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation                                                                                                                             Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‐0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ‐0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4




                       ‐0.4
                                    ‐0.3
                                            ‐0.2
                                                          ‐0.1
                                                                         0
                                                                             0.1
                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_NW_0d5m
                                                      PH_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                    PH_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                     PH_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PH_V_W_0d5m
                                                       PH_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_W_10d10m
                                                     PH_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_W_10d5m
                                                      PH_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_We_0d5m
                                                      PH_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_We_10d10m
                                                    PH_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_We_10d5m
                                                     PH_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PH_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                      PH_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                     PH_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                      PH_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                      PH_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                    PH_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                     PH_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_NW_0d5m
                                                     PSV_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                    PSV_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                    PSV_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                      PSV_NV_W_0d5m                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_W_0d5m

                                                    PSV_NV_W_10d10m                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_W_10d10m

                                                     PSV_NV_W_10d5m                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_W_10d5m

                                                     PSV_NV_We_0d5m                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_We_0d5m

                                                    PSV_NV_We_10d10m                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_We_10d10m




     eta_nonvoters
                                                                                                                                                                                                  eta_voters




                                                    PSV_NV_We_10d5m                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_We_10d5m




58
                                                      PSV_NV_Oo_0d5m                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_Oo_0d5m

                                                    PSV_NV_Oo_10d10m                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Oo_10d10m

                                                     PSV_NV_Oo_10d5m                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Oo_10d5m

                                                     PSV_NV_Ooe_0d5m                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                  S_svy_voters




                                                   PSV_NV_Ooe_10d10m                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_Ooe_10d10m

                                                    PSV_NV_Ooe_10d5m                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Ooe_10d5m




     S_svy_nonvoters
                                                     POO_NV_Oo_0d5m                                                                                                                                                                   POO_V_Oo_0d5m

                                                   POO_NV_Oo_10d10m                                                                                                                                                                 POO_V_Oo_10d10m

                                                    POO_NV_Oo_10d5m                                                                                                                                                                  POO_V_Oo_10d5m

                                                    POO_NV_Ooe_0d5m                                                                                                                                                                  POO_V_Ooe_0d5m

                                                   POO_NV_Ooe_10d10m                                                                                                                                                                POO_V_Ooe_10d10m

                                                   POO_NV_Ooe_10d5m                                                                                                                                                                 POO_V_Ooe_10d5m

                                                    PSV_NV_Nw_NoInfo                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Nw_NoInfo

                                                       PSV_NV_Nw_Info                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Elasticity of sorting (eta) and Social Pressure Cost (S) of refusing survey for voters




                                                     PSV_NV_W_NoInfo                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_W_NoInfo

                                                       PSV_NV_W_Info                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_W_Info
                                                                                                     Elasticity of sorting (eta) and Social Pressure Cost (S) of refusing survey for non‐voters




                                                    PSV_NV_We_NoInfo                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_We_NoInfo

                                                       PSV_NV_We_Info                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_We_Info

                                                     PSV_NV_Oo_NoInfo                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_V_Oo_NoInfo

                                                       PSV_NV_Oo_Info                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_Oo_Info

                                                    PSV_NV_Ooe_NoInfo                                                                                                                                                                PSV_V_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                      PSV_NV_Ooe_Info                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Ooe_Info
                                                     PL_NV_5m_Control                                                                                                                                                                 PL_V_5m_Control
                                                    PL_NV_5m_Incentive                                                                                                                                                               PL_V_5m_Incentive
                                                    PL_NV_10m_Control                                                                                                                                                                PL_V_10m_Control
                                                   PL_NV_10m_Incentive                                                                                                                                                              PL_V_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Online Appendix Figures 6a-b. Sensitivity of Estimated Parameters to the Moments: Sorting Elasticity and Social Pressure
 Note: Online Appendix Figures 6a-b present the sensitivity of the estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). The plotted lines
indicate the local sensitivity of the given parameter estimate to an individual moment. A positive bar indicates that a (local) increase in the moment would increase
the estimated value of the parameter. Higher bars indicate more influential moments for the identification of the parameter. For each moment, we plot the influence
estimate for the cost of sorting (in blue) and for the social pressure cost (in orange) first for voters (Online Appendix Figure 6a) and then for non-voters (Online Ap-
pendix Figure 6b).




                                                                                   59
                                                                                                                                                                                    Effect on parameter in units of asymptotic standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                                             ‐0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      ‐0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                               ‐0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‐0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‐0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PH_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PH_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PH_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PH_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_NV_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PH_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PH_NV_We_10d10m




     ters, allowing for estimation of the lying cost.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PH_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PH_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PH_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PH_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PH_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Nw_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_V_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_V_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_NW_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_Nw_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Nw_10d5m




60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_NV_W_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_W_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_W_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_We_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_We_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cost of Lying (L)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_We_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PSV_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PSV_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POO_V_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POO_V_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POO_V_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POO_V_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POO_V_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POO_V_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    POO_NV_Oo_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                POO_NV_Oo_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POO_NV_Oo_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POO_NV_Ooe_0d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                               POO_NV_Ooe_10d10m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                POO_NV_Ooe_10d5m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_V_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSV_V_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PSV_V_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_V_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PSV_V_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_V_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_V_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Nw_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_Nw_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Online Appendix Figure 7. Sensitivity of Estimated Parameters to the Moments: Lying Cost (Full Estimation)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PSV_NV_W_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PSV_NV_W_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_We_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_We_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PSV_NV_Oo_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PSV_NV_Oo_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PSV_NV_Ooe_NoInfo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSV_NV_Ooe_Info
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PL_V_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PL_V_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PL_V_10m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PL_V_10m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PL_NV_5m_Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PL_NV_5m_Incentive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PL_NV_10m_Control
     cate the local sensitivity of the given parameter estimate to an individual moment. A positive bar indicates that a (local) increase in the moment would increase the

     timate for the lying cost. These estimates are for the “full estimation” case, which requires that on this subsample voters and non-voters have the same key parame-
     estimated value of the parameter. Higher bars indicate more influential moments for the identification of the parameter. For each moment, we plot the influence es-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                PL_NV_10m_Incentive
      Note: Online Appendix Figure 7 presents the sensitivity of the estimates to the individual moments following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2013). The plotted lines indi-
                                                   Online Appendix Table 1. Survey Treatments, Robustness

         Specification:                                                                                OLS Regressions
         Dependent Variable:                                             Indicator for Answering the Door            Indicator for Completing Survey
         Group:                                                             Voters                           Non-Voters                               Voters                         Non-Voters
                                                                     (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)       (7)                      (8)
    $10/10min Treatment                                          0.0364**            0.0314*           0.0243            0.0254              0.0132           0.0124    0.0231***               0.0266***
                                                                  (0.015)            (0.016)           (0.015)           (0.016)             (0.010)          (0.011)    (0.009)                 (0.009)
    $10/5min Treatment                                           0.0596***          0.0518***          0.0204            0.0196             0.0683***        0.0638*** 0.0467***                0.0470***
                                                                  (0.017)            (0.018)           (0.015)           (0.017)             (0.013)          (0.014)    (0.009)                 (0.010)
    Simple Flyer Treatments                                       0.0128              0.0091           0.0286            0.0224             0.0960***        0.0948*** 0.0496***                0.0510***
                                                                  (0.018)            (0.020)           (0.018)           (0.019)             (0.013)          (0.014)    (0.010)                 (0.011)
    Flyer Treatments with Opt-out                                 -0.0232            -0.0219           0.0052            0.0049             0.0695***        0.0731*** 0.0325***                0.0349***
                                                                  (0.019)            (0.021)           (0.018)           (0.019)             (0.013)          (0.014)    (0.010)                 (0.011)
    Mention of Election in Flyer                                  -0.0143            -0.0206          -0.0278**         -0.0274*            -0.0194*         -0.0238** -0.0238***               -0.0216**
                                                                  (0.013)            (0.014)           (0.014)           (0.015)             (0.011)          (0.012)    (0.008)                 (0.009)
    Voters Informed at Door of Election                                                                                                      0.0001           -0.0018    0.0047                  0.0085
    Topic                                                                                                                                    (0.009)          (0.010)    (0.008)                 (0.008)
    Omitted Treatment                                                        No Flyer, $0/5min Treatment                                    No Flyer, $0/5min, Not Informed Treatment
    Fixed Effects for Solicitor, Date-
                                                                       X                                    X                                     X                                  X
    Location, and Hour (Benchmark)
    Fixed Effects for Solicitor-Date-
                                                                                          X                                  X                                     X                                  X
    Location, and Hour
    R2                                                             0.0279             0.0629            0.0338           0.0765               0.0350           0.0650            0.0269           0.0734
    N                                                              6,873               6,873             6,324            6,324                6,873            6,873             6,324            6,324
    Notes: Estimates for a linear probability model with standard errors, clustered by solicitor-date, in parentheses. The omitted treatment is the Baseline No-Flyer $0-5 minutes survey. The regressions
    include fixed effects for the solicitor, for the date-town combination, and for the hour of day in Columns 1 ,3, 5, 7. The regressions include in addition fixed effects for solicitor-date-town location in
    Columns 2, 4, 6, 8.
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
\




                                                                                                       61
                                                                                 Online Appendix Table 2. Survey Treatments, By Time Period

     Specification:                                                                                                                                 OLS Regressions
     Dependent Variable:                                          Indicator for Answering the Door                                           Indicator for Completing Survey                                          Indicator for Lie in Turnout Question
     Time Period:                                              Summer       Fall    Summer       Fall                                     Summer      Fall    Summer       Fall                                     Summer        Fall      Summer      Fall
     Group:                                                               Voters                          Non-Voters                                Voters                          Non-Voters                                Voters                         Non-Voters
                                                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)              (4)                  (5)              (6)              (7)                (8)                  (9)              (10)              (11)             (12)
$10/10min Treatment                                           0.0510***             0.0110            0.0072         0.0460**             0.0271**          -0.0096           0.0028           0.0498***
                                                               (0.018)             (0.026)           (0.020)          (0.023)              (0.014)          (0.016)           (0.012)           (0.012)
$10/5min Treatment                                            0.0609***            0.0543*           0.0039          0.0434**             0.0654***        0.0700***         0.0432***         0.0534***
                                                               (0.020)             (0.030)           (0.022)          (0.021)              (0.016)          (0.021)           (0.013)           (0.013)
Simple Flyer Treatments                                         0.0094             0.0167            -0.0007         0.0683***            0.0953***        0.0928***          0.0268*          0.0815***
                                                               (0.024)             (0.029)           (0.025)          (0.025)              (0.018)          (0.021)           (0.014)           (0.014)
Flyer Treatments with Opt-out                                  -0.0204             -0.0299           -0.0181          0.0356              0.0766***        0.0545***          0.0208           0.0507***
                                                               (0.024)             (0.031)           (0.024)          (0.026)              (0.017)          (0.021)           (0.015)           (0.015)
Mention of Election in Flyer                                   -0.0125             -0.0140           -0.0112         -0.0472**             -0.0080         -0.0331**         -0.0207*          -0.0273**
                                                               (0.018)             (0.019)           (0.018)          (0.021)              (0.015)          (0.016)           (0.011)           (0.012)
Voters Informed at Door of Election                                                                                                        0.0008           -0.0053           0.0064            0.0031
Topic                                                                                                                                      (0.012)          (0.013)           (0.011)           (0.011)
Treatment with Incentive to Say that                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0263           0.0162    -0.1502***                -0.0777
Did not Vote                                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.023)          (0.035)     (0.054)                 (0.059)
Omitted Treatment                                                         No Flyer, $0/5min Treatment                                    No Flyer, $0/5min, Not Informed Treatment                                                    No Incentive to Lie
Solicitor, Date-Location, Hour F.e.                                 X             X           X                            X                X           X           X         X
Date-Location F.e.                                                                                                                                                                                                       X                 X                X                 X
R2                                                              0.0265             0.0325             0.0344           0.0341               0.0343           0.0423            0.0256            0.0353              0.0237            0.0745           0.0787            0.0670
N                                                               4,245               2,628              3,459            2,865                4,245            2,628             3,459             2,865                718               418              343               252
Notes: Estimates for a linear probability model with standard errors, clustered by solicitor-date, in parentheses. The regressions include fixed effects for the solicitor, for the date-town combination, and for the hour of day in Columns 1-8 and fixed effects for date-location in
Columns 9-12.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                         62
                                                 Online Appendix Table 3. Survey Treatments, By Political Registration

     Specification:                                                                                                          OLS Regressions
     Dependent Variable:                                    Indicator for Answering the Door                          Indicator for Completing Survey                              Lie in Turnout Question
     Political Registration:                               Republican Democratic      Other                          Republican Democratic     Other                           Republican Democratic Other
                                                               (1)          (2)        (3)                               (4)         (5)        (6)                               (7)         (8)        (9)
Panel A. Voters
$10/10min Treatment                                           0.0604**           0.0285            0.0450*              0.0272            0.0008             0.0273
                                                               (0.025)           (0.023)           (0.025)              (0.018)           (0.017)            (0.017)
$10/5min Treatment                                            0.0544*           0.0550**          0.0887***            0.0827***         0.0612***          0.0677***
                                                               (0.028)           (0.025)           (0.029)              (0.021)           (0.019)            (0.021)
Simple Flyer Treatments                                       -0.0169           0.0610**           -0.0250             0.0777***         0.1265***          0.0758***
                                                               (0.033)           (0.025)           (0.032)              (0.023)           (0.021)            (0.024)
Flyer Treatments with Opt-out                                -0.0769**           0.0322           -0.0593*             0.0687***         0.0801***          0.0564**
                                                               (0.035)           (0.025)           (0.035)              (0.024)           (0.021)            (0.023)
Mention of Election in Flyer                                   0.0332           -0.0295            -0.0397              0.0046           -0.0290*           -0.0344*
                                                               (0.025)           (0.020)           (0.025)              (0.021)           (0.017)            (0.019)
Voters Informed at Door of Election                                                                                     -0.0121           0.0242*            -0.0242
Topic                                                                                                                   (0.017)           (0.014)            (0.017)
Treatment with Incentive to Say that                                                                                                                                  0.0319    0.0275                                 0.0523
Did not Vote                                                                                                                                                          (0.043)   (0.027)                                (0.054)
Omitted Treatment                                               No Flyer, $0/5min Treatment                                                 No Flyer, $0/5min, Not Informed Treatment
Solicitor, Date-Location, Hour F.e.                              X            X         X                                    X               X            X
Date-Location F.e.                                                                                                                                                       X         X                                       X
R2                                                             0.0651            0.0476             0.0512               0.0701            0.0554            0.0658                0.1660            0.0590            0.0902
N                                                               1,918             3,018              1,937                1,918             3,018             1,937                  300               565               271
Panel B. Non-Voters
$10/10min Treatment                                            0.0549            0.0315            0.0245               0.1233**            0.0071           0.0193**
                                                              (0.061)            (0.033)           (0.018)               (0.048)           (0.021)            (0.009)
$10/5min Treatment                                             0.0078            0.0110            0.0241                0.0241            0.0461*          0.0440***
                                                              (0.072)            (0.039)           (0.017)               (0.051)           (0.026)            (0.010)
Simple Flyer Treatments                                        0.0811            0.0463            0.0225                0.0916             0.0448          0.0505***
                                                              (0.093)            (0.047)           (0.020)               (0.065)           (0.027)            (0.011)
Flyer Treatments with Opt-out                                 -0.0025             0.0141            0.0008               0.0560             0.0385           0.0292**
                                                              (0.091)            (0.044)           (0.019)               (0.065)           (0.028)            (0.011)
Mention of Election in Flyer                                  -0.0832            -0.0433           -0.0181             -0.1148***          -0.0114          -0.0215**
                                                              (0.069)            (0.034)           (0.015)               (0.043)           (0.022)            (0.009)
Voters Informed at Door of Election                                                                                     -0.0070             0.0046            0.0031
Topic                                                                                                                    (0.043)           (0.019)            (0.009)
Treatment with Incentive to Say that                                                                                                                                  -0.0000   -0.1998*                             -0.0970**
Did not Vote                                                                                                                                                          (0.265)    (0.112)                              (0.045)
Omitted Treatment                                               No Flyer, $0/5min Treatment                                                 No Flyer, $0/5min, Not Informed Treatment
Solicitor, Date-Location, Hour F.e.                              X            X         X                                    X               X            X              X          X                                      X
Date-Location F.e.                                                                                                                                                       X          X                                      X
R2                                                             0.2710            0.0816             0.0381               0.2945            0.0706            0.0309                0.3762            0.2994            0.0986
N                                                               351               1,179              4,794                351               1,179             4,794                  42                126               429
Notes: Estimates for a linear probability model with standard errors, clustered by solicitor-date, in parentheses. The regressions include fixed effects for the solicitor, for the date-town combination, and for the hour of day in
Columns 1-8 and fixed effects for date-location in Columns 9-12.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                                                                               63
             Online Appendix Table 4. Moments and Estimates on Erat and Gneezy (2012)

                                                      Payoffs of A          Payoffs of B           Fraction Lying               Fraction Lying (At
Decision Number:                                        (Truth)                (Lie)                 (Empirical)              Estimated Parameters)
1                                                         (20, 20)             (19, 30)              33/101 (33%)                           39%
2                                                         (20, 20)             (21, 30)              49/101 (49%)                           43%
3                                                         (20, 20)             (30, 30)              66/102 (65%)                           62%
4                                                         (20, 20)             (21, 15)              38/104 (37%)                           34%
5                                                         (20, 20)             (30, 20)              57/109 (52%)                           56%


                                                       Lying Cost             Altruism           S.D. of error term
Parameter Estimates:                                                         Coefficient

                                                       7.0 (1.4)***          0.29 (0.17)*             18.6 (4.0)***

Notes: Estimates from minimum-distance estimator using the 5 moments shows above and weights given by the inverse of the variance of each moment.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                              64
