                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ALCOHOL EXPOSURE IN UTERO AND CHILD ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT

                               Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder
                                         George L. Wehby
                                           Sarah Lewis
                                          Luisa Zuccolo

                                        Working Paper 19839
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19839


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014


We thank Neil Davies, Jason Fletcher, Steve Lehrer, Debbie Lawlor, Maarten Lindeboom, Owen O’Donnell,
Christine Valente, Frank Windmeijer, conference participants at the Integrating Genetics and Social
Science Conference, the 20th Workshop on Health Economics and Econometrics, the 2013 Royal
Economic Society conference, and seminar participants at the University of Sheffield and University
College Dublin for helpful comments on earlier version of this paper. We are extremely grateful to
all the families who took part in this study, the midwives for their help in recruiting them, and the
whole ALSPAC team, which includes interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians, clerical workers,
research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists and nurses. The UK Medical Research Council
(MRC), the Wellcome Trust and the University of Bristol provide core support for ALSPAC. This
publication is the work of the authors, who will serve as guarantors for the contents of this paper. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the UK Economic and Social Research Council (PTA-
026-27-2335), the UK Medical Research Council (G1002345, G0902144), and the NIH/NIDCR (R01
DE020895). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder, George L. Wehby, Sarah Lewis, and Luisa Zuccolo.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Alcohol Exposure In Utero and Child Academic Achievement
Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder, George L. Wehby, Sarah Lewis, and Luisa Zuccolo
NBER Working Paper No. 19839
January 2014
JEL No. I12,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the effect of alcohol exposure in utero on child academic achievement. As well as studying
the effect of any alcohol exposure, we investigate the effect of the dose, pattern, and duration of exposure.
We use a genetic variant in the maternal alcohol-metabolism gene ADH1B as an instrument for alcohol
exposure, whilst controlling for the child’s genotype on the same variant. We show that the instrument
is unrelated to an extensive range of maternal and paternal characteristics and behaviours. OLS regressions
suggest an ambiguous association between alcohol exposure in utero and children’s academic attainment,
but there is a strong social gradient in maternal drinking, with mothers in higher socio-economic groups
more likely to drink. In stark contrast to the OLS, the IV estimates show negative effects of prenatal
alcohol exposure on child educational attainment. These results are very robust to an extensive set
of model specifications. In addition, we show that that the effects are solely driven by the maternal
genotype, with no impact of the child’s genotype.


Stephanie von Hinke Kessler Scholder                  Sarah Lewis
Department of Economics                               MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit
  and Related Studies                                 School of Social and Community
University of York                                     Medicine University
Heslington, York, YO10 5DD                            S.J.Lewis@bristol.ac.uk
United Kingdom
Stephanie.Scholder@york.ac.uk                         Luisa Zuccolo
                                                      MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit
George L. Wehby                                       School of Social and Community
Department of Health Management                        Medicine University
 and Policy                                           L.Zuccolo@bristol.ac.uk
College of Public Health
University of Iowa
N248 CPHB, 105 River Street
Iowa City, IA 52242
and NBER
george-wehby@uiowa.edu
1. Introduction and Literature

The first scientific study that examined the effects of excessive alcohol intake during
pregnancy was published by a Liverpool prison physician in 1899 (Sullivan, 1899). He
argued that alcohol consumption caused the higher rates of stillbirth observed among female
alcoholic prisoners compared to their sober counterparts. The detrimental effects of excessive
drinking during pregnancy are currently well-known. The effects of low-to-moderate
drinking, however, are less conclusive. Indeed, there are conflicting recommendations
regarding the ‘threshold’ for maternal prenatal alcohol consumption, ranging from total
abstinence in most countries including the US to restricted consumption in the UK. Only in
1995 did the UK Department of Health issue guidelines for women who were (planning to
become) pregnant, stating that “women should not drink more than 1 or 2 units of alcohol
once or twice a week, and should avoid episodes of intoxication” (DH, 1995). Their most
recent guidelines are very similar: despite advising pregnant women not to drink in the first
three months of pregnancy, they mention that, if women choose to drink, they should not
exceed 1 to 2 units once or twice a week, as “at this low level, there is no evidence of any
harm to the unborn baby” (NICE, 2008).

These conflicting recommendations arise from inconsistent findings in observational studies
of the correlation between low-to-moderate alcohol consumption and child development
(including physical and mental health, cognitive and behavioural outcomes). Some find
negative effects on child development, some do not find evidence of developmental
differences, and others argue it improves child outcomes (for reviews of this literature, see
e.g. Gray and Henderson, 2006; Polygenis et al., 1998; Abel and Hannigan, 1995). One of the
major problems in estimating the causal effects of prenatal alcohol consumption is that it is a
choice; as such, it may be related to other unobserved characteristics that also affect the
outcome of interest, biasing the estimates.

This paper examines the impact of alcohol exposure in utero, as proxied by whether the
mother consumed any alcohol during pregnancy, on child academic achievement. We also
investigate the effect of the dose, pattern, and duration of exposure. We deal with
unobserved residual confounding using ‘Mendelian randomization’, referring to the random
allocation of an individual’s genotype at conception (Davey Smith and Ebrahim, 2003).
Although this allocation is random at the family trio level (i.e. from parents to children), at a
population level it has been shown that genetic variants are largely unrelated to the many
socioeconomic and behavioural characteristics that are closely linked with each other and that

                                               3
confound conventional observational studies. This has been shown using a wide range of
genetic variants1, different data sources2, and for an extensive set of background
characteristics3 (see e.g. Bhatti et al., 2005; WTCCC, 2007; Davey Smith et al., 2008;
Kivimäki et al., 2008; von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al., 2011; Lawlor et al., 2013).4 Hence,
we employ a carefully validated genetic variant that is associated with decreased alcohol
exposure as an instrumental variable (IV) for exposure to alcohol in utero (Zuccolo et al.,
2009). Under assumptions discussed in detail below, genetic variants are independent of
unobservable confounders, including those that occur in utero. As such, Mendelian
randomization can be exploited to make causal inferences about the effects of behavioural or
health conditions that have (at least partly) a genetic aetiology on certain outcomes of
interest. For a brief introduction to some of the genetic terms referred to in this study, see
Appendix A.

Our contribution to the literature is, first, to examine the causal effects of prenatal alcohol
exposure on child development. As suggested by the relatively few studies attempting to
investigate the causal effects (see below), it is particularly difficult to estimate these due to
unobserved residual confounding. Second, as it is obviously unethical to design a randomized
controlled trial, we show that quasi-experimental designs, such as Mendelian randomization,
may provide a powerful and useful alternative for causal inference. We also present a
thorough discussion of the assumptions required in Mendelian randomization experiments,


1
  Including, for example, LAC1 (rs4988235), CETP (rs708272), TNF-α (rs1800629), GPX4 (rs1007), MTHFR
(rs1801133), FTO (rs9939609), as well as the variant used here (ADH1B, rs1229984).
2
  Such as the British Women Heart and Health Study, the Young Finns Study, the Copenhagen General
Population Study, the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, as well as different case-control
samples.
3
  These include more ‘medical’ characteristics (e.g. pulse, lung function, vitamin levels, haemoglobin, fasting
insulin, fasting glucose, fibrinogen, C-reactive protein, plasma viscosity, etc.) as well as socioeconomic or
behavioural characteristics (e.g. area deprivation, SES, types of foods/drinks consumed, time use, walking
speed, educational level, age when parents died, housing characteristics, nurse estimation of life expectancy,
etc.)
4
   For example, Bhatti et al. (2005) explores differences in polymorphism frequencies by willingness to
participate in studies. They examine three studies with different recruitment designs and different participation
incentives. Conditional on having provided blood or saliva samples, they investigate whether genotype
frequencies differ by the timing of non-response to questionnaires (early, late and never responders), finding no
systematic correlations. Davey Smith et al. (2008) estimate pairwise correlations between non-genetic and
genetic variables and compare the number of correlations that are statistically significant with the number
expected by chance if all variables were uncorrelated. They show significant correlations between behavioural,
socioeconomic and physiological factors, with 45% of the 4,560 pairwise correlations being significant at the
1% level. In contrast, genetic variants show no greater association with each other, nor with the behavioural,
socioeconomic and physiological factors than what would be expected by chance. Consistent with these
findings, the allele frequencies in British blood donors have been shown to be virtually identical to those in the
British 1958 cohort study (WTCCC, 2007). The former are clearly a highly selected sample in the population,
whereas the latter includes a nationally representative sample of all children born in one week in Britain. Taken
together, this suggests that genetic variants are generally unrelated to potential confounders.

                                                        4
and provide additional evidence on the validity of genetic variants as instrumental variables
by testing its correlation with an unusually wide range of maternal and paternal
characteristics and behaviours. Third, we add to the literature on the long-term effects of the
early environment on later child outcomes (for a recent overview, see Almond and Currie,
2011), on potential differential investments by parents in response to child development
(Almond and Mazumder, 2013), as well as on identifying important periods of parental
investments per se (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). Finally, we provide advice to policy makers,
distinguishing between the effects of low-to-moderate versus excessive alcohol exposure in
utero.

We start by presenting some simple descriptive statistics about the prevalence of maternal
prenatal alcohol consumption, as these are not well documented in the economics literature.
We show that 63% of pregnant women drink at some point during pregnancy, with 17%
reporting that they binged (defined as drinking four units of alcohol in a day). On average,
women drink 1.5 units of alcohol per week. OLS regressions show an ambiguous association
between alcohol exposure in utero and children’s educational attainment, with exposure to
wine having a positive association, but exposure to beer being negative. Binge drinking is bad
for the child, but a longer exposure to alcohol (in terms of the number of trimesters) is
positively associated with the child’s outcomes.

We then present evidence of a strong social gradient in alcohol exposure, with older mothers,
and those of higher socio-economic position being more likely to drink during pregnancy,
and particularly drink wine. Beer consumption on the other hand, is associated with smoking,
lower education, and worse mental health. We use a genetic variant in the maternal Alcohol
Dehydrogenase 1B gene, an alcohol-metabolizing gene, as an instrument for prenatal alcohol
exposure. We show that the SNP is associated with alcohol exposure in utero. In addition, we
demonstrate that it is not related to any of the background characteristics that we show to be
associated with prenatal drinking. To provide additional evidence on the validity of our IV
approach, we exploit the richness of our data and correlate the SNP to an unusually extensive
range of maternal and paternal prenatal characteristics and behaviours; we find no evidence
of any systematic associations that would suggest the instrument is invalid. In stark contrast
to the OLS, our IV estimates show strong negative effects of alcohol exposure in utero on
child educational achievement, which are robust to a large set of model specifications. In
addition, the reduced form regressions show that the effects are solely driven by the maternal
SNP, with no impact of the child’s SNP on the child’s academic attainment. The results also

                                              5
suggest that low-to-moderate (as opposed to excessive) exposure may have similar negative
effects on child outcomes. Yet, despite the large negative effects, we find little evidence of
differential parental responsive investments to child development, exploring an unusually
wide range of parental postnatal responses and behaviours.

The relatively few studies in the economics literature that have attempted to deal with
unobserved confounding related to prenatal alcohol exposure generally find large negative
effects on child development.5 Exploiting a Swedish alcohol policy experiment from the
1960s that increased alcohol availability in two Swedish counties by allowing grocery stores
to sell strong beer, Nilsson (2008) investigates the effects of prenatal alcohol exposure on a
set of adult outcomes. The policy experiment led to a sharp increase in alcohol consumption
in the experimental regions, particularly among youths, causing the experiment to be
discontinued prematurely. Using a difference-in-difference-in-differences design, he finds
that children born to mothers under age 21, who have the longest prenatal exposure to the
experiment at delivery, have a lower human capital attainment later in life: total years of
schooling are reduced by 0.27 on average, with males being more affected (0.47 years) than
females (0.10 years). Children exposed prenatally to alcohol are four percentage points less
likely to have completed high school, and 2.5 percentage points less likely to have graduated.
Their earnings at age 32 are 24 percent lower compared to those not exposed, and the
proportion on welfare increased by five percentage points.

Wüst (2010) uses Danish survey and register data to examine the effect of maternal inputs on
child birth outcomes (birth weight, foetal growth, and preterm birth). OLS analyses suggest
an ambiguous association between prenatal alcohol consumption and birth outcomes. The
sibling fixed effects however, shows clear negative effects, suggesting that each daily unit of
alcohol decreases birth weight by 147 grams (4%), and increases the probability of a preterm
birth by 7.8 percentage points.6 Exploiting changes in the minimum legal drinking age over
time across US states, similar adverse effects on birth outcomes are reported by Fertig and
Watson (2009), whilst Barreca and Page (2012) find no effects. Finally, Zhang (2010)
examines the relationship between state-level alcohol taxes, prenatal drinking, and infant
health using the US Natality Files and the Behavioural Risk Surveillance System. The results
suggest that an increase in taxes on beer relates to a decrease in the incidence of low birth

5
 Other studies in the epidemiology literature include Lewis et al. (2012) and Zuccolo et al. (2013).
6
  Although not the main research question in their study, Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1994) also do not find any
effects of maternal prenatal alcohol consumption on child test scores in their GLS estimation, but the estimates
become negative when using a within-mother specification.

                                                       6
weight.

Our paper is structured as follows: the next section reviews the mechanisms through which
alcohol can affect the foetus, and discusses the metabolism of alcohol. Sections three presents
the methodological framework and discusses the validity of the instrument. The data is
introduced in section four, followed by the results in section five. We conclude with a
discussion of our findings.



2. Mechanisms

2.1 In utero alcohol exposure and child development

Excessive drinking during pregnancy is well-known to be detrimental to the foetus,
potentially leading to Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD, a pattern of mental and
physical defects). The effects of low-to-moderate drinking are less clear, and there is no
consensus as to what level of exposure is toxic to the foetus.

Numerous mechanisms have been suggested to contribute to alcohol-induced foetal damage.
Its effects on the developing brain are particularly complex, as – depending on the
developmental stage of the cells – alcohol can affect cell division, the survival of migrating
cells, the establishment of mature cell structures/functions, as well as interfere with the
brain’s cellular functions. For example, after multiplication through cell division, nerve cells
in the foetal brain migrate to an appropriate location where they mature to their full form and
function. Alcohol exposure during cell division may decrease the cell division rate, whilst
exposure during later stages may deplete cells due to alcohol-induced cell death (Goodlett
and Horn, 2001). Hence, the timing of alcohol exposure may be important for different
aspects of brain development. However, because the brain is one of the first organs to begin
and the last to complete development, it is susceptible to damage throughout pregnancy
(Guerri, 2002). Furthermore, as it is the blood alcohol level, rather than the amount of alcohol
consumed, that can cause foetal damage, binge drinking is generally regarded as more
damaging than drinking the same amount of alcohol over a longer period (Guerri, 2002).

Any damage due to prenatal alcohol exposure however, does not necessarily show at birth or
in infancy, but may only manifest later in childhood, adolescence or even adulthood. Hence,
affected children may go undetected until problems arise in the academic environment (Coles
et al., 1991), with neurodevelopmental problems potentially persisting into adult life (Gray
and Henderson, 2006). The most prominent dysfunctions include deficits in verbal learning

                                               7
and in integrating visual information, alterations in spatial memory and in reaction time,
impaired attention, reduced academic achievement and other cognitive and motor skills
(Guerri, 2002; Russell, 1991).



2.2 The metabolism of alcohol

Figure 1 graphically presents the first two steps in the metabolism of ethanol.7 The alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH) family of enzymes, which includes ADH1B, catalyses its first step:
oxidizing ethanol to acetaldehyde, a mutagenic and carcinogenic metabolite. With that, the
ADH1B enzyme plays a major role in the breakdown of ethanol. The rare variant of
rs1229984, a single nucleotide polymorphism, or SNP, in the ADH1B gene, greatly increases
ADH1B enzymatic activity, resulting in a quicker reduction of blood alcohol levels, and
sharper rises of acetaldehyde in blood and organs (see Appendix A for a brief introduction to
some of the genetic terms used here). The latter in turn leads to symptoms such as increased
heart rate and nausea. Individuals with the rare variant of ADH1B therefore consume less
alcohol, as found in numerous studies across many populations (see below). Hence, foetuses
of mothers who carry the rare variant of ADH1B have a reduced exposure to alcohol
compared to foetuses of mothers who carry the common variant. Note that the effects of
ADH1B on alcohol consumption are subtle: it does not make an individual an alcoholic or in
other ways alcohol-dependent. Instead, it only reduces alcohol intake by a small amount.8



3. Methodological framework

We use a SNP in the alcohol dehydrogenase 1B (ADH1B) gene rs1229984 to explain
variation in alcohol exposure in utero. The vast majority of individuals of European ancestry
are homozygous for the common allele. In fact, there are very few individuals who are
homozygous for the rare allele (<1%). We therefore specify a binary instrument, equalling 1
when the individual carries either one or two copies of the rare allele (A), assuming a
7
  Ethanol is also known as pure alcohol or drinking alcohol. It is the type of alcohol found in alcoholic
beverages.
8
  The second step in the metabolism of ethanol is mainly driven by aldehyde dehydrogenase enzymes. Some
individuals carry a polymorphism in the ALDH2 gene which encodes an enzyme that is unable to clear
acetaldehyde, leading to severe symptoms of facial flushing, increased heart rate, and nausea, causing these
individuals to abstain from alcohol or drink very little. This ALDH2 variant has been used in Mendelian
randomization studies to explore the causal effects of alcohol consumption on blood pressure (Chen et al.,
2008), drug use and anti-social behavior (Irons et al., 2007), and upper aerodigestive and stomach cancers
(Hashibe et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2007). However, its relevance is limited to East-Asian populations as the
variant is absent in populations of European ancestry.

                                                      8
dominant genetic model (as in Zuccolo et al., 2009, 2010); i.e. we compare individuals with
genotype GA or AA to those with genotype GG.



3.1 Potential outcomes framework

Let      denote this binary genetic variant, with                          1 indicating that the mother of child
carries the rare variant, and          0 implying that the mother of child does not carry the rare
variant. Let        and    denote random variables representing, respectively, alcohol intake and
the educational outcome. Let                 be the potential alcohol exposure for child                    when the
instrument is set to . Similarly, let          ,           be the potential outcome for child that would be
obtained if the instrument was set to , and alcohol exposure, the treatment variable, was set
to . Only one of the two potential exposures or treatments (                             0 and      1 ), and only one

of the two potential outcomes           0,         0        and          1,         1   are ever observed for any one

child.

As implicit in our notation, we assume that there is no interference between units (the Stable
Unit Treatment Value Assumption, see Rubin, 1980). Given the set of potential outcomes, we
can define the causal effect for child of                  on       as         1         0 , and the causal effect for

child of       on     as     1,    1           0,               0       . These are also known as the intention-to-

treat effects. Our framework follows the work by, among others, Imbens and Angrist (1994)
and Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996). We briefly lay out our structural assumptions, and
discuss more specifically how these apply to our research question.



Assumption 1: (Conditional) Independence

                                                            ,       ,           ,


Independence assumes that the instrument is as good as randomly assigned. Conditional
independence implies that independence holds conditional on some (vector of) covariate(s)
  , which would be denoted by                          ,    ,              ,   | .

Although genetic variants are randomly assigned at conception, the independence assumption
can be violated when a systematic relationship exists between the allele frequency and the
outcome of interest in different sub-populations; this is also known as population


                                                                9
stratification. The most common example, and one that is important in the case of ADH1B, is
ancestry. The ADH1B variant is one of the most ethnically stratified: the Minor Allele
Frequency (MAF; the frequency with which the rare allele occurs in the population) ranges
from 2-5% in Western European populations to 60-70% in North-East Asia (Borinskaya et
al., 2009). However, population stratification is likely to be less important in our study, as our
data is collected in a small geographically defined region with a predominantly white
population. In addition, we only include a child if the mother describes herself and the child’s
father as white, and we adjust for ten ancestry-informative principal components derived
from analysis of the genome wide association data (Bouaziz et al., 2011). In section 4.4, we
evaluate the independence assumption by exploring the distribution of an extensive range of
background characteristics by the value of the instrument. If the instrument is randomized,
there should be no systematic differences in such characteristics.


Assumption 2: Exclusion

                                     1,          0,   , for all .

Exclusion implies that the instrument can only affect the outcome via its effect on . Hence,
we can write       ,            . If the exclusion restriction only holds conditional on        , we
may specify the exclusion restriction conditional on these covariate(s).

The exclusion restriction can in principle be violated in different situations. First, we need to
consider the mechanism through which the variant affects alcohol exposure. This mechanism
is relatively well understood, as discussed in section 2.2. Furthermore, we know that the
ADH1B gene is predominantly expressed in the liver and (less so) in the lining of the stomach
(Lee et al., 2006). The liver functions as the main organ in ethanol clearance; the stomach and
small intestine are the principal absorption sites of ingested alcohol (Cortot et al., 1986).

Second, the exclusion restriction may be violated by pleiotropy, referring to the possibility
that a SNP has multiple phenotypic associations. The gene expression and the well
understood mechanisms of ADH1B decrease the likelihood that ADH1B directly influences
behaviours other than alcohol consumption. However, we cannot rule this out. It may be
possible, for example, that carriers of the ADH1B rare allele are more likely to become
anxious due to, or take medication to counter, any negative side-effects of their alcohol
intake, which in turn could directly affect foetal development, violating the exclusion
restriction. We directly investigate this in Section 4.4, examining the distribution of an

                                                10
extensive set of maternal characteristics during pregnancy by genotype, including maternal
diet, health and health conditions, physical activity, the use of medication, substance use,
mental health, and the use of chemicals.

Third, Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) refers to certain genetic variants potentially being co-
inherited with other variants. Whether this violates the exclusion restriction depends on the
function(s) of any co-inherited variants. ADH1B is in weak LD with other variants on the
Alcohol Dehydrogenase genes, such as ADH1A and ADH1C, but these have all been shown
to relate to alcohol metabolism, rather than to behaviours other than drinking (Birley et al.,
2009).

More generally, we investigate the potential violation of the exclusion restriction by
searching the medical literature on the relationships between ADH1B and other variables. In
addition to consistent evidence of an association between ADH1B and alcohol intake (see
also below), the SNP is consistently associated with conditions such as liver cirrhosis (see
e.g. Lorenzo et al., 2006), head and neck cancer (see e.g. Brennan et al., 2004; McKay et al.,
2011), upper aerodigestive tract cancer (see e.g. Canova et al., 2009) and oesophageal cancer
(see e.g. Zhang et al., 2006). These are all associated with alcohol consumption, strongly
suggesting that the SNP affects the outcomes through its effect on alcohol intake.



Assumption 3: Nonzero effect of instrument on treatment

                                           1        0     0

This implies that the instrument has some effect on treatment. It is essential for this
association to be replicated in a large number of independent studies, as it has been shown
that many initial genetic associations fail to replicate in independent samples (Colhoun et al.,
2003; see also Beauchamp et al., 2011). Individuals with the rare variant of ADH1B are
predicted to consume less alcohol than those with two common alleles. With that, foetuses of
mothers who carry the rare variant have a reduced exposure to alcohol compared to foetuses
of mothers who carry the common variant. This negative association is very robust and has
been replicated in numerous independent genetic studies (see e.g. Reich et al. (1998);
Whitfield et al. (1998); Saccone et al. (2000, 2005); Loew et al. (2003); Wall et al. (2005);
Duranceaux et al. (2006); Zintzaras et al. (2006); Luo et al. (2006); Zhang et al. (2007);
Ghosh et al. (2008); Tolstrup et al. (2008); Zuccolo et al. (2009); MacGregor et al. (2009);


                                               11
Sherva et al. (2009)), confirming Assumption 3; we show the standard statistical tests below.




Assumption 4: Monotonicity

                                   1          0        1        for all .

This means that the potential exposure or treatment for child whose mother does not carry
the rare variant is at least as high as the potential treatment for the same child whose mother
does carry the rare variant, for all . As discussed above, ADH1B does not make individuals
alcoholics, nor does it stop people from drinking altogether; it only affects intake by a small
amount. As such, individuals will not be aware of their genotype, and it is therefore very
unlikely that they would engage in any potential ‘compensatory responses’, such as drinking
less because they may be genetically less ‘protected’ against drinking. Hence, we assume that
the foetus is less exposed to alcohol if the mother carries the risk allele than if she does not.



We use assumptions 1 to 4 to interpret differences in average outcomes and treatments at
different values of the instrument. Under these assumptions, the instrumental variables
(Wald) estimand, defined as the ratio of the difference in average outcomes at two values of
the instrument to the difference in average treatment at the same two values of the instrument,
can be written as:
                                          |            |
                                                           .                                   (1)
                                          |            |


This is a Local Average Treatment Effect: the effect of in utero alcohol exposure on child
academic achievement for children whose mother was induced by the instrument to reduce
her alcohol intake. Our instrument picks up differences in children’s exposure for mothers
with and without the rare variant. Mothers who carry the rare variant are more likely to
abstain in pregnancy, less likely to binge, and on average consume less if they drink at all.
We therefore start by exploring the effects of any alcohol exposure on academic achievement,
but we are also interested in the effects of the dose, pattern and duration of exposure.
However, estimating the effects of these additional treatments has implications for our IV
approach. Indeed, with only one instrument, as we can only estimate the effect of one
treatment at a time. When estimating the effect of an increase in the duration, for example,
the exclusion restriction implies that our instrument          only affects the outcome through its

                                                  12
effect on the duration. However,      may also affect the outcome through its effect on the dose
and pattern of exposure. As such, specifying separate models for each treatment may violate
our assumptions. In an attempt to deal with this, we start the analyses by defining treatment
as a binary indicator equal to one if the foetus was exposed to any alcohol during the course
of the pregnancy, and equal to zero otherwise. This measure picks up a combined effect of
any alcohol exposure in utero, ranging from light to heavy exposure, and including shorter as
well as longer exposures.

We then estimate the effects of the dose, pattern and duration of exposure, but recognize the
potential limitation of this approach with respect to the IV assumptions. The pattern variable
(binge drinking) is binary; the dose and duration are count variables. Using a variable
treatment intensity for the dose and duration, the Wald estimand becomes


                                                     1 |    1            0 ,


where   is the maximum of , and the weights             ∑
                                                                           are non-negative and

sum to one (Angrist and Imbens, 1995; Angrist and Pischke, 2009). Hence, the IV estimate
with variable treatment intensity is a weighted average of the causal responses to a unit
change in treatment, for those whose treatment status is affected by the instrument. The
weight attached to the average of                    1 is proportional to the number of people
who, because of the instrument, change their treatment intensity from more than       units to
or less (Angrist and Imbens, 1995). We show these weight functions in section 4.4.



3.2 Interpretation of the estimates

The interpretation of our estimates is not straightforward, but rather depends on two
important issues. First, we note that we identify an ‘overall’ or ‘total’ effect of alcohol
exposure, which includes any effects that alcohol has on other substance use that in turn may
affect child development. Indeed, if we were interested in the effects of alcohol exposure per
se, our estimates may be either upward or downward biased, depending on whether alcohol
and other substances are compliments or substitutes. For example, if alcohol and e.g.
cannabis are substitutes (DiNardo and Lemieux, 2001) and prenatal exposure to cannabis
negatively affects the child academic attainment , the positive numerator of (1) will be
reduced by the negative effect of cannabis. As the denominator is unchanged, the IV estimate

                                                13
would underestimate the effect of alcohol per se. Conversely, if alcohol and e.g. smoking are
complements (Dee, 1999), and prenatal exposure to smoking negatively affects child
development, the IV estimate would overestimate the effect of alcohol.

We directly explore any potential complements and substitutes of alcohol below, where we
test whether there are any systematic differences by genotype in the use of a wide range of
substances, including caffeine, smoking, cannabis, amphetamine, barbiturate, cocaine, heroin,
methadone and ecstasy. We also examine whether maternal prenatal alcohol consumption
affects her substance use using IV regressions. Our results show no systematic patterns,
suggesting that the ‘overall’ effect we identify is similar to the ‘alcohol-effect’ per se.

The second issue to note regarding the interpretation of the estimates is that our treatment of
interest is prenatal alcohol exposure. Foetal exposure to alcohol consists of three components:
maternal consumption, maternal metabolism, and foetal metabolism. The rare allele of
maternal ADH1B rs1229984 is negatively associated with exposure through maternal
consumption and metabolism: it is associated with a reduction in intake and an increase in the
metabolic rate. Hence, the numerator of the Wald estimand (1) captures this total, or
combined, ‘exposure effect’.

Ideally, therefore, we would like our treatment variable in the denominator of (1) to be a
direct measure of exposure, such as foetal blood alcohol levels. For obvious practical and
ethical reasons, however, we do not observe this. As we discuss below, we only observe one
component of alcohol exposure: maternal alcohol consumption. This could be problematic,
as, holding alcohol intake constant, blood alcohol levels may be lower in rare allele carriers
of ADH1B due to the increased speed with which ethanol is broken down.

We search the literature to investigate the relative importance of the three components
through which ADH1B may affect foetal alcohol exposure. As we discuss above, this shows
clear evidence that ADH1B is an important determinant of the first component: alcohol
intake. We also find this in our data: as we show below, those who carry the rare allele drink
around 0.8 units a week less compared to those not carrying the rare allele; a difference
similar to a 53% decrease relative to the mean. In addition, as alcohol consumed by the
mother can cross the placenta without delay, it may immediately affect the foetus. Although
there is no evidence on the importance of the effect of ADH1B on foetal metabolism, there is
some – albeit little – evidence on adult metabolism. Neumark (2004) finds that ADH1B
explains 8.5% of the variance in alcohol elimination rate in a sample of 109 (Jewish) male


                                                14
students. Hence, although the evidence is limited, this would suggest that maternal metabolic
rates do play a role, which we are not able to account for. In other words, as we only observe
one of the three components of alcohol exposure in the denominator of (1), and since the
numerator captures the full ‘exposure effect’, the IV estimate based on consumption alone is
likely to be overestimated. Hence, although the sign of our estimates is correct, we cannot
identify the exact magnitude, and we argue that our analysis provides an upper bound of the
causal effect of alcohol exposure in utero.



4. Data

Our data are from a cohort of children born in one geographic area (Avon) of England.
Women eligible for enrolment in the population-based Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents
and Children (ALSPAC) had an expected delivery date between 1 April 1991 and 31
December 1992. Note that the first official guidelines on prenatal alcohol consumption,
mentioning that pregnant women should not drink more than 1-2 units of alcohol once or
twice a week, were only issued by the UK Department of Health in 1995; after this cohort
was born. Despite this, the US Surgeon General advised women not to drink in pregnancy as
early as 1981 (Office of the US Surgeon General, 1981), and it is unlikely that UK women
were completely insulated from this information. Approximately 85% of eligible mothers
enrolled, leading to about 14,000 pregnancies (ALSPAC is a cohort; there is no systematic
data collection on siblings).9 The Avon area has approximately 1 million inhabitants and is
broadly representative of the UK as a whole, although slightly more affluent than the general
population (Boyd et al., 2012; Fraser et al., 2012; see www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac for more a
detailed description of the data).

Just over 12,000 children had at least one completed questionnaire. Our sample selection
process is as follows. First, we exclude children whose mother or father is of non-white
ethnic origin to reduce the risk of population stratification. Second, we select mothers for
whom we observe both their and their child’s genotype, leaving us with 5,531 observations.10


9
  Of the 14,676 foetuses with a known birth outcome, 14,062 were live births and 13,988 were alive at 1 year.
As we do not observe the genotype of mothers whose children did not survive, we cannot directly explore
whether alcohol exposure in utero affects survival rates. However, if the genotype affects the survival of
foetuses, it would not be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (which states that allele and genotype frequencies in a
population remain constant from generation to generation in the absence of other evolutionary influences, such
as non-random mating and selection). We checked this and ADH1B is in equilibrium.
10
   For our sample of mother-child pairs, we observe a total of 7,088 maternal genotypes, and 8,886 child
genotypes at rs1229984. As we require both genotypes in the analyses, we can only use those observations for

                                                     15
Third, we drop observations with missing data on all measures of prenatal alcohol exposure
(n = 134), resulting in 5,397 observations. We further restrict the sample to children for
whom we observe their academic achievement at least once. Depending on the measure of
alcohol exposure and on the outcome of interest, the final sample includes between 1,922 and
4,088 mother-child matches.11



4.1 Measures of academic achievement

We specify different measures of academic achievement. First, we use an entry assessment
test, taken by all pupils about to start primary school (ages 4-5). Although there were no
compulsory national assessment tests at this time, the Local Education Authorities covering
the ALSPAC area used the same tests, which is available for 80% of (not privately owned)
schools. In addition, we use four nationally set exams taken at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16 (also
known as the Key Stage 1 (KS1), Key Stage 2 (KS2), Key Stage 3 (KS3) and Key Stage 4
(KS4, or GCSE) exam respectively). These measures of children’s performance are objective
and comparable across all children. Children’s scores are obtained from the National Pupil
Database, a census of all pupils in England within the state school system, which is matched
into ALSPAC. For each of the Key Stage tests (1 to 4), we use an average score for the
child’s mandatory subjects, standardized on the full sample of children for whom data is
available, with mean 0 and standard deviation 1.12



4.2 In Utero exposure and the genetic marker

which we observe the two: n = 5,513. It is unlikely that missing genotype data introduces selection bias. First,
empirical evidence on other data suggests that genotype frequencies are the same for general-population versus
selected samples (e.g. the British 1958 birth cohort versus British blood donors from the Wellcome Trust Case–
Control Consortium; see WTCCC, 2007). Second, empirical evidence shows that genotype frequencies do not
differ by the timing of non-response to questionnaires (see Bhatti et al., 2005). And third, we examine potential
bias in our data due to missing genotypes by investigating whether, conditional on observing genetic
information, the probability of being in the final sample differs by maternal and child genotypes. In other words,
we test whether the genotype frequencies for mother and child differ, comparing the sample where we observe
both genotypes (i.e. our estimation sample) to the sample where we only observe just the mother’s or just the
child genotype. We find no evidence that mother or child genotype frequencies differ between the two samples
(p = 0.12 and p = 0.58 respectively), suggesting that the missingness is unrelated to the instrument.
11
   The low sample sizes are mainly driven by third trimester alcohol intake for which an additional 35% (of the
maximum of 5,397 observations) is missing. Lower educated women are more likely to be missing in the third
trimester. However, this does not affect our results, which are robust the use of different samples. More
generally, Boyd et al. (2012) and Fraser et al. (2012) show that the lower socio-economic groups are more likely
to attrite.
12
   For KS1, this is an average of the child’s reading, writing, spelling and maths scores; KS2 includes reading,
writing, science and maths. For KS3 and KS4, the final score is an average of the child’s English, maths and
science.

                                                       16
We use the binary genetic instrument ADH1B, comparing those with genotype GA or AA to
those with genotype GG (A being the rare allele, where the effect is dominant; i.e. carrying
one rare allele, GA, has a similar effect on alcohol consumption as carrying two, AA).
Depending on the specification of interest, between 4.7 and 5.2% of our sample carry as least
one rare allele.13

As discussed above, we would ideally use a direct measure of alcohol exposure in utero, such
as foetal blood alcohol levels. As this is not available in the data, we proxy alcohol exposure
in utero by maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy. We start the analyses using a
binary variable indicating whether the foetus was exposed to alcohol in utero. This equals
one if the woman reports drinking any amount at any point during pregnancy, and equals zero
if the woman reports not to drink in the first, second, as well as third trimester, and reports
not to have binged (i.e. has non-missing values for alcohol intake in each trimester).14 We
then examine the effect of the dose of alcohol exposure, measured by the number of units
consumed per week, averaged over the first, second, and third trimester. In addition, we
examine the pattern and duration of alcohol exposure. We proxy the pattern by investigating
the effects of bingeing, defined by drinking the equivalent of two pints of beer, four glasses
of wine, or four pub measures of spirit in one day, measured in the second trimester. The
duration is measured by a count variable ranging from 0 to 3, representing the number of
trimesters during which the foetus was exposed to alcohol.

Several epidemiological studies distinguish between the effects of different types of
beverages, noting increases in preterm births or decreases in birth weight primarily among
beer drinkers (e.g. Kline et al., 1987). To investigate potential differences in the type of drink,
we separately examine the effects of beer or wine consumption. This explores differences in
(e.g.) wine consumption among those who report not consuming other alcoholic drinks. We
do not use information on the consumption of spirits, as too few mothers report drinking
spirits during pregnancy. The questionnaire explained that half a pint of ordinary strength
beer, lager or cider, and a small glass of ordinary strength wine contains one (UK) unit of

13
   With our sample sizes, this corresponds to 106 to 267 mothers (presented in Table 1 below); a relatively low
number.
14
   Alcohol consumption in the first, second, and third trimesters are obtained from questionnaires at 8, 18, and
32 weeks gestation respectively. Note that the first trimester questionnaire was only sent out to mothers who
enrolled before 14 weeks gestation; this is almost half of all mothers in our data. The other half were asked
about their first trimester alcohol consumption at a later date. For ease of description and discussion however,
we refer to this as the week 8, or first trimester, questionnaire. In the first and third trimester, women were
directly asked to report the number of alcoholic units consumed per week. In the second trimester, women were
asked to report the number of units of beer, wine, spirits and other alcohol per week, which we sum to obtain the
total number of units.

                                                      17
alcohol (similar to 10ml or 8 grams of ethanol).

Note that all measures of alcohol exposure may be subject to substantial measurement error.
First, the concentration of alcohol in different types of beers and wines varies considerably.
Second, the size of a glass of wine in a bar or restaurant can vary anywhere between 125ml to
250ml. Third, these standard measures of 125 or 250 ml are only used in bars and restaurants;
measures at home are likely to differ. Fourth, women may under-report their consumption
during pregnancy (e.g. Gray and Henderson, 2006). Combining the measurement error with
the imprecision and bias related to the reporting of alcohol consumption, this can lead to
considerable underestimation of the amount of alcohol actually consumed (Stockwell et al.,
2004), which may drive OLS estimates towards the null, though the IV may partially correct
for this, assuming that the instrument is unrelated to the measurement error. We explore this
assumption indirectly in Section 4.4, showing no systematic correlation between the
instrument and a wide range of covariates.



4.3 Covariates

Conditioning on covariates is not necessary to obtain unbiased estimates in Mendelian
randomization studies, as the covariates do not enter the assignment (randomization)
mechanism. In fact, it is unclear which covariates to include in a Mendelian randomization
study, as any characteristic is measured post-randomization, and – with that – may be
affected by the instrument (von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al., 2011, 2013). For this reason,
we do not control for covariates in our main analysis, though we discuss and report the
estimates that adjust for a wide variety of different sets of covariates in Section 5.9 and
Appendix D.

The exception however, is that we include ten ancestry-informative principal components to
account for any remaining population stratification, and we control for the child’s genotype.
We include the latter for two reasons. First, when alcohol consumed by the mother crosses
the placenta, the child’s ADH1B may also start oxidizing the ethanol (depending on whether
the enzyme is expressed in utero). Second, the child’s genotype is likely to be related to the
child’s alcohol consumption later in life, and may –through that– affect the child’s academic
achievement, although this is not likely for academic outcomes measured at younger ages.
Including the child’s ADH1B will account for these potential biases. However, the results are
not sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of the child’s ADH1B.


                                              18
4.4 Descriptive Statistics

As discussed in Section 3, the IV estimate for the dose and duration of alcohol exposure is a
weighted average of the unit causal response. Figure 2 presents the weight function, plotting
the differences (between those carrying no risk alleles and those carrying at least one risk
allele for ADH1B) in the probability that alcohol intake is at or exceeds the level on the x-
axis. This shows that those who carry no risk allele of ADH1B are between two and 13
percentage points more likely to drink, depending on the number of units examined. The
intensity of the shift is highest around 2 to 3 units per week, declines thereafter, but remains
positive throughout.

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the average alcohol consumption during pregnancy.
We show these for the full sample (column 1), as well as by genotype (columns 2 and 3).
Panel A shows that, on average, 62.7% of the sample drank any alcohol during pregnancy,
but this varies by genotype, with 63.3% of mothers who are homozygous for the common
allele drinking alcohol, and 50.7% of those who carry at least one rare allele. Furthermore,
we find that 17.0% of mothers who have two common alleles binged at least once in the
second trimester, compared to 11.2% among those carrying at least one rare allele. Similarly,
using the number of trimesters in which the mother drinks as a proxy for the duration or
length of exposure, we find the average to be 0.99 for those carrying two common alleles,
compared to 0.59 for those carrying at least one rare allele.

The average number of units of alcohol per week is just over 1.5. However, there is much
variation around this: the average number across pregnancy ranges from 0-35, with the
variation in the number of beers being larger than that for wine. There are again large
differences by maternal genotype, as shown in columns 2 and 3. Mothers who are
homozygous for the common allele, for example, drink an average of 1.55 units a week. This
is 0.65 units a week among those carrying at least one rare allele.

The second part of the table shows the between and within standard deviations for the
number of units of alcohol, wine and beer consumed for the full sample and the two
genotypes separately. This shows that most of the variation lies between mothers, though
there remains considerable variation within mothers. This suggests that mothers do alter their
alcohol intake; it is not the case that mothers’ alcohol consumption remains stable over the
course of her pregnancy. In other words, our results are not based on one particular group of


                                               19
mothers who do not change their behaviour during pregnancy.

To provide evidence on the validity of our IV approach, we exploit the richness of our data
and correlate the instrument to an unusually extensive range of maternal and paternal prenatal
background characteristics (we explore activities after birth – i.e. those that may be affected
by child development – in Section 5.5). This is presented in Appendix B, showing the mean
and standard deviation of a wide range of variables by the value of the instrument. With
random assignment of genetic variants, there should be no systematic variation in covariates
by genotype.

We start by testing covariates that are related to the (potential) alcohol intake of the mother’s
genetically-related family. With each maternal allele having a 50% chance of being inherited
by the child, children are more likely to carry the rare allele if their mother does. Similarly,
we find that, among mothers who carry the rare allele, her mother and father are slightly less
likely to have an alcohol problem. The mother’s partner, however, is equally likely to drink
during and after birth (at 8 months) for mothers with or without the rare allele, suggesting
that potential assortative mating based on alcohol consumption is not an important issue.

Our further extensive range of covariates includes (i) a set of ‘standard’ covariates, (ii)
maternal tea/coffee/milk consumption, (iii) parental diet and nutrition, (iv) parental attitudes
to breastfeeding and other parenting issues, (v) religious beliefs, (vi) household and family
characteristics, (vii) previous/current pregnancies and conditions during labour and delivery,
(viii) mother’s and partner’s physical health, including a wide range of conditions measured
both in the first and second trimester of pregnancy, (ix) mother’s physical activity, (x)
measures of parental mental health, (xi) maternal use of medication in the first and second
trimester as well as after pregnancy, (xii) parental substance use, (xiii) mother’s use of
chemicals during pregnancy, (xiv) the extent of social support available to the mother and
partner, and (xv) neighbourhood characteristics.

All tests are reported in Table B1, showing no systematic differences in the wide range of
covariates by maternal genotype. We compare the number of correlations that are statistically
significant with the number expected by chance if all variables were uncorrelated (excluding
the characteristics of genetically-related family). We find no greater association between the
genetic variant and the covariates than what would be expected by chance (p = 0.32 at the
10% level, p = 0.46 at 5%, and p = 0.48 at 1%), suggesting that the SNP is independent of
behavioural or environmental factors that may affect the outcome of interest. Indeed, in the


                                               20
robustness checks in Appendix D, we test the sensitivity of our analysis by controlling for
these covariates in the IV specification, leaving our findings unaffected.



5. Results

5.1 OLS results

Table 2 presents the OLS estimates of the associations between prenatal alcohol exposure and
child educational attainment, controlling for the ancestry-informative principal components
and the child’s ADH1B. Panel A reports the estimates for any alcohol exposure, showing an
insignificant relationship with the different measures of child educational attainment,
presented in the columns. Panel B shows a clear negative association between maternal binge
drinking and educational achievement, whilst a longer exposure to alcohol is positively
correlated with children’s academic attainment.

Examining the (average) number of units of alcohol in Panel C shows an ambiguous
association; OLS coefficients are sometimes positive, sometimes negative, but most estimates
cannot be distinguished from zero. In contrast, the table shows strong positive correlations for
exposure to wine, but negative associations for exposure to beer. Although this could reflect
differential effects of wine and beer, it is more likely to simply reflect other characteristics of
mothers who drink wine as opposed to beer during pregnancy.

Indeed, column 1 and 2 in Table 3 present the results from separate regressions of any
alcohol and binge drinking respectively on the ‘standard’ covariates presented in Appendix
B, showing a strong socio-economic gradient in prenatal alcohol exposure. Mothers of higher
socio-economic position are more likely to drink alcohol, and less likely to binge, whereas
length of exposure (column 3) is positively associated with socio-economic position. The
positive gradient is stronger for wine consumption (column 5), than for mothers who drink
beer or other alcoholic beverages (column 6): older, better educated, higher social class,
employed mothers, and those with higher family income and a better educated, employed
partner are more likely to consume wine, whilst smoking, lower educated mothers with worse
mental health are more likely to drink beer. This social gradient in alcohol consumption and
the inverse gradient for binge drinking is consistent with that observed in other US and UK




                                                21
surveys.15



5.2 IV results

Table 4 presents the first stage IV results, regressing prenatal alcohol exposure on the genetic
instrument whilst controlling for the child’s ADH1B. As expected, we find a negative
correlation between maternal ADH1B and in utero alcohol exposure: mothers who carry at
least one rare allele of ADH1B are less likely to drink any alcohol (column 1), less likely to
binge (column 2), have a shorter duration of alcohol consumption (column 3), and drink
fewer units of alcohol compared to those carrying two common alleles (columns 4-6). Hence,
children born to these mothers have a reduced alcohol exposure during pregnancy. The F-
statistic depends on the specification and sample size used, and is strongest when we consider
the number of units of alcohol, ranging between 16 and 23. If we do not control for the
child’s genotype, this increases to 28-43, with similar point estimates and slightly smaller
standard errors, suggesting that ADH1B predicts alcohol exposure well, but that the inclusion
of child ADH1B reduces its precision. The coefficients suggest that those who carry the rare
allele are between 11 and 15 percentage points less likely to consume any alcohol during
pregnancy. They drink between 0.77 and 0.86 units a week less compared to those not
carrying the rare allele. The wine and beer-specific effects are smaller, though in the same
direction. As discussed above, alcohol intake is only one of the three components through
which the foetus may be exposed to alcohol, and hence, this is likely to be an underestimate
of the effect of ADH1B on actual exposure.

The second stage IV results are presented in Table 5. To deal with potential weak
instruments, we report the weak-instrument robust 95% confidence bounds, based on the
Anderson Rubin statistic (Andrews et al., 2006). This shows consistent negative effects of
any prenatal alcohol exposure, bingeing, the duration, and the dose of alcohol exposure on all
measures of child educational attainment, though due to the sometimes large standard errors,
not all are significant. The magnitude of the estimates is considerable, though as we discuss
above, we argue these are upper bounds of the causal effect of alcohol exposure.

Increasing the number of units of alcohol in utero lowers child academic attainment, with

15
   Although the majority of these explore the social gradient in alcohol consumption in general (see e.g. Cutler
and Lleras-Muney (2010), using the National Health and Interview Survey, the Health and Retirement Study,
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, and the National Child Development Study), others explore
alcohol intake during or just after pregnancy (e.g. Bartley et al. (2005) and Dezateux et al. (2005) using the UK
Millennium Cohort Study).

                                                      22
similar effect-sizes when examining the different educational outcomes. The estimates
suggest that exposure to an additional unit of alcohol reduces academic achievement by up to
0.2 to 0.3 standard deviations. There is a slight suggestion that the negative effects of alcohol
exposure increase as the child ages, with larger effects for the KS4 exam compared to the
entry assessment or KS1 exams, indicating possible accumulation of educational gaps and
complementarity of educational achievement over time.

Examining the two types of alcoholic beverages, we find similar negative effects to the
‘average alcohol’ specification, though they are less well defined due to the smaller sample
sizes, and larger due to the weaker first stage association (and therefore smaller denominator
in (1)). Note, however, that the instrument is not specific to wine or beer consumption, but to
alcohol intake more generally. The estimates can therefore not be interpreted as the specific
effect of wine or beer intake, but rather indicate that the OLS associations, suggesting that
wine improves and beer worsens child development, are likely to be biased due to
unobserved confounding.

Although we argue that our IV estimates are an upper bound of the true causal effect, we are
not the first to estimate such large effects, or to see a different association from the OLS after
attempting to account for residual confounding. Indeed, Nilsson (2008) finds substantially
large effects of prenatal alcohol exposure on human capital outcomes in Sweden. Similarly,
Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1994) and Wüst (2010) obtain considerably larger negative effects
in within-mother specifications compared to more ambiguous results in the OLS or GLS.
Furthermore, it is consistent with the literature on the long-term effects of early life
conditions on later-life outcomes. This literature generally finds that foetal shocks have large
impacts on later outcomes, including on test scores, educational attainment, and other
developmental outcomes (see e.g. Currie, 2009; Almond and Currie, 2011). In addition and as
discussed above, our measures of exposure are likely to be subject to considerable
measurement error, which may drive OLS estimates towards the null. The IV, however, is not
affected by this, resulting in larger estimates (in absolute value).



5.3 Reduced forms

Table 6 presents the reduced form estimates from separate regressions of the test scores on
the maternal genotype, and regressions of the test scores on the child’s genotype (Panel A);
Panel B includes both genotypes simultaneously. All analyses control for the ancestry-


                                                23
informative principal components. Recall that exposure to alcohol in utero results from a
combination of three components: maternal consumption, maternal metabolism, and foetal
metabolism. These analyses therefore shed light on whether the effect we find is likely to
come via the combined consumption and metabolism through the mother, or via the foetal
metabolism. We find a strong positive estimate for the maternal genotype, with much smaller
and close-to-zero estimates for the child’s genotype, suggesting that the alcohol effect runs
through maternal intake and metabolism, rather than via the child metabolizing its mother’s
alcohol.



5.4 The prenatal period

We are interested in the effect of prenatal alcohol exposure on child academic achievement.
For mothers who carry a rare allele of ADH1B, however, their mother may also have been a
carrier. As such, the mother’s mother may have drunk less during her pregnancy, affecting
the mother’s cognitive abilities. This implies that we may not be able to attribute the entire
observed effect to prenatal drinking by this generation of women alone, as there may also be
indirect effects of drinking by the child’s female ancestors. However, that does not provide
evidence against a detrimental effect of prenatal alcohol exposure on child academic
outcomes.

Furthermore, one may argue that our instrument does not solely explain prenatal drinking. In
other words, mothers who carry the rare variant of ADH1B are likely to have had lower
alcohol consumption throughout life. Hence, if the difference in alcohol exposure over the
mother’s lifetime changes her preferences or attitudes towards her child’s education, the
estimated effects are not necessarily solely due to prenatal alcohol consumption, but may
partly reflect a more general alcohol intake.

Similarly, as alcohol consumption is correlated over the life cycle, our estimated negative
effects may reflect the combined effects of alcohol consumption in different periods, rather
than that specific to the prenatal period. For example, mothers who drink more may – perhaps
because of that – spend less time with their children or pay less attention to their children’s
school performance. Or children whose mothers drink more may change their behaviour in
response, affecting their outcomes.16 To examine these potential pathways, Table B1


16
   Although we observe some variables for maternal alcohol intake post-pregnancy, these are categorical
variables and therefore the magnitude of any OLS or IV estimates are not comparable to those reported above.

                                                    24
(Appendix B), explores whether ADH1B rare allele carriers have systematically different
behaviours compared to those who carry two common alleles. We find no evidence of
systematic differences by genotype.

Another possibility to explicitly examine the effects of prenatal alcohol exposure is by using
SNPs that only affect exposure during pregnancy. Although the ADH1B effect is not specific
to the pregnancy period, there is evidence that ADH1B is a stronger predictor of alcohol
intake and quitting during pregnancy, compared to that in other periods (Jacobson et al.,
2006; Zuccolo et al., 2009; Wehby and von Hinke Kessler Scholder, 2013).17 Hence, we can
examine the effect of quitting during pregnancy. If prenatal alcohol exposure negatively
affects child academic achievement, we would expect to find a positive effect on child
academic attainment for those children whose mother’s ADH1B induced them to quit
drinking during pregnancy. To investigate this, we restrict the sample to women who drank
prior to pregnancy and define quitters as those reporting not to drink at any point during
pregnancy.18 The findings (available from the authors upon request) show consistent positive
effects of quitting during pregnancy on child educational attainment, with estimates of very
similar (absolute) magnitude to those in Panel A, Table 5. As above, the results are likely to
be an overestimate due to not being able to measure actual exposure to alcohol. Nevertheless,
the direction of effect is as expected. Hence, although we are not able to fully deal with the
specificity of the prenatal period, our results are at least suggestive that alcohol exposure
during the intrauterine period affects the foetus.



5.5 Parental responsive investments

The large estimates of the effect of prenatal alcohol exposure on child educational attainment
call for an investigation into the potentially differential investments that parents make in
response to their child’s development. The literature on parental responsive investments tends
to explore whether they reinforce or compensate for initial endowment differences (for a
recent overview of the literature, see Almond and Mazumder, 2013). Understanding these
responses is of broad interest and can provide interesting insights into parental responsive

17
   This could suggest an interaction between ADH1B and the environment; the latter being pregnancy. With
women facing similar environments during pregnancy, those who carry ADH1B may find it easier to quit.
Alternatively, it could mean that ADH1B causes other (physical) changes in pregnancy that lead these women to
women quit drinking. Although there is no evidence of the latter, and we find no evidence of this in Table B1, it
could violate the IV assumption depending on such other effects of the variant.
18
   In other words, this definition is perfectly negatively correlated with our definition of ‘any alcohol’ exposure,
but the analysis is conditional on the sample of women who drank before pregnancy.

                                                        25
investment behaviours.

To explore this in detail, we estimate IV regressions to examine whether alcohol exposure in
utero leads to differential parental responses, considering a wide range of post-birth
characteristics and behaviours that parents have control over. These include (i) child diet and
nutrition, (ii) immunisations and other health treatments (such as fluoride treatment and the
use of vitamins), (iii) interactions between the parents and child, (iv) doctor and dentist visits,
(v) parenting and teaching scores of both the mother and her partner, (vi) time use, (vii)
maternal worries and concerns about her child, (viii) a set of post-birth household
characteristics, (ix) the use of child care, and (x) the level of social support and social
network available to the mother and her partner. In addition, many of these variables are
observed multiple times after birth, allowing us to also explore whether any differences are
systematic over time.

The results are presented in Table C1, Appendix C. These show some significant effects of
alcohol exposure in utero. For example, consuming alcohol during pregnancy increases
(decreases) the likelihood of having given the baby formula (a herbal drink) at age 6 months.
However, we find little evidence of any systematic patterns in the data that would suggest that
prenatal alcohol consumption leads to differential parental choices and behaviours. For
example, parents are more likely (at age 6 months) to change nappies at night of babies
exposed to alcohol in utero, but there is no difference in night-time nappy changing at age
four weeks. Similarly, we find that parents of children who are exposed to alcohol in utero
are less likely to take their child to the dentist or use a toothbrush/toothpaste at 38 month, but
they are more likely to have a doctor visit at 18 and 30 months. The only finding that is
consistent over time is that exposure to alcohol increases the likelihood that babies are
regularly looked after by their grandparents at age 15, 24, and 38 months. Considering the
wide range of parental choices explored, however, there seems to be little evidence of any
systematic differences in parental responsive investments for children exposed to alcohol in
utero compared to those not exposed, suggesting that most of the effect we find from prenatal
alcohol consumption on academic achievement in foetal in origin.



5.6 Subgroup analysis

To examine whether the effects of alcohol exposure are different for different groups of
children, we distinguish between child’s gender, mother’s age at birth, partner’s social class


                                                26
at birth, maternal education, and family income. The results are reported in Table 7.
Consistent with Nilsson (2009), the estimates are slightly larger for children of lower
educated and lower income mothers. In contrast to previous findings that show boys to be
more vulnerable to alcohol exposure in utero than girls (e.g. Nilsson, 2009; Barreca and Page,
2012), however, we find no clear patterns by gender or social class.



5.7 Low-to-moderate drinking

The UK Department of Health suggests that, if women choose to drink during pregnancy,
they should not exceed 1-2 units once or twice a week, as “at this low level, there is no
evidence of any harm to the unborn baby”. If there truly are non-linearities in the effects of
alcohol exposure in utero, we cannot directly investigate this with only one instrument. To
shed some more light on this however, Figure 3 plots the IV point estimates for mothers
drinking 1-5, 6-10, 11-15, and 16 or more units a week, comparing each of them to mothers
who do not drink. This shows that all estimates are negative, including the indicators for low-
to-moderate consumption, though not all are very precisely estimated. Nevertheless, this does
suggest that low-to-moderate alcohol exposure also harms the foetus.



5.8 The timing of exposure

For policy purposes, whether there is any differential effect in the timing of exposure to
alcohol in utero is of substantial interest. Although we observe the number of drinks in each
trimester and we can run the analyses separately by trimester, the interpretation of the
estimates is limited by the fact that the instrument is not specific to a particular trimester. In
other words, since the reduced form (the numerator in (1)) is similar in all analysis for a
specific outcome variable (apart from differences due to the sample size), changes in the IV
estimates are mainly driven by differences in the first stage (the denominator in (1)). Indeed,
unsurprisingly, our results (available upon request) suggest the estimates are similar
throughout pregnancy.



5.9 Robustness checks

We perform a range of checks to verify that our results are robust to different specifications,
shown in Appendix D. We present the estimates of the average number of units per week

                                               27
during her pregnancy on Key Stage 1 scores, though the findings are robust to the use of the
Entry Assessment test, or later Key Stage exams. The different model specifications control
for different sets of covariates. We start by controlling for a set of alcohol-related variables
(Panel A): specification 1 repeats the KS1 results from Table 5 for comparison; specification
2 includes an indicator for maternal smoking during pregnancy; specification 3 does not
include the child’s ADH1B (i.e. only including the principal components); specification 4
includes (binary) indicators for maternal post-natal alcohol intake when the child was 8, 21,
33, and 47 months old; specification 5 includes binary indicators for the child’s own alcohol
consumption at 157, 166, and 185 months; specification 6 accounts for the mother’s partner’s
alcohol consumption in the second trimester, the partner’s alcohol intake and bingeing at 8
months, and whether the mother’s parent’s ever had an alcohol problem.

We next run multiple IV analyses, each time controlling for the different sets of
characteristics and behaviours listed in table B1, Appendix B. For these analyses, we only
control for the mother’s characteristics, as sample sizes reduce substantially when controlling
for partner’s characteristics due to missing values. However, as most variables relate to the
mother, this still controls for an extensive set of covariates that are generally not observed in
survey data. Panel B shows that the use of different sets of control variables leads to different
sample sizes due to missing values on some covariates. However, our results are very robust,
with coefficients of similar magnitudes in all specifications.



6. Discussion and conclusion

This paper examines the effect of alcohol exposure in utero on child academic achievement.
Simple correlations between alcohol exposure and child academic achievement show
somewhat ambiguous results, with exposure to wine having a positive association, but
exposure to beer being negative. Binge drinking is bad for the child, but a longer duration of
exposure is positively associated with the child’s academic performance. However, we
present clear evidence of the endogeneity of alcohol intake, showing a strong social gradient
in maternal alcohol consumption, with mothers of higher socio-economic status more likely
to drink, and in particular, drink wine. In contrast, beer consumption is associated with lower
education and worse mental health. To deal with the confounding, we use a genetic variant in
the alcohol metabolism gene ADH1B as an instrument for alcohol exposure, and show that –
in contrast to alcohol consumption – the genetic instrument is unrelated to potential


                                               28
confounders, examining an unusually wide range of maternal and paternal characteristics and
behaviours. We include a detailed discussion of the IV assumptions that are required to
estimate the causal effect of alcohol exposure. In stark contrast to the OLS, our IV estimates
show large negative effects of prenatal alcohol exposure on child educational achievement,
which are robust to a large set of model specifications. In addition, the reduced form
regressions show that the effects are solely driven by the maternal genotype, with no impact
of the child’s genotype. Yet, despite the large negative effects, we find little evidence of
differential parental responses to child development, exploring a wide range of parental
postnatal investments and behaviours.

Our estimates are Local Average Treatment Effects, capturing the effect on children whose
mother was induced by her genotype to reduce her alcohol intake. Although we obviously
cannot alter individuals’ genotypes, we believe that our estimates remain policy relevant. As
argued in Imbens (2010), if randomized experiments are unethical or infeasible, credible
evaluations can be based on instrumental variable strategies. Although they are second best to
randomized experiments, as they rely on additional assumptions and have less external
validity, they are often all we have. The relatively small number of studies attempting to deal
with the endogeneity of prenatal alcohol exposure indeed suggest that it is particularly
difficult due to unobserved residual confounding. Using different methodological approaches,
these studies find negative effects of prenatal alcohol exposure on child development (see e.g.
Nilsson, 2008; Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1994; Wüst, 2010; Zhang, 2010; Fertig and Watson,
2009). There is no evidence a priori to suggest that different sources of variation in alcohol
exposure lead to different effects of exposure on academic achievement. In addition, if there
is a biological effect of alcohol exposure (damaging the developing brain), any reduction in
exposure should improve child outcomes. Hence, despite estimating a LATE, we believe that
our estimates have some external validity and are relevant to policy.

Although the mothers in our sample were pregnant before the official UK guidelines on
prenatal alcohol consumption were released, we believe our results are still likely to be
relevant in today’s context for three reasons. First, the US Surgeon General advised women
not to drink during pregnancy as early as 1981, and it is unlikely that UK women were
completely insulated from this information. Second, with the UK’s most recent guidelines on
alcohol consumption during pregnancy being very similar to their first guidelines, we assume
that differences in the information available between the early 1990s and today are modest.
Third, it is unlikely that the biological effects of alcohol exposure on child development have

                                              29
changed over time, suggesting that the results are also relevant for today’s society.

Although we argue that our estimates may be an upper-bound, they are very robust to
different model specifications. In addition, we are not the first to find such large effects: the
few papers that attempt to deal with unobserved confounding in alcohol exposure also find
large negative effects on child development (see e.g. Nilsson, 2008; Wüst, 2010; Zhang,
2010).

Nevertheless, the paper has several limitations. First, we are not able to fully deal with the
specificity of the prenatal period. Second, we cannot make any strong statements about the
specific effects of low-to-moderate versus excessive prenatal alcohol intake, though the
analyses suggest that both negatively affect child academic attainment. Third, although the
results suggest the effects are similar for alcohol intake throughout pregnancy, we cannot rule
out differential effects of the timing of exposure. Fourth, as with any other IV analyses, the
validity of independence and exclusion will never be known with complete certainty.
However, the well-known mechanism of ADH1B, its location on the chromosome, the
literature search on the effects of ADH1B, and our extensive tests examining the distribution
of child and family characteristics by genotype all suggest that the SNP is independent of
behavioural or environmental factors that may affect the outcome of interest.

Hence, by examining the link between prenatal alcohol exposure and child educational
outcomes, this paper contributes to the economic literature on the long-term effects of the
early environment on later child outcomes (e.g. van den Berg et al., 2006; Almond, 2006;
Currie, 2009; Almond and Currie, 2011; Almond and Mazumber, 2011), on potential
differential investments by parents in response to child development (Almond and
Mazumder, 2013), and on identifying critical and sensitive periods of parental investments
per se (e.g. Cunha and Heckman, 2007). We also provide advice to policy makers, showing
that low-to-moderate alcohol exposure in utero may have similar negative effects on the
foetus that may be carried into childhood and adolescence. In addition, since it is unethical to
design a randomized controlled trial to study foetal alcohol exposure, we show that quasi-
experimental designs such as Mendelian randomization can provide powerful alternatives for
causal inference.




                                               30
References

Abel, E. and Hannigan, J. (1995). J-Shaped Relationship between Drinking During
 Pregnancy and birth Weight: Reanalysis of prospective Epidemiological Data, Alcohol and
 Alcoholism, vol. 30(3), pp. 345-355.
Almond, D. (2006). Is the 1918 Inuenza Pandemic over? Long-term Effects of in utero
 Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population, Journal of Political Economy, vol.
 114(4), pp. 672-712.
Almond, D, and Currie, J. (2011). Killing me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis, Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25(3), pp. 153-72.
Almond, D, and Mazumder, B. (2011). Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The
 Effect of Ramadan Observance During Pregnancy, American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, vol. 4: pp. 56-85.
Almond, D, and Mazumder, B. (2013). Fetal Origins and Parental Responses, Annual Review
 of Economics, vol. 5: pp. 37-56.
Andrews, D, Moreira, M. and Stock, J. (2006). Optimal two-sided invariant similar tests for
 instrumental variables regression, Econometrica, vol. 74(3), pp. 715–752.
Angrist, J, Imbens, G. and Rubin, D. (1996). Identification of Causal Effects using
 Instrumental Variables, Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 91(434), pp.
 444-472.
Angrist, J. and Imbens G. (1995). Two-Stage least Squares Estimation of Average Causal
 Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity. Journal of the American Statistical
 Association, vol. 90(430), pp. 431-442.
Angrist, J. and Pischke, J-S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
 Companion, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Barreca, A., Page, E. 2012. A Pint for a Pound? Reevaluating the Relationship between
 Minimum Drinking Age Laws and Birth Outcomes. Tulane Economics Working Paper
 Series, no. 1220
Bartley M. et al. (2005) Children’s origins. In: (S. Dex and H. Joshi, Eds.) Children of the
 21st Century: From birth to nine months. Bristol: The Policy Press.
Beauchamp, J. Cesarini, D., Johannesson, M., van der Loos, M., Koellinger, P., Groenen, P.,
 Fowler, J., Rosenquist, N., Thurik, R. and Christakis, N. (2011). Molecular Genetics and
 Economics, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 24(4), pp.57-82.
van den Berg, G., Portrait, F. and Lindeboom, M. (2006). Economic conditions early in life
 and individual mortality, American Economic Review, vol. 96, pp. 290-302.
Bhatti, P., Sigurdson, A., Wang, S., et al. (2005). Genetic Variation and Willingness to
  Participate in Epidemiologic Research: Data from Three Studies, Cancer Epidemiology
  Biomarkers and Prevention, vol. 14, pp. 2449-2453.
Birley, A., James, M., Dickson, P. et al. (2009). ADH single nucleotide polymorphism
 associations with alcohol metabolism in vivo, Human Molecular Genetics, vol. 18(22), pp.
 1533–1542.
Borinskaya, S., Kal’ina, N., Marusin, A., et al. (2009). Distribution of the Alcohol
 Dehydrogenase ADH1B*47His Allele in Eurasia, American Journal of Human Genetics,
 vol. 84, pp. 89-92.
Bouaziz M. et al. (2011). Accounting for population stratification in practice: a comparison of
 the main strategies dedicated to genome-wide association studies. PLoS One, 6: e28845.
Boyd, A., Golding, J., Macleod, J., Lawlor, D., Fraser A., Henderson, J., Molloy, L., Ness,
 A., Ring S. and Davey Smith, G. (2012). Cohort Profile: The ‘Children of the 90s’ – the
 Index Offspring of the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, International
 Journal of Epidemiology, doi: 10.1093/ije/dys064

                                              31
Brennan, P. et al. (2004). Pooled analysis of alcohol dehydrogenase genotypes and head and
 neck cancer: a HuGE review, American journal of epidemiology, vol. 159(1), 1-16.
Canova, C. et al. (2009). Genetic associations of 115 polymorphisms with cancers of the
 upper aerodigestive tract across 10 European countries: the ARCAGE project. Cancer
 research, vol. 69, pp. 2956-65
Chen, L, Davey Smith, G., Harbord, R. and Lewis, S. (2008). Alcohol Intake and Blood
 Pressure: A Systematic Review Implementing a Mendelian Randomization Approach, PLoS
 Medicine,vol.5,pp.461-71.
Coles, C., Brown, R., Smith I., et al. (1991). Effects of Prenatal Alcohol Exposure at School
 Age. I. Physical and Cognitive Development, Neurotoxicology and Teratology, vol. 13, pp.
 357-367.
Colhoun, H., McKeigue, P. and Davey Smith, G. (2003). Problems of Reporting Genetic
  Associations with Complex Outcomes, The Lancet, vol. 361, pp. 865-72.
Cortot, A., Jobin, G., Ducrot, F., et al. (1986). Gastric emptying and gastrointestinal
 absorption of alcohol ingested with a meal, Dig Dis Sci vol. 31, pp. 343-348.
Cunha, F., and Heckman, J. (2007). The Technology of Skill Formation. American Economic
 Review, vol, 97(2), pp. 31-48.
Currie, J. (2009). Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Is there a causal relationship between child
 health and human capital development? Journal of Economic Literature, vol. XLVII(1), pp.
 87-122.
Cutler, D. and Lleras-Muney, A. (2010). Understanding differences in health behaviors by
  education. Journal of Health Economics, vol. 29, pp. 1-28.
Davey Smith, G. and Ebrahim, S. (2003). 'Mendelian Randomization': Can Genetic
  Epidemiology Contribute to Understanding Environmental Determinants of Disease?
  International Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 32, pp. 1-22.
Davey Smith, G, Lawlor, D., Harbord, R., Timpson, N., Day, I. and Ebrahim, S. (2008).
  Clustered Environments and Randomized Genes: A Fundamental Distinction between
  Conventional and Genetic Epidemiology, PLoS Medicine vol. 4, pp. 1985-1992.
Dee, T.S. 1999. The complementarity of teen smoking and drinking. Journal of Health
 Economics, 18(6), 769-793.
Department of Health. 1995. Sensible drinking: Report of an Interdepartmental Working
 Group. London: Department of Health. [Accessed 5 December 2012] available at:
 www.dh.gov.uk/en/
 Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_4084701
Dezateux C. et al. (2005) Children’s health. In: (S. Dex and H. Joshi, Eds.) Children of the
 21st Century: From birth to nine months. Bristol: The Policy Press.
DiNardo, J.E, Lemieux, T. 2001. Alcohol, marijuana, and American youth: The unintended
 consequences of government regulation. Journal of Health Economics, 20, 991-1010.
Duranceaux, N.C.E., Schuckit, M.A., Eng, M.Y., Robinson, S.K., Carr, L.G. and Wall, T.L.
 2006. Associations of variations in alcohol dehydrogenase genes with the level of response
 to alcohol in non-Asians, Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, vol. 30, pp.
 1470–1478.
Fertig, A. Watson, T. 2009. Minimum drinking age laws and infant health outcomes. Journal
 of Health Economics, vol. 28, pp. 737-747.
Fraser, A., Macdonald-Wallis, C., Tilling, K., Boyd, A., Golding, J., Davey Smith, G.,
 Henderson, J., Macleod, J., Molloy, L., Ness, A., Ring, S., Nelson, S. and Lawlor, D.
 (2012). Cohort Profile: The Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children: ALSPAC
 Mothers Cohort, International Journal of Epidemiology, doi: 10.1093/ije/dys066



                                             32
Ghosh, S., Bierut, L., Porjesz, B., et al. (2008). A novel non-parametric regression reveals
  linkage on chromosome 4 for the number of externalizing symptoms in Sib-Pairs, American
  Journal of Medical Genetics Part B (Neuropsychiatric Genetics), vol. 147B, pp. 1301–
  1305.
Golding, J., Pembrey, M., Jones, R. and the ALSPAC Study Team (2001). ALSPAC - The
   Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children: I. Study Methodology, Pediatric and
   Perinatal Epidemiology, vol. 15, pp. 74-87.
Goodlett, C. and Horn, K. (2001). Mechanisms of Alcohol-Induced Damage to the
  Developing Nervous System, Alcohol Research and Health: the Journal of the National
  Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, vol. 25(3), pp. 175-84.
Gray, R. and Henderson, J. (2006). Review of the Fetal Effects of Prenatal Alcohol Exposure.
  Report to the Department of Health; National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit.
Guerri, C. (2002). Mechanisms Involved in Central Nervous System Dysfunctions Induced
  by Prenatal Ethanol Exposure, Neurotoxicity Research, vol. 4(4), pp. 327-335.
Hashibe, M., McKay, J., Curado, M., et al. (2008). Multiple ADH Genes are Associated with
   Upper Aerodigestive Cancers, Nature Genetics, vol. 40, pp. 707-709.
von Hinke Kessler Scholder, S., Davey Smith, G., Lawlor, D., Propper, C., Windmeijer, F.
  (2011). Genetic Markers as Instrumental Variables, CMPO Working Paper 11/274.
von Hinke Kessler Scholder, S., Davey Smith, G., Lawlor, D., Propper, C., Windmeijer, F.
   (2013). Child Height, Health and Human Capital: Evidence using Genetic Markers,
   European Economic Review, vol. 57, pp. 1-22.
Imbens, G. and Angrist, J. (1994). Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
   Effects, Econometrica, vol. 62(2), pp. 467-475.
Imbens, G. (2010). Better LATE than nothing: Some comments on Deaton (2009) and
   Heckman and Urzua (2009). Journal of Economic Literature, 48, 399-423.
Irons, D.E., McGue, M., Iacono, W., and Oetting, W. (2007). Mendelian Randomization: A
  Novel Test of the Gateway Hypothesis and Models of Gene-Environment Interplay,
  Development and Psychopathology, vol. 19, pp. 1181-1195.
Jacobson, S., Carr, L., Croxford, J. et al. (2006). Protective Effects of the Alcohol
   Dehydrogenase-ADH1B Allele in Children Exposed to Alcohol During Pregnancy, The
   Journal of Pediatrics, vol. 148, pp.30-37.
Kivimäki, M, Davey Smith, G., Timpson, N., Lawlor, D., et al., (2008). Lifetime Body Mass
   Index and Later Atherosclerosis Risk in Young Adults: Examining Causal Links using
   Mendelian Randomization in the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study, European
   Heart Journal, vol. 29 (20), pp. 2552-2560.
Kline, J., Stein, Z., and Hutzler, M. (1987). Cigarettes, Alcohol and Marijuana: Varying
  Associations with Birthweight, International Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 16(1), pp. 44-
  51.
Lawlor, D., Harbord, R., Sterne, J., Timpson, N. and Davey Smith, G. (2008). Mendelian
   Randomization: Using Genes as Instruments for Making Causal Inferences in
   Epidemiology, Statistics in Medicine, vol. 27, pp. 1133-1163.
Lawlor, D., Nordestgaard, B., Benn, M., Zuccolo, L., Tybjaerg-Hansen, A. and Davey Smith,
   G. (2013). Exploring Causal Associations between Alcohol and Coronary Heart Disease
   Risk Factors: Findings from a Mendelian Randomization Study in the Copenhagen General
   Population Study, European Heart Journal, vol. 34, pp. 2519-2528.
Lee, S-L., Chau, G-Y., Yao, C-T. et al. (2006). Functional Assessment of Human Alcohol
  Dehydrogenase Family in Ethanol Metabolism: Significance of First-Pass Metabolism,
  Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, vol. 30(7), 1132-1142.



                                            33
Lewis, S. et al. (2012). Fetal Alcohol Exposure and IQ at Age 8: Evidence from a Population-
 Based Birth-Cohort Study. PLoS ONE, vol. 7(11), pp. e49407.
Loew, M. Boeing, H. Sturmer, T. and Brenner, H. (2003). Relation among alcohol
 dehydrogenase 2 polymorphism, alcohol consumption, and levels of gamma-
 glutamyltransferase, Alcohol, vol. 29, pp. 131–135.
Lorenzo, A. et al. (2006). Polymorphisms of alcohol-metabolizing enzymes and the risk for
 alcoholism and alcoholic liver disease in Caucasian Spanish women, Drug and alcohol
 dependence, vol.84(2),pp.195-200.
Luo, X., Kranzler, H., Zuo, L., et al. (2006). Diplotype trend regression analysis of the ADH
 gene cluster and the ALDH2 gene: multiple significant associations with alcohol
 dependence, The American Journal of Human Genetics, vol. 78, pp. 973–987.
Macgregor, S., Lind, P., Bucholz, K., et al. (2009). Associations of ADH and ALDH2 gene
 variation with self report alcohol reactions, consumption and dependence: an integrated
 analysis, Human Molecular Genetics, vol. 18(3), pp. 580–593.
McKay J.D., Truong, T., Gaborieau, V., Chabrier, A., Chuang, S-C. et al. (2011). A Genome-
 Wide Association Study of Upper Aerodigestive Tract Cancers Conducted within the
 INHANCE Consortium, PLoS Genetics, vol. 7(3), pp. e1001333.
Neumark, Y. Friedlander, Y. Durst, R., Leitersdorf, E., et al. (2004). Alcohol Dehydrogenase
 Polymorphisms Influence Alcohol-Elimination Rates in a Male Jewish Population,
 Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, vol. 28(1), pp. 10-14.
NICE, National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. (2008). “Understanding NICE
 Guidelines: Routine Antenatal Care for Healthy Pregnant Women.” [Accessed 5 December
 2012] available at: www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/pdf/CG062PublicInfo.pdf
Nilsson, P. (2008). Does a Pint a Day affect your Child’s Pay? The Effect of Prenatal Alcohol
 Exposure on Adult Outcomes, Cemmap Working paper 22/08.
Office of the US Surgeon General. 1981. Surgeon General's advisory on alcohol and
 pregnancy. FDA Drug Bulletin, 11:9-10.
Polygenis, D., Wartona, S., Malmberg, C., et al., (1998). Moderate alcohol Consumption
 during Pregnancy and the Incidence of Fetal Malformations: A Meta-Analysis,
 Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 20, pp. 61-7.
Reich, T., Edenberg, H., Goate, A., et al. (1998). Genome-wide search for genes affecting the
 risk for alcohol dependence, American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B
 (Neuropsychiatric Genetics), 81, pp. 207–215.
Rosenzweig, M. and Wolpin, K. (1993). Are There Increasing Returns to the
 Intergenerational Production of Human Capital? Maternal Schooling and Child Intellectual
 Achievement, Journal of Human Resources, vol. 29, pp. 670-693.
Rubin, D. (1980). Comment on ‘Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data: The Fisher
  Randomization Test’ by D. Basu, Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 75,
  pp. 591-593.
Russell, M. (1991). Clinical Implications of Recent Research on the Fetal Alcohol Syndrome,
 Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine, vol. 67(3), pp. 207-222.
Saccone, N., Kwon, J., Corbett, J., et al. (2000). A genome screen of maximum number of
 drinks as an alcoholism phenotype, American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B
 (Neuropsychiatric Genetics), vol. 96, 632–637.
Stockwell, T., Dnoath, S., Cooper-Stanbury, M., et al. (2004). Under-reporting of Alcohol
 Consumption in Household Surveys: A Comparison of Quantity-Frequency, Graduated-
 Frequency and Recent Recall, Addiction, vol. 99(8), pp. 1024-1033.
Saccone, S.F., Saccone, N.L., Neuman, R.J. and Rice, J.P. (2005). Genetic analysis of the
 maximum drinks phenotype, BMC Genetics, vol. 6, pp. S124.


                                             34
Sherva, R., Rice, J.P., Neuman, R.J., Rochberg, N., Saccone, N.L. and Bierut, L.J. (2009).
 Associations and interactions between SNPs in the alcohol metabolizing genes and
 alcoholism phenotypes in European Americans, Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
 Research, vol. 33, pp. 848–857.
Sullivan, W.C. (1899). A Note on the Influence of Maternal Inebriety on the Offspring,
 Journal of Mental Science, vol. 45, pp. 489-503.
Tolstrup, J.S., Nordestgaard, B.G., Rasmussen, S., Tybjaerg-Hansen, A. and Gronbaek,M.
 (2008). Alcoholism and alcohol drinking habits predicted from alcohol dehydrogenase
 genes, The Pharmacogenomics Journal, vol. 8, pp. 220–227.
Wall, T.L., Shea, S.H., Luczak, S.E., Cook, T.A.R. and Carr, L.G. (2005). Genetic
 associations of alcohol dehydrogenase with alcohol use disorders and endophenotypes in
 White college students, J. Abnorm. Psychol., vol. 114, pp. 456–465.
Wehby, G., and S. von Hinke Kessler Scholder. 2013. Genetic Instrumental Variables Studies
 of Effects of Prenatal Risk Factors. Biodemography and Social Biology, vol. 59, pp. 4-36.
Whitfield, J.B., Nightingale, B.N., Bucholz, K.K., Madden, P.A.F., Heath, A.C. and Martin,
 N.G. (1998). ADH Genotypes and Alcohol Use and Dependence in Europeans, Alcoholism:
 Clinical and Experimental Research, vol. 22, pp. 1463–1469.
WTCCC (Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium). (2007). Genome-wide association
 study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared controls, Nature, vol.
 447, pp. 661-678.
Wüst, M. (2010). The Effect of Cigarette and Alcohol Consumption on Birth Outcomes,
 Aarhus School of Business, Department of Economics Working Paper 10-05.
Zhang G., Mai, R., Huang, B. (2010). ADH1B Arg47His Polymorphism Is Associated with
 Esophageal Cancer Risk in High-Incidence Asian Population: Evidence from a Meta-
 Analysis, PLoS ONE vol. 5(10), pp. e13679.
Zhang, F., Hou, L., Terry, M., et al. (2007). Genetic polymorphisms in alcohol metabolism,
 alcohol intake and the risk of stomach cancer in Warsaw, Poland, International Journal of
 Cancer, vol. 121, pp.2060–64.
Zhang, N. (2010). Alcohol Taxes and Birth Outcomes, International Journal of
 Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 7, pp. 1901-1912.
Zintzaras, E., Stefanidis, I., Santos, M. Vidal, F. (2006). Do alcohol-metabolizing enzyme
 gene polymorphisms increase the risk of alcoholism and alcoholic liver disease?
 Hepatology, vol. 43:352–361.
Zuccolo L, Fitz-Simon, N., Gray, R., Ring, S., Sayal, K., Davey Smith, G. and Lewis, S.
 (2009). A non-synonymous variant in ADH1B is strongly associated with prenatal alcohol
 use in a European sample of pregnant women, Human Molecular Genetics, vol. 18(22), pp.
 4457–4466.
Zuccolo, L. (2010). Alcohol and Prostate Cancer: Identifying Potentially Modifiable
 Lifestyle-related Causes of Cancer by Means of Mendelian Randomization, PhD thesis,
 School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol.
Zuccolo L. et al. (2013) Prenatal Alcohol Exposure and Offspring Cognition and School
 Performance: A ‘Mendelian Randomization’ Natural Experiment. International Journal of
 Epidemiology, doi:10.1093/ije/dyt172




                                           35
Appendix A: A Brief Introduction to Genetics



Each cell in the human body contains a nucleus in which most DNA (99.9995%) is located.
DNA forms structures called chromosomes, where each chromosome contains a single
continuous piece of DNA. All cells in the human body apart from gametes (i.e. germ cells)
contain 46 chromosomes, organized into 23 chromosome pairs: one copy of chromosome 1-
22 from each parent, plus an X-chromosome from the mother and either an X or a Y
chromosome from the father.

Sites within DNA which vary between people are called polymorphisms. The most
commonly studied form of polymorphism is a Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP): a
single base-pair variation in a particular location on the DNA sequence. As chromosomes
come in pairs, humans have two base-pairs at each location (locus). Where there are two or
more forms of DNA at a specific locus, these different forms are called alleles. The term
genotype is used to describe the specific set of alleles inherited at a particular location on the
chromosome. For example, individuals can have one of two alleles on each chromosome at
the rs1229984 locus (A or G), this will result in three genotypes: they can be homozygous for
the common allele (having two of the same common/most prevalent alleles: GG),
heterozygous (AG), and homozygous for the rare allele (AA).




                                               36
Appendix B: Tests of Independence

To provide evidence on the validity of our IV approach, Table B1 presents descriptives of the
covariates presented in the first column by genotype. Column 3 shows the p-value of a test
whether the mean among those homozygous for the common allele (column 1) equals the
mean among those carrying at least one rare allele (column 2). With random assignment of
genetic variants, there should be no systematic variation in covariates by genotype. Table B1
shows this for a wide range of maternal and paternal prenatal background characteristics and
behaviours (we investigate activities after birth – i.e. those that may be affected by child
development, exploring potential parental responsive investments – in section 5.5).

We compare the number of correlations that are statistically significant with the number
expected by chance if all variables were uncorrelated (excluding the first set of covariates,
which concern genetically-related family members). We find no greater association between
the genetic variant and covariates than what would be expected by chance (p = 0.32 at the
10% level, p = 0.46 at 5%, and p = 0.48 at 1%), suggesting that the SNP is independent of
behavioural or environmental factors that may affect the outcome of interest.




                                             37
Table B1: Descriptive statistics: mean and standard deviation of covariates
                                                                      (1)                     (2)                (3)
                                                           Mother is homozygous      Mother carries at least    t-test
                                                          for the common allele at     one rare allele at
                                                                  rs1229984              rs1229984
                                                               Mean (std dev)           Mean (std dev)         p-value

Alcohol-related covariates of mother’s family
Child’s ADH1B (rs1229984)                                     0.029      (0.168)      0.471        (0.500)     <0.001
Mother’s mother has alcohol problem                           0.022      (0.147)      0.008        (0.091)      0.125
Mother’s father has alcohol problem                           0.054      (0.226)      0.034        (0.181)      0.094

Alcohol-related covariates of mother’s partner
Partner's drinks any alcohol (at 18 wks gestation)            0.705      (0.456)      0.728        (0.446)     0.436
Partner's drinks any alcohol (at 8 months)                    0.749      (0.434)      0.702        (0.457)     0.573
Freq. partner drinks>4units (8 month; 0=never,5=daily)        2.088      (1.390)      1.966        (1.558)     0.315

‘Standard’ covariates1
Girl                                                           0.482     (0.500)      0.505        (0.501)     0.449
Child’s age at KS1 (in months)                                88.727     (3.735)     88.302        (3.673)     0.096
Mother’s age at child’s birth (in years)                      28.543     (4.666)     28.651        (4.555)     0.709
Older siblings (0, 1, or 2+)                                   0.726     (0.748)      0.727        (0.746)     0.972
Younger siblings (0, 1, or 2+)                                 0.048     (0.220)      0.075        (0.279)     0.068
Father’s education: O-level                                    0.309     (0.462)      0.293        (0.456)     0.582
Father’s education: A-level                                    0.275     (0.447)      0.293        (0.456)     0.533
Father’s education: University degree                          0.190     (0.392)      0.202        (0.402)     0.646
Mother’s education: O-level                                    0.444     (0.497)      0.451        (0.499)     0.809
Mother’s education: A-level                                    0.233     (0.423)      0.257        (0.438)     0.366
Mother’s education: University degree                          0.146     (0.353)      0.153        (0.361)     0.749
Social class: Semi-skilled                                     0.098     (0.297)      0.070        (0.255)     0.145
Social class: Skilled manual                                   0.301     (0.459)      0.332        (0.472)     0.304
Social class: Skilled non-manual                               0.114     (0.318)      0.082        (0.275)     0.119
Social class: Managerial/Technical                             0.349     (0.477)      0.361        (0.481)     0.718
Social class: Professional                                     0.114     (0.317)      0.119        (0.324)     0.798
Ln(income)                                                     5.331     (0.479)      5.352        (0.452)     0.510
Mother employed                                                0.499     (0.500)      0.444        (0.498)     0.103
Father employed                                                0.873     (0.333)      0.897        (0.305)     0.274
CCEI [score ranging from 0-44]                                13.009     (7.485)     12.943        (7.222)     0.894
EPDS [score ranging from 0-23]                                 6.629     (4.723)      6.440        (4.760)     0.538
Smoking (first trimester)                                      0.172     (0.377)      0.136        (0.343)     0.131

Mother’s tea, coffee & milk, 8 weeks gestation
Drink tea                                                     0.799      (0.401)      0.749        (0.434)     0.050
Drink decaf tea                                               0.035      (0.184)      0.034        (0.182)     0.951
Drink coffee                                                  0.511      (0.500)      0.492        (0.501)     0.556
Drink decaf coffee                                            0.157      (0.364)      0.130        (0.337)     0.249
Drink cola                                                    0.347      (0.476)      0.391        (0.489)     0.149
Drink decaf cola                                              0.090      (0.287)      0.080        (0.272)     0.576
Drink milk                                                    0.586      (0.493)      0.604        (0.490)     0.561

Parental diet and nutrition2
Mother eats sausages/burgers                                  0.608      (0.488)      0.584        (0.494)     0.448
Mother eats pies or pastries                                  0.550      (0.498)      0.506        (0.501)     0.169
Mother eats meat                                              0.913      (0.281)      0.898        (0.303)     0.400
Mother eats poultry                                           0.906      (0.292)      0.898        (0.303)     0.665
Mother eats offal                                             0.093      (0.290)      0.075        (0.263)     0.320
Mother eats white fish                                        0.823      (0.382)      0.843        (0.364)     0.413
Mother eats oily fish                                         0.593      (0.491)      0.612        (0.488)     0.543
Mother eats shellfish                                         0.193      (0.394)      0.196        (0.398)     0.893
Mother eats eggs or quiche                                    0.861      (0.346)      0.859        (0.349)     0.908
Mother eats cheese                                            0.945      (0.227)      0.953        (0.212)     0.600
Mother eats pizza                                             0.571      (0.495)      0.643        (0.480)     0.024
Mother eats chips                                             0.819      (0.385)      0.776        (0.417)     0.085
Mother eats roast potatoes                                    0.697      (0.460)      0.702        (0.458)     0.858
Mother eats boiled or baked potatoes                          0.975      (0.156)      0.980        (0.139)     0.587
Mother eats boiled rice                                       0.767      (0.423)      0.788        (0.409)     0.432
Mother eats pasta                                             0.811      (0.392)      0.816        (0.389)     0.843

                                                         38
Mother eats crisps                                             0.792    (0.406)   0.769    (0.423)    0.372
Mother eats fried food                                         0.486    (0.500)   0.427    (0.496)   0.067
Mother eats baked beans                                        0.853    (0.354)   0.859    (0.349)   0.803
Mother eats peas or corn                                       0.933    (0.251)   0.941    (0.236)    0.592
Mother eats cabbage                                            0.904    (0.294)   0.898    (0.303)   0.745
Mother eats other green vegetables                             0.938    (0.242)   0.925    (0.263)    0.429
Mother eats carrots                                            0.929    (0.257)   0.929    (0.257)   0.970
Mother eats root vegetables (not carrots)                      0.629    (0.483)   0.580    (0.494)    0.120
Mother eats salad                                              0.916    (0.277)   0.933    (0.250)    0.339
Mother eats fresh fruit                                        0.979    (0.143)   0.988    (0.108)   0.320
Mother drinks tinned juice                                     0.188    (0.391)   0.122    (0.327)    0.008
Mother drinks pure non-tinned juice                            0.788    (0.408)   0.831    (0.375)    0.101
Mother eats pudding                                            0.759    (0.428)   0.780    (0.415)   0.432
Mother eats oat cereals                                        0.559    (0.497)   0.537    (0.500)    0.491
Mother eats bran cereals                                       0.686    (0.464)   0.722    (0.449)    0.234
Mother eats other cereals                                      0.677    (0.468)   0.659    (0.475)    0.544
Mother eats cakes or buns                                      0.869    (0.338)   0.890    (0.313)   0.320
Mother eats crispbreads                                        0.318    (0.466)   0.322    (0.468)    0.913
Mother eats biscuits                                           0.913    (0.282)   0.914    (0.281)    0.969
Mother eats chocolate bars                                     0.839    (0.367)   0.820    (0.385)   0.406
Mother eats pulses                                             0.239    (0.427)   0.294    (0.457)    0.047
Mother eats nuts                                               0.317    (0.465)   0.310    (0.463)    0.809
Mother eats bean curd                                          0.024    (0.154)   0.047    (0.212)   0.025
Mother eats tahini                                             0.024    (0.154)   0.043    (0.204)    0.059
Mother eats soya or similar non-meat                           0.080    (0.271)   0.078    (0.269)   0.945
Mother eats chocolate                                          0.763    (0.426)   0.780    (0.415)   0.515
Mother eats sweets                                             0.595    (0.491)   0.533    (0.500)    0.050
Mother drinks diet drinks                                      0.755    (0.430)   0.700    (0.459)   0.056
Partner eats sausages or burgers                               0.738    (0.440)   0.709    (0.455)   0.341
Partner eats pies or pastries                                  0.711    (0.454)   0.644    (0.480)    0.034
Partner eats meat                                              0.949    (0.220)   0.891    (0.312)   <0.001
Partner eats poultry                                           0.925    (0.263)   0.886    (0.318)    0.036
Partner eats offal                                             0.226    (0.418)   0.177    (0.383)    0.092
Partner eats white fish                                        0.807    (0.394)   0.814    (0.390)   0.820
Partner eats oily fish                                         0.533    (0.499)   0.523    (0.501)    0.775
Partner eats shellfish                                         0.232    (0.422)   0.183    (0.388)   0.096
Partner eats fried food                                        0.759    (0.428)   0.714    (0.453)   0.131
Partner eats cabbage                                           0.888    (0.316)   0.900    (0.301)   0.579
Partner eats carrots                                           0.918    (0.275)   0.918    (0.275)    0.979
Partner eats other vegetables                                  0.969    (0.174)   0.973    (0.163)    0.736
Partner eats salad                                             0.868    (0.339)   0.923    (0.268)    0.018
Partner eats fresh fruit                                       0.881    (0.324)   0.872    (0.335)    0.687
Partner drinks tinned juice                                    0.227    (0.419)   0.191    (0.394)    0.212
Partner drinks pure non-tinned juice                           0.714    (0.452)   0.682    (0.467)    0.298
Partner eats nuts                                              0.363    (0.481)   0.341    (0.475)    0.507
Partner drinks diet drink                                      0.566    (0.496)   0.556    (0.498)    0.777
Mother eats mostly white bread                                 0.575    (0.494)   0.549    (0.499)   0.411
Partner eats mostly white bread                                0.780    (0.415)   0.750    (0.434)    0.384
Mother eats mostly brown/granary bread                         0.446    (0.497)   0.475    (0.500)   0.367
Partner eats mostly brown/granary bread                        0.641    (0.480)   0.653    (0.478)   0.770
Mothers eats mostly wholemeal bread                            0.506    (0.500)   0.506    (0.501)   1.000
Partner eats mostly wholemeal bread                            0.612    (0.487)   0.580    (0.495)    0.465
Mothers eats mostly chappati’s                                 0.013    (0.114)   0.008    (0.088)    0.457
Partner eats mostly chappati’s                                 0.055    (0.228)   0.020    (0.140)    0.124
Mother doesn’t usually eat any bread                           0.021    (0.143)   0.031    (0.175)   0.257
Partner doesn’t usually eat any bread                          0.075    (0.264)   0.041    (0.199)    0.264
Mother has takeaway meals                                      0.704    (0.457)   0.738    (0.440)    0.242
Partner has takeaway meals                                     0.689    (0.463)   0.687    (0.465)   0.954
Mother is vegetarian or vegan                                  0.131    (0.338)   0.157    (0.365)    0.233
Partner is vegetarian or vegan                                 0.033    (0.178)   0.064    (0.246)    0.013
Mother buys organic vegetables                                 0.306    (0.461)   0.296    (0.457)   0.737
Mother buys organic meat                                       0.143    (0.350)   0.148    (0.356)   0.831
Mother buys other organic foods                                0.038    (0.191)   0.035    (0.184)   0.809

Parental attitudes
Mother’s attitude to breastfeeding[ranging from 4-23]3         16.204   (3.279)   16.458   (3.198)   0.228
Partner’s attitude to breastfeeding[ranging from 6-22]3        15.591   (2.679)   15.731   (2.951)   0.461


                                                          39
Proportion agreeing (mother):
  Should pick up crying baby                                    0.483    (0.500)   0.532    (0.500)   0.129
  Regular feed & sleep pattern is important                     0.903    (0.296)   0.900    (0.301)   0.852
  Should always be fed when they are hungry                     0.942    (0.233)   0.933    (0.251)   0.536
  Babies need stimulation to develop well                       0.977    (0.150)   0.984    (0.126)   0.467
  Babies should not be disturbed too much                       0.550    (0.498)   0.560    (0.497)   0.735
  Parents should adapt lives to baby’s demands                  0.523    (0.500)   0.552    (0.498)   0.365
  Baby should fit into parents’ routine                         0.576    (0.494)   0.571    (0.496)   0.884
  Babies should develop naturally                               0.429    (0.495)   0.417    (0.494)   0.730
  It is important to talk to a baby                             0.999    (0.025)   0.996    (0.063)   0.069
  Cuddling baby is very important                               0.999    (0.032)   0.996    (0.063)   0.195
Proportion agreeing (partner):
  Should pick up crying baby                                     0.397   (0.489)   0.427    (0.496)   0.387
  Regular feed & sleep pattern is important                      0.918   (0.274)    0.949   (0.221)   0.113
  Should always be fed when they are hungry                      0.870   (0.336)    0.882   (0.323)   0.618
  Babies need stimulation to develop well                        0.978   (0.146)    0.962   (0.191)   0.125
  Babies should not be disturbed too much                        0.590   (0.492)    0.640   (0.481)   0.147
  Parents should adapt lives to baby’s demands                   0.635   (0.481)   0.626    (0.485)   0.787
  Baby should fit into parents’ routine                          0.502   (0.500)    0.498   (0.501)   0.900
  Babies should develop naturally                                0.411   (0.492)    0.500   (0.501)   0.010
  It is important to talk to a baby                              0.997   (0.051)    1.000   (0.000)   0.458
  Cuddling baby is very important                                0.997   (0.053)    1.000   (0.000)   0.436
Attitude to fatherhood score [ranging from 8-45]                38.477   (5.183)   38.596   (5.788)   0.758
Work and parenthood score [ranging from 1-12]                    8.751   (2.029)    8.675   (2.060)   0.635

Religious beliefs
Mother believes in a divine power                               0.503    (0.500)   0.539    (0.499)   0.264
Partner believes in a divine power                              0.360    (0.480)   0.408    (0.493)   0.149
Mother feels helped by divine power                             0.339    (0.474)   0.377    (0.486)   0.209
Partner feels helped by divine power                            0.240    (0.427)   0.271    (0.445)   0.308
Mother appeals to God for help if in trouble                    0.474    (0.499)   0.506    (0.501)   0.323
Partner appeals to God for help if in trouble                   0.352    (0.478)   0.426    (0.496)   0.028

Household characteristics
Home is mortgaged/owned                                          0.796   (0.403)    0.829   (0.377)   0.191
Total number of rooms [ranging from 0-18]                        4.942   (1.507)   4.879    (1.417)   0.508
Use of garden or yard                                           0.950    (0.218)   0.973    (0.161)   0.084
Working phone in home                                           0.920    (0.271)   0.933    (0.251)   0.461
Use of car by mum or partner                                    0.922    (0.268)   0.963    (0.190)   0.015
House has damp condensation or mould                            0.481    (0.500)   0.448    (0.498)   0.295
Partner is father of child                                       0.994   (0.074)    0.996   (0.061)   0.699
Partner lives with mum                                           0.952   (0.214)    0.970   (0.171)   0.178
Age of partner [ranging from 16-60]                             30.963   (5.602)   30.643   (5.349)   0.378
Marital status (8 wks gestation)                                 0.796   (0.403)    0.841   (0.367)   0.076
Total no. of persons (8 wks gestation)                           2.929   (1.093)   2.901    (1.031)   0.675

Pregnancy
Seen doctor for possible infertility                             0.131   (0.337)    0.136   (0.343)   0.815
Used treatments to help conceive                                 0.033   (0.179)    0.051   (0.220)   0.128
Has previously been pregnant                                     0.660   (0.474)    0.655   (0.476)   0.868
Has previously had a miscarriage                                0.206    (0.404)    0.217   (0.413)   0.663
Has previously had an abortion or termination                   0.134    (0.340)    0.098   (0.299)   0.099
Has previously had a stillbirth                                  0.008   (0.088)    0.011   (0.106)   0.530
Previous child born alive but died later                         0.013   (0.111)    0.011   (0.106)   0.874
Mother’s age when first pregnant [ranging from 12-42]           24.986   (4.868)   24.978   (4.719)   0.977
This pregnancy was intentional                                  0.730    (0.444)    0.780   (0.415)   0.074
Mother happy with pregnancy when first pregnant                  0.717   (0.450)    0.756   (0.431)   0.177
Motherhood means personal sacrifice                              0.705   (0.456)    0.667   (0.472)   0.184
Mother is currently happy with pregnancy                         0.888   (0.316)    0.925   (0.265)   0.062
Partner is happy about pregnancy                                0.869    (0.338)    0.867   (0.340)   0.928
Partner’s first reaction was supportive                          0.838   (0.368)    0.861   (0.347)   0.332
Partner is currently supportive                                  0.897   (0.304)    0.911   (0.286)   0.483
Mother already knew a lot about pregnancy                       0.617    (0.486)    0.644   (0.480)   0.388
Self-induced vomiting for weight loss prior to pregnancy        0.053    (0.224)   0.073    (0.261)   0.156
Self-induced vomiting during this pregnancy                     0.010    (0.102)    0.015   (0.124)   0.453
Laxative use for weight loss prior to pregnancy                  0.042   (0.200)    0.035   (0.183)   0.593
Laxative use during this pregnancy                              0.003    (0.054)    0.000   (0.000)   0.381


                                                           40
Mother had pain relief during labour                          0.873    (0.333)     0.867    (0.340)   0.798
Mother had caesarean section                                  0.103    (0.303)     0.080    (0.272)   0.259
Partner was with mother during labour                         0.882    (0.322)     0.884    (0.320)   0.912
Partner was with mother during delivery                       0.854    (0.353)     0.873    (0.334)   0.429
Mother intends to work after child’s birth                    0.471    (0.499)     0.464    (0.500)   0.823

Mother’s and partner’s physical health
Partner is well (8 wks gestation)                             0.963     (0.190)    0.955    (0.208)   0.524
Mother is well prior to pregnancy                             0.926     (0.261)    0.934    (0.249)   0.659
Mother is well in first trimester                              0.407    (0.491)     0.457   (0.499)   0.114
Mother is well in second trimester                            0.754     (0.431)    0.766    (0.424)   0.668
Mother is well in third trimester                             0.766     (0.423)    0.776    (0.417)   0.697
Partner is well (8 month post birth)                          0.968     (0.176)     0.962   (0.192)   0.614
Height of mother (in cm)                                     164.183    (6.767)   164.057   (6.960)   0.772
Weight of mother pre-pregnancy (in kg)                        62.086   (11.030)    60.483   (9.620)   0.025
Mother visited dentist in preg (measured post-preg)           0.771     (0.420)    0.842    (0.366)   0.055
Mother: Nausea in first trimester                             0.706     (0.456)    0.737    (0.441)   0.272
Mother: Vomiting in first trimester                           0.417     (0.493)     0.390   (0.489)   0.388
Mother: Diarrhoea in first trimester                          0.172     (0.378)    0.170    (0.376)   0.923
Mother: Vaginal Bleeding in first trimester                   0.158     (0.365)    0.181    (0.386)   0.314
Mother: Jaundice in first trimester                           0.001     (0.025)    0.000    (0.000)   0.687
Mother: Urinary infection in first trimester                  0.048     (0.213)    0.062    (0.241)   0.299
Mother: Influenza in first trimester                          0.084     (0.278)    0.081    (0.273)   0.850
Mother: Rubella in in first trimester                          0.000    (0.014)     0.000   (0.000)   0.816
Mother: Thrush in first trimester                              0.089    (0.284)     0.108   (0.311)   0.286
Mother: Genital herpes in first trimester                     0.001     (0.038)     0.000   (0.000)   0.537
Mother: Other infection in first trimester                    0.047     (0.212)     0.062   (0.241)   0.284
Mother: Any infection in first trimester                      0.232     (0.422)    0.266    (0.443)   0.202
Mother: Injury or shock in first trimester                    0.046     (0.211)    0.078    (0.268)   0.023
Mother: Sugar in urine in first trimester                     0.020     (0.139)    0.039    (0.193)   0.036
Mother: X-ray in first trimester                               0.018    (0.132)     0.031   (0.174)   0.125
Mother: Amniocentesis in in first trimester                    0.006    (0.078)     0.004   (0.062)   0.654
Mother: Chorionic Villus Sampling in first trimester          0.009     (0.092)    0.008    (0.088)   0.886
Mother: Spina bifida test in first trimester                  0.125     (0.331)    0.140    (0.347)   0.505
Mother: Ultrasound scan in first trimester                    0.265     (0.441)    0.310    (0.463)   0.111
Mother: Admitted to hospital in first trimester                0.037    (0.188)     0.012   (0.107)   0.034
Mother: Nausea in second trimester                            0.364     (0.481)    0.391    (0.489)   0.393
Mother: Vomiting in second trimester                           0.220    (0.414)     0.234   (0.424)   0.581
Mother: Diarrhoea in second trimester                         0.310     (0.462)    0.246    (0.432)   0.032
Mother: Vaginal bleeding in second trimester                  0.043     (0.202)    0.039    (0.194)   0.773
Mother: Jaundice in second trimester                          0.001     (0.029)    0.000    (0.000)   0.643
Mother: Urinary infection in second trimester                 0.057     (0.232)    0.031    (0.174)   0.081
Mother: Cold in second trimester                              0.401     (0.490)    0.367    (0.483)   0.277
Mother: Influenza in second trimester                         0.056     (0.229)    0.039    (0.194)   0.257
Mother: Rubella in second trimester                           0.000     (0.000)    0.000    (0.000)     -
Mother: Thrush in second trimester                            0.132     (0.338)    0.102    (0.303)   0.162
Mother: Genital herpes in second trimester                    0.003     (0.054)     0.008   (0.088)   0.178
Mother: Other infection in second trimester                   0.053     (0.224)    0.055    (0.228)   0.900
Mother: Any infection in second trimester                     0.253     (0.435)    0.211    (0.409)   0.132
Mother: Injury or shock in second trimester                   0.076     (0.265)    0.070    (0.256)   0.731
Mother: Sugar in urine in second trimester                    0.128     (0.335)    0.117    (0.322)   0.600
Mother: X-ray in second trimester                             0.009     (0.093)     0.027   (0.163)   0.003
Mother: Amniocentesis in second trimester                     0.018     (0.132)     0.016   (0.124)   0.812
Mother: Chorionic Villus Sampling in second trimester         0.008     (0.087)    0.004    (0.063)   0.506
Mother: Spina bifida test in second trimester                 0.232     (0.422)    0.293    (0.456)   0.026
Mother: Ultrasound in second trimester                        0.427     (0.495)     0.430   (0.496)   0.937
Mother: Headache in second trimester                          0.604     (0.489)    0.574    (0.495)   0.335
Mother: Backache in second trimester                          0.789     (0.408)    0.754    (0.432)   0.185
Mother: Varicose veins in second trimester                    0.144     (0.351)    0.148    (0.356)   0.842
Mother: Admitted to hospital in second trimester               0.066    (0.248)     0.055   (0.228)   0.490

Mother’s physical activity
Mother exercises at least once a week                         0.693    (0.461)     0.615    (0.488)   0.008
Mother usually walks                                          0.263    (0.440)     0.206    (0.405)   0.045
Mother usually cycles                                         0.009    (0.096)     0.012    (0.108)   0.693
Mother usually uses public transport                          0.074    (0.262)     0.054    (0.227)   0.244
Mother usually uses the car                                   0.721    (0.449)     0.774    (0.419)   0.063


                                                        41
Mother: Jogging                                                  0.019    (0.138)   0.012    (0.108)    0.395
Mother: Aerobics                                                 0.050    (0.217)   0.051    (0.221)    0.905
Mother: Ante-natal exercise                                      0.242    (0.428)   0.251    (0.434)    0.732
Mother: Keep fit exercises                                       0.136    (0.343)   0.142    (0.349)    0.790
Mother: Yoga                                                     0.030    (0.170)   0.032    (0.175)    0.868
Mother: Squash                                                   0.005    (0.069)   0.004    (0.063)    0.859
Mother: Tennis or badminton                                      0.030    (0.170)   0.032    (0.176)    0.852
Mother: Swimming                                                 0.453    (0.498)   0.420    (0.495)    0.310
Mother: Brisk walking                                            0.753    (0.431)   0.719    (0.450)    0.215
Mother: Weight training                                          0.006    (0.079)   0.008    (0.089)    0.746
Mother: Cycling                                                  0.061    (0.239)   0.071    (0.258)    0.501
Mother: Other exercise                                           0.083    (0.276)   0.105    (0.307)    0.219

Parental mental health
Bachman self-esteem score [-4-2]                                  0.015   (0.987)    0.035    (0.969)   0.760
Mother’s self-perceived change score [11-35]4                    23.860   (2.734)   24.206    (2.811)   0.050
Mother’s self-perceived feel good score [7-30]4                  16.799   (3.866)   16.659    (3.877)   0.576
Mother’s perception of partner’s change score [9-35]4            20.938   (1.674)   20.928    (1.853)   0.930
Mother’s perception of partner’s feel good score [7-31]4         13.734   (4.026)   13.498    (3.863)   0.373
Partner’s self-perceived change score [9-35]4                    20.647   (2.309)   20.832    (2.069)   0.251
Partner’s self-perceived feel good score [7-30]4                 15.791   (3.806)   15.690    (3.786)   0.705
Partner’s perception of mother’s change score [10-35]4           20.368   (1.538)   20.257    (1.538)   0.309
Partner’s perception of mother’s feel good score [7-32]4         14.901   (3.839)   14.557    (4.082)   0.208
Mother: Interpersonal awareness score [7-28]                     18.324   (4.659)   18.835    (4.866)   0.085
Mother: Need for approval score [8-32]                           25.836   (3.581)   26.073    (3.122)   0.296
Mother: Separation anxiety score [8-32]                          16.211   (4.612)   16.275    (4.939)   0.827
Mother: Timidity score [8-32]                                    20.644   (4.503)   21.111    (4.362)   0.101
Mother: Fragile inner-self score [5-20]                           8.701   (2.919)    8.748    (2.954)   0.799
Mother: Total interpersonal sensitivity score [36-140]           89.704   15.828)   91.034   (15.818)   0.185
Partner: Interpersonal awareness score [7-28]                    16.229   (4.854)   16.467    (4.683)   0.487
Partner: Need for approval score [0-32]                          24.540   (4.319)   24.507    (4.344)   0.914
Partner: Separation anxiety score [0-32]                         14.692   (4.386)   14.519    (4.567)   0.577
Partner: Timidity score [3-32]                                   18.896   (4.697)   18.877    (4.794)   0.955
Partner: Fragile inner-self score [5-20]                          8.187   (2.725)    8.267    (2.635)   0.680
Partner: Total interpersonal sensitivity score [29-138]          82.456   16.270)   82.519   (15.482)   0.956
Mother: Pre-17 life event score [0-63]                            8.751   (8.324)    8.685    (8.096)   0.901
Partner: Pre-17 life event score [0-74]                           9.890   (8.700)   10.552    (9.027)   0.272
Partner’s affection score (mother reported) [6-30]5              11.340   (4.087)   11.363    (3.913)   0.930
Partner’s affection score (partner reported) [6-30]5             10.929   (3.905)   10.970    (4.033)   0.886
Partner’s aggression score (mother reported) [3-15]5             10.082   (1.750)    9.945    (1.671)   0.224
Partner’s aggression score (partner reported) [3-15]5             9.915   (1.862)    9.782    (1.927)   0.328

Maternal use of medication
Any medications used since start of pregnancy                    0.705    (0.456)   0.702    (0.458)    0.918
Medication for nausea in first trimester                         0.043    (0.202)   0.064    (0.245)    0.093
Medication for heartburn in first trimester                      0.071    (0.256)   0.042    (0.200)    0.070
Medication for vomiting in first trimester                       0.031    (0.173)   0.049    (0.216)    0.101
Medication for anxiety in first trimester                        0.005    (0.068)   0.004    (0.061)    0.843
Medication for infection in first trimester                      0.082    (0.274)   0.095    (0.293)    0.461
Medication for migraine in first trimester                       0.124    (0.329)   0.106    (0.309)    0.396
Medication for sleeping in first trimester                       0.008    (0.087)   0.000    (0.000)    0.154
Medication for pain in first trimester                           0.123    (0.328)   0.102    (0.304)    0.321
Medication for allergies in first trimester                      0.030    (0.170)   0.030    (0.171)    0.979
Medication for skin condition in first trimester                 0.073    (0.260)   0.075    (0.265)    0.886
Medication for bleeding in first trimester                       0.006    (0.075)   0.000    (0.000)    0.221
Medication for depression in first trimester                     0.005    (0.069)   0.000    (0.000)    0.258
Medication for piles in first trimester                          0.022    (0.146)   0.023    (0.149)    0.934
Medication for constipation in first trimester                   0.054    (0.225)   0.038    (0.191)    0.260
Medication for cough in first trimester                          0.052    (0.222)   0.064    (0.245)    0.388
Medication for other reasons in first trimester                  0.067    (0.250)   0.057    (0.232)    0.533
Taking iron in first trimester                                   0.197    (0.397)   0.177    (0.382)    0.427
Taking zinc in first trimester                                   0.015    (0.120)   0.015    (0.122)    0.956
Taking calcium in first trimester                                0.032    (0.175)   0.045    (0.208)    0.222
Taking folic acid in first trimester                             0.086    (0.280)   0.094    (0.292)    0.645
Taking vitamins in first trimester                               0.160    (0.367)   0.198    (0.399)    0.107
Taking other supplements or diet foods in first trimester        0.030    (0.170)   0.019    (0.138)    0.327
Ever used homeopathic medicine (trimester 1)                     0.103    (0.304)   0.102    (0.303)    0.933


                                                            42
Taking aspirin in first trimester                             0.042   (0.201)   0.053   (0.224)   0.396
Taking paracetamol in first trimester                         0.550   (0.498)   0.491   (0.501)   0.060
Taking codeine or anadin in first trimester                   0.024   (0.154)   0.015   (0.122)   0.342
Taking sleeping tablets in first trimester                    0.004   (0.063)   0.000   (0.000)   0.302
Taking tranquiliser in first trimester                        0.003   (0.051)   0.008   (0.087)   0.141
No. of medications used in first trimester [0-17]             1.350   (1.446)   1.330   (1.370)   0.825
Medication for nausea in second trimester                     0.025   (0.156)   0.008   (0.088)   0.082
Medication for heartburn in second trimester                  0.367   (0.482)   0.332   (0.472)   0.251
Medication for vomiting in second trimester                   0.016   (0.126)   0.004   (0.063)   0.125
Medication for anxiety in second trimester                    0.007   (0.083)   0.012   (0.108)   0.382
Medication for infection in second trimester                  0.107   (0.309)   0.090   (0.287)   0.389
Medication for migraine in second trimester                   0.077   (0.267)   0.070   (0.256)   0.692
Medication for sleeping disorder in second trimester          0.032   (0.177)   0.031   (0.174)   0.925
Medication for pain in second trimester                       0.155   (0.362)   0.117   (0.322)   0.105
Medication for allergies in second trimester                  0.046   (0.211)   0.035   (0.185)   0.400
Medication for skin condition in second trimester             0.108   (0.311)   0.145   (0.352)   0.070
Medication for bleeding in second trimester                   0.003   (0.058)   0.000   (0.000)   0.352
Medication for depression in second trimester                 0.007   (0.081)   0.004   (0.063)   0.606
Medication for piles in second trimester                      0.077   (0.266)   0.090   (0.287)   0.450
Medication for constipation in second trimester               0.070   (0.255)   0.063   (0.243)   0.650
Medication for cough in second trimester                      0.076   (0.266)   0.094   (0.292)   0.313
Medication for other reason in second trimester               0.107   (0.309)   0.094   (0.292)   0.514
Taken iron in last second trimester                           0.426   (0.494)   0.422   (0.495)   0.907
Taken zinc in last second trimester                           0.013   (0.115)   0.012   (0.108)   0.812
Taken calcium in last second trimester                        0.032   (0.175)   0.035   (0.185)   0.751
Taken folic acid in second trimester                          0.193   (0.395)   0.191   (0.394)   0.947
Taken vitamins in second trimester                            0.114   (0.318)   0.117   (0.322)   0.873
Taken other supplements in second trimester                   0.026   (0.159)   0.027   (0.163)   0.904
Ever use homeopathic medicine (trimester 2)                   0.156   (0.363)   0.162   (0.369)   0.788
Taken aspirin use in second trimester                         0.028   (0.166)   0.027   (0.164)   0.942
Taken paracetamol in second trimester                         0.434   (0.496)   0.361   (0.481)   0.022
Taken codein or anadin in second trimester                    0.017   (0.130)   0.024   (0.152)   0.459
Taken sleeping pill in second trimester                       0.007   (0.086)   0.012   (0.108)   0.431
Taken tranquilizer in second trimester                        0.002   (0.041)   0.004   (0.063)   0.412
No. of medications used in second trimester [0-11]            1.661   (1.568)   1.673   (1.542)   0.906
Taken sleeping pill since birth (measured at 8 month)         0.015   (0.120)   0.004   (0.064)   0.176
Taken cannabis since birth (measured at 8 month)              0.030   (0.169)   0.025   (0.155)   0.652
Taken tranquilliser since birth (measured at 8 month)         0.007   (0.082)   0.008   (0.090)   0.804
Taken anti-depressant since birth (meas. at 8 month)          0.043   (0.204)   0.029   (0.167)   0.271
Taken hormone tablet since birth (meas. at 8 month)           0.009   (0.092)   0.016   (0.127)   0.210
Taken antibiotic since birth (measured at 8 month)            0.267   (0.442)   0.246   (0.432)   0.469
Taken painkiller since birth (measured at 8 month)            0.818   (0.386)   0.803   (0.398)   0.555
Taken amphetamine since birth (measured at 8 month)           0.005   (0.071)   0.004   (0.064)   0.833
Taken the pill since birth (measured at 8 month)              0.515   (0.500)   0.516   (0.501)   0.958
Taken opiate or cocaine since birth (meas. at 8 month)        0.002   (0.045)   0.000   (0.000)   0.486
Taken anticonvulsant since birth (measured at 8 month)        0.003   (0.051)   0.004   (0.064)   0.672
Taken steroid since birth (measured at 8 month)               0.017   (0.128)   0.008   (0.090)   0.303
Taken iron since birth (measured at 8 month)                  0.208   (0.406)   0.225   (0.419)   0.526
Taken vitamin since birth (measured at 8 month)               0.254   (0.435)   0.254   (0.436)   0.999
Taken other substance since birth (meas. at 8 month)          0.184   (0.387)   0.168   (0.375)   0.532

Parental substance use
Mother smoked pre-pregnancy                                   0.299   (0.458)   0.270   (0.445)   0.310
Mother ever smoked                                            0.567   (0.495)   0.523   (0.500)   0.164
Father ever smoked                                            0.763   (0.425)   0.744   (0.437)   0.483
Partner smokes (at 18 weeks gest)                             0.341   (0.474)   0.346   (0.477)   0.855
Partner’s number of cigarettes (at 8 months) [0-60]           3.712   (7.698)   3.846   (7.598)   0.794
Mother smoked cannabis during pregnancy                       0.023   (0.149)   0.019   (0.138)   0.726
Mother smoked cannabis in 6 mths prior to pregnancy           0.043   (0.204)   0.039   (0.194)   0.735
Mother used amphetamine during pregnancy                      0.001   (0.028)   0.004   (0.062)   0.125
Mother used barbiturate during pregnancy                      0.000   (0.020)   0.000   (0.000)   0.745
Mother used crack during pregnancy                            0.000   (0.000)   0.000   (0.000)     -
Mother used cocaine during pregnancy                          0.001   (0.025)   0.000   (0.000)   0.690
Mother used heroin during pregnancy                           0.000   (0.014)   0.000   (0.000)   0.819
Mother used methadone during pregnancy                        0.000   (0.014)   0.000   (0.000)   0.818
Mother used ecstasy during pregnancy                          0.003   (0.051)   0.000   (0.000)   0.700
Mother used other drug during pregnancy                       0.002   (0.040)   0.004   (0.062)   0.402


                                                         43
Mother used hard drugs during pregnancy                      0.003   (0.058)   0.008   (0.087)   0.270
Partner smoked cannabis in 6 mths prior to pregnancy         0.117   (0.322)   0.104   (0.307)   0.654
Partner smoked cannabis in first trimester                   0.095   (0.294)   0.090   (0.288)   0.843
Partner used amphetamine in first trimester                  0.006   (0.080)   0.000   (0.000)   0.235
Partner used barbiturate in first trimester                  0.001   (0.036)   0.000   (0.000)   0.596
Partner used crack in first trimester                        0.001   (0.028)   0.000   (0.000)   0.682
Partner used cocaine in first trimester                      0.002   (0.046)   0.000   (0.000)   0.502
Partner used heroin in first trimester                       0.001   (0.032)   0.000   (0.000)   0.636
Partner used methadone in first trimester                    0.001   (0.032)   0.000   (0.000)   0.636
Partner used ecstasy in first trimester                      0.005   (0.073)   0.000   (0.000)   0.613
Partner used other in first trimester                        0.010   (0.098)   0.015   (0.120)   0.490
Partner used hard drugs in first trimester                   0.015   (0.123)   0.014   (0.117)   0.871
Mother used ganja in last 2 months of pregnancy              0.018   (0.132)   0.013   (0.112)   0.560
Mother used ganja since birth (measured at 8 weeks)          0.026   (0.158)   0.013   (0.112)   0.210
Mother used hard drugs in last 2 months of pregnancy         0.001   (0.033)   0.000   (0.000)   0.606
Mother used hard drugs since birth (meas. at 8 weeks)        0.003   (0.057)   0.008   (0.090)   0.208

Mother’s use of chemicals during pregnancy
Disinfectant                                                 0.874   (0.332)   0.841   (0.366)   0.117
Bleach                                                       0.845   (0.362)   0.841   (0.366)   0.872
Window cleaner                                               0.621   (0.485)   0.601   (0.491)   0.521
Carpet cleaner                                               0.376   (0.484)   0.358   (0.480)   0.548
Oven or drain cleaner                                        0.416   (0.493)   0.380   (0.486)   0.244
Dry cleaning fluid                                           0.059   (0.235)   0.063   (0.243)   0.790
Turps or white spirit                                        0.217   (0.412)   0.188   (0.392)   0.261
Paint stripper                                               0.058   (0.234)   0.048   (0.214)   0.481
House paint or varnish                                       0.326   (0.469)   0.277   (0.448)   0.094
Weed killer                                                  0.076   (0.264)   0.063   (0.243)   0.433
Pesticide                                                    0.276   (0.447)   0.255   (0.436)   0.450
Aerosol or spray                                             0.823   (0.382)   0.815   (0.389)   0.754
Hair dye or bleach                                           0.163   (0.370)   0.144   (0.352)   0.396
Hair removal cream                                           0.110   (0.312)   0.100   (0.300)   0.607
Air freshener                                                0.697   (0.460)   0.657   (0.476)   0.165
Use of other chemicals                                       0.061   (0.240)   0.066   (0.249)   0.736
Electrical mixer                                             0.539   (0.499)   0.551   (0.498)   0.695
Hoover use                                                   0.966   (0.181)   0.958   (0.200)   0.507
Floor polisher                                               0.056   (0.230)   0.023   (0.149)   0.020
Electrical iron                                              0.964   (0.186)   0.951   (0.216)   0.270
Electrical hair appliance                                    0.876   (0.330)   0.879   (0.326)   0.867
Electrical typewriter                                        0.161   (0.368)   0.204   (0.404)   0.069
Photocopier or fax                                           0.407   (0.491)   0.453   (0.499)   0.142
PC or VDU                                                    0.409   (0.492)   0.479   (0.501)   0.024
Power tool                                                   0.059   (0.235)   0.045   (0.208)   0.361
Sunbed or lamp                                               0.015   (0.121)   0.019   (0.136)   0.601
Microwave                                                    0.777   (0.417)   0.767   (0.423)   0.719
Other electrical equipment                                   0.099   (0.299)   0.083   (0.276)   0.391
Dental amalgam                                               0.013   (0.112)   0.015   (0.121)   0.780
Ceramic or enamel                                            0.019   (0.135)   0.015   (0.121)   0.648
Dry cleaning                                                 0.021   (0.143)   0.033   (0.179)   0.178
Electroplating                                               0.001   (0.028)   0.000   (0.000)   0.642
Glue                                                         0.258   (0.438)   0.283   (0.451)   0.359
Leather working                                              0.004   (0.061)   0.000   (0.000)   0.310
Fabric and textile                                           0.167   (0.373)   0.169   (0.376)   0.936
Dye                                                          0.043   (0.203)   0.026   (0.159)   0.163
Insecticide                                                  0.112   (0.316)   0.110   (0.314)   0.918
Plastics                                                     0.039   (0.194)   0.022   (0.147)   0.155
Metal cleaner                                                0.219   (0.414)   0.191   (0.394)   0.275
Petrol                                                       0.390   (0.488)   0.375   (0.485)   0.629
Paint                                                        0.287   (0.453)   0.246   (0.432)   0.145
Photo chemical                                               0.015   (0.121)   0.018   (0.135)   0.650
ELEC wiring                                                  0.031   (0.173)   0.029   (0.169)   0.893
Machining                                                    0.046   (0.210)   0.048   (0.214)   0.903
Soldering                                                    0.006   (0.077)   0.004   (0.061)   0.629
Radiation                                                    0.025   (0.158)   0.029   (0.169)   0.690




                                                        44
Social support
Mother’s social network score (at 12 wks gest) [5-29]6             23.615       (3.690)       23.605        (4.047)       0.965
Partner’s social network score (at 18 wks gest) [1-29]6            22.503       (3.890)       22.605        (3.880)       0.706
Mother’s social support score (at 12 wks gest) [0-30]6             19.963       (4.914)       20.358        (5.115)       0.223
Partner’s social support score (at 18 wks gest) [1-30]6            17.930       (4.859)       18.205        (4.889)       0.415

Neighbourhood characteristics
Mother thinks neighbourhood is a good place to live                0.933        (0.251)        0.928        (0.259)       0.770
Partner thinks neighbourhood is a good place to live               0.932        (0.251)        0.918        (0.275)       0.440
Mother: People in neighbourhood visit                              0.550        (0.498)        0.587        (0.493)       0.234
Mother: People in neighbourhood argue with mother                  0.044        (0.204)        0.026        (0.159)       0.164
Mother: People in neighbourhood look after children                0.202        (0.401)        0.238        (0.427)       0.151
Mother: People in neighbourhood keep to themselves                 0.822        (0.382)        0.807        (0.396)       0.520
Mother visits others in neighbourhood                              0.496        (0.500)        0.524        (0.500)       0.368
Mother argues with people in neighbourhood                         0.037        (0.189)        0.022        (0.148)       0.208
Mother looks after neighbours’ children                            0.216        (0.411)        0.257        (0.438)       0.113
Mother keeps to herself                                            0.807        (0.394)        0.792        (0.407)       0.526
Partner: People in neighbourhood visit                             0.516        (0.500)        0.549        (0.499)       0.370
Partner: People in neighbourhood argue with mother                 0.051        (0.221)        0.031        (0.174)       0.206
Partner: People in neighbourhood look after children               0.211        (0.408)        0.313        (0.465)       0.001
Partner: People in neighbourhood keep to themselves                0.881        (0.324)        0.870        (0.337)       0.673
Partner visits others in neighbourhood                             0.378        (0.485)        0.421        (0.495)       0.229
Partner argues with people in neighbourhood                        0.041        (0.199)        0.036        (0.187)       0.725
Partner looks after neighbours’ children                           0.155        (0.362)        0.179        (0.384)       0.387
Partner keeps to himself                                           0.871        (0.335)        0.845        (0.363)       0.293
Mother is worried about possible burglary                          0.845        (0.361)        0.863        (0.345)       0.454
Mother is worried about possible mugging/robbery                   0.655        (0.475)        0.664        (0.473)       0.758
Mother is worried about possible sex assault                       0.640        (0.480)        0.656        (0.476)       0.597
Mother is worried about possible vandalism to home                 0.700        (0.458)        0.714        (0.453)       0.627
Partner is worried about possible burglary                         0.871        (0.335)        0.896        (0.306)       0.322
Partner is worried about possible mugging/robbery                  0.496        (0.500)        0.537        (0.500)       0.274
Partner is worried about possible sex assault                      0.226        (0.418)        0.212        (0.410)       0.655
Partner is worried about possible vandalism to home                0.737        (0.441)        0.773        (0.420)       0.258
Mother thinks neighbourhood is lively                              0.569        (0.495)        0.553        (0.498)       0.604
Mother thinks neighbourhood is friendly                            0.932        (0.252)        0.940        (0.238)       0.624
Mother thinks neighbourhood is noisy                               0.511        (0.500)        0.515        (0.501)       0.903
Mother thinks neighbourhood is clean                               0.915        (0.278)        0.914        (0.282)       0.918
Mother thinks neighbourhood is attractive                          0.833        (0.373)        0.827        (0.379)       0.797
Mother thinks neighbourhood is polluted or dirty                   0.285        (0.451)        0.274        (0.447)       0.712
Partner thinks neighbourhood is lively                             0.319        (0.467)        0.231        (0.439)       0.507
Partner thinks neighbourhood is friendly                           0.881        (0.324)        0.846        (0.376)       0.704
Partner thinks neighbourhood is noisy                              0.244        (0.430)        0.231        (0.439)       0.913
Partner thinks neighbourhood is clean                              0.825        (0.381)        0.769        (0.439)       0.612
Partner thinks neighbourhood is attractive                         0.710        (0.455)        0.538        (0.519)       0.190
Partner thinks neighbourhood is polluted or dirty                  0.132        (0.339)        0.231        (0.439)       0.314

Notes: All variables are measured during pregnancy, unless otherwise stated. All variables are binary unless otherwise
stated, indicating the range of the values, e.g. [0-30]. 1The educational indicators are: less than ordinary (O) level (ref), O-
level only, advanced (A) level that permits higher educational study, and university degree. The social class variables use the
standard (reversed, so that higher values correspond to higher social classes) UK classification of social class based on
occupation (professional, managerial/technical, non-manual skilled, manual skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled). Family
income is an average of two observations (when the child is aged 3 and 4) and is in 1995 prices. It is adjusted for family size
and composition (equalised) using the OECD equivalence scale to allow for a comparison of incomes for all households.
EPDS and CCEI refer to the mother’s Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Score and the Crown-Crisp Experimental Index.
EPDS indicates to what extent the mother is at risk of perinatal depression; CCEI captures a broader definition of mental
health, measuring general anxiety, depression and somaticism. Higher scores mean the mother is more affected. 2Mother’s
diet is measured at 32 weeks gestation; partner’s diet is measured at 18 weeks gestation. 3‘Attitude to breastfeeding’,
‘attitude to fatherhood’, and ‘work and parenthood’ are derived from multiple questions, with higher scores indicating more
positive attitudes. 4The self-perceived change and feel good scores relate to physical, emotional and behavioural changes
during early pregnancy, with higher scores indicating more positive changes. 5The partner’s affection (aggression) scores are
derived from multiple questions, where higher scores indicate less affection (aggression). 6The social network and social
support scores are derived from multiple questions, where higher scores indicate a larger network and more support.




                                                              45
Appendix C: Parental responsive investments


Table C1: Potential parental investments in response to child development
                                                  (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)
                                            Coefficient on
                                            average no. of
                                             units during    Standard           First stage
                                              pregnancy        error    Mean    F-statistic    N

Child diet and nutrition
Baby has fruit juice (4 weeks)                   0.004       (0.042)    0.125    14.651       2620
Baby has vitamins (4 weeks)                      0.004       (0.034)    0.071    14.651       2620
Baby has glucose solution (4 weeks)              0.010       (0.011)    0.006    14.651       2620
Baby has cereal (4 weeks)                        0.008       (0.023)    0.019    14.651       2620
Baby has other diet supplements (4 weeks)       -0.013       (0.041)    0.100    14.651       2620
Child had formula (6 months)                   0.149**       (0.070)    0.825    13.790       2546
Child had follow-on milk (6m)                   -0.075       (0.049)    0.093    13.790       2546
Child had soya milk (6m)                         0.007       (0.024)    0.029    13.790       2546
Child had goats milk (6m)                        0.001       (0.001)    0.001    13.790       2546
Child had hypo-allergenic formula (6m)          -0.011       (0.013)    0.002    13.790       2546
Child had cows’ milk (6m)                       -0.079       (0.060)    0.198    13.790       2546
Child had plain baby rice (6m)                  -0.033       (0.039)    0.887    13.790       2546
Child had flavoured baby rice (6m)               0.032       (0.064)    0.382    13.790       2546
Child had other cereal (6m)                      0.024       (0.051)    0.818    13.790       2546
Child had sweetened rusks (6m)                  -0.023       (0.059)    0.225    13.790       2546
Child had plain rusks (6m)                      -0.017       (0.065)    0.612    13.790       2546
Child had bread or toast (at 6m)                -0.022       (0.065)    0.375    13.790       2546
Child had biscuits (6m)                         -0.011       (0.057)    0.223    13.790       2546
Child had prepared savoury meat (6m)             0.066       (0.054)    0.832    13.790       2546
Child had prepared savoury fish (6m)            -0.102       (0.072)    0.359    13.790       2546
Child had prepared savoury veg (6m)             -0.033       (0.039)    0.898    13.790       2546
Child had prepared fruit pudding (6m)            0.011       (0.043)    0.873    13.790       2546
Child had prepared milk pudding (6m)            -0.036       (0.065)    0.583    13.790       2546
Child had home cooked egg (6m)                  -0.022       (0.047)    0.145    13.790       2546
Child had home cooked meat (6m)                  0.031       (0.067)    0.479    13.790       2546
Child had home cooked fish (6m)                 -0.090       (0.068)    0.303    13.790       2546
Child had home cooked potatoes (6m)             -0.037       (0.039)    0.883    13.790       2546
Child had home cooked veg (6m)                  -0.058       (0.047)    0.816    13.790       2546
Child had home-made fruit puddings (6m)         -0.035       (0.068)    0.463    13.803       2539
Child had home-made milk puddings (6m)          -0.055       (0.059)    0.189    13.790       2546
Child had coca cola or pepsi (6m)               -0.001       (0.012)    0.011    13.790       2546
Child had other fizzy drink (6m)                0.014*       (0.007)    0.008    13.790       2546
Child had apple juice (6m)                       0.016       (0.059)    0.246    13.790       2546
Child had a little alcohol (6m)                  0.005       (0.015)    0.024    13.790       2546
Child had blackcurrant/rosehip syrup (6m)       -0.068       (0.068)    0.344    13.790       2546
Child had other fruit drink (6m)                 0.028       (0.067)    0.557    13.790       2546
Child had herbal drink (6m)                    -0.138*       (0.072)    0.495    13.790       2546
Child had gripe water (6m)                       0.033       (0.067)    0.542    13.790       2546
Child had tea (6m)                               0.042       (0.029)    0.072    13.790       2546
Child had coffee (6m)                          0.021**       (0.010)    0.010    13.790       2546
Child had raw fruit (6m)                        -0.047       (0.067)    0.418    13.790       2546
Child had crisps (6m)                           -0.027       (0.028)    0.022    13.790       2546
Child had chocolates (6m)                        0.011       (0.054)    0.207    13.790       2546
Child had sweets (6m)                            0.005       (0.007)    0.012    13.790       2546
Child had raw veg (6m)                          -0.092       (0.061)    0.167    13.790       2546
Child had packet soup (15m)                     -0.060       (0.038)    0.082    22.616       2482
Child had canned soup (15m)                      0.019       (0.057)    0.429    23.377       2489
Child had liver (15m)                            0.018       (0.048)    0.198    22.857       2490
Child had kidney (15m)                           0.014       (0.026)    0.067    23.050       2489
Child had shell fish (15m)                       0.025       (0.030)    0.089    22.752       2491
Child had baked beans (15m)                      0.011       (0.030)    0.927    22.662       2495
Child had green peas (15m)                       0.021       (0.029)    0.938    22.637       2494
Child had other legumes (15m)                  -0.102*       (0.061)    0.270    22.069       2476
Child had yoghurt (15m)                         -0.005       (0.017)    0.965    21.959       2488
Child had fig (15m)                             -0.008       (0.025)    0.040    21.574       2474

                                                  46
Child had raw apple (15m)                       -0.020   (0.039)   0.833    22.754   2485
Child had other raw fruit (15m)                 -0.019   (0.018)   0.965    22.002   2488
Child had raw carrot (15m)                      -0.029   (0.058)   0.454    22.798   2483
Child had other raw vegetables (15m)             0.003   (0.039)   0.171    23.304   2316
Child had nuts (15m)                            -0.000   (0.036)   0.082    22.161   2483
Child had crisps (15m)                          -0.050   (0.054)   0.637    22.108   2485
Child had other savoury snacks (15m)             0.003   (0.055)   0.672    22.242   2476
Child had chocolate (15m)                        0.081   (0.052)   0.841    22.011   2486
Child had mints (15m)                            0.004   (0.027)   0.041    22.383   2478
Child had sweets (15m)                          -0.053   (0.057)   0.302    22.748   2480
Child ever had gravy or soy sauce (15m)          0.059   (0.051)   0.805    22.553   2484
Child ever had salt (15m)                        0.035   (0.043)   0.229    22.663   2485
Child ever had herbs (15m)                      -0.029   (0.058)   0.430    22.604   2467
Child ever had spices (15m)                      0.002   (0.043)   0.188    22.605   2482
Child ever had tomato ketchup (15m)              0.020   (0.050)   0.275    22.244   2484
Child ever had other sauce (15m)                -0.007   (0.037)   0.117    22.723   2338
Child ever had sugar (15m)                      -0.012   (0.053)   0.275    21.705   2467
Child ever had smoked or cured food (15m)        0.057   (0.058)   0.410    22.573   2490
Child ever had microwave meal (15m)            0.050**   (0.023)   0.064    22.609   2489
Child ever had BBQ food (15m)                    0.052   (0.039)   0.144    22.381   2488
Child ever had sports drink (15m)             0.011***   (0.003)   0.012    22.376   2492
No. of meals a day (6m) [ranging from 1-4]      -0.008   (0.057)   2.903    13.775   2539
No. of meals a day (38m) [ranging from 1-4]     -0.025   (0.029)   2.944    12.080   2324
Feeding difficulties (6m)                        0.072   (0.066)   0.353    13.226   2528
Cereal added to child's bottle (6m)             -0.018   (0.020)   0.022    14.223   2506
Sugar added to child's food/bottle (6m)          0.012   (0.034)   0.071    13.558   2532
Child uses dummy (6m)                            0.105   (0.071)   0.463    13.790   2546

Immunisation and other treatment
Began to immunise baby at 4weeks                0.019    (0.025)   0.044    14.241   2608
BCG (tuberculosis) immunisation (6m)           -0.018    (0.018)   0.008    13.790   2546
DTP immun. incl. whooping cough (6m)           -0.026    (0.038)   0.916    13.790   2546
DT immun. excl. whooping cough (6m)            -0.020    (0.029)   0.044    13.790   2546
Polio immunisation (6m)                         0.061    (0.055)   0.829    13.790   2546
Hib (meningitis) immunisation (6m)             -0.006    (0.056)   0.239    13.790   2546
Fluoride treatment (6m)                        -0.017    (0.021)   0.013    10.560   2307
Child has vitamins (24m)                        0.054    (0.056)   0.246    11.543   2383
Child has vitamins (38m)                       -0.027    (0.061)   0.291    12.476   2364

(Night-time) interactions1
Partner ever feeds baby at night (4w)          -0.009    (0.063)    0.668   13.894   2561
Feed baby when wakes at night (4w)              0.014    (0.019)    0.988   14.704   2581
Give baby water when wakes at night (4w)      0.107**    (0.047)    0.139   14.704   2581
Cuddle baby when wakes at night (4w)           -0.019    (0.036)    0.886   14.704   2581
Give baby dummy when wakes at night (4w)        0.070    (0.066)    0.405   14.704   2581
Baby to mother's bed when wakes (4w)            0.034    (0.062)    0.668   14.704   2581
Nappy change when wakes at night (4w)           0.009    (0.025)    0.966   14.704   2581
Other activity when baby wakes (4w)            -0.001    (0.024)    0.040   14.704   2581
Ever wake baby for feed (4w)                    0.005    (0.054)    0.764   14.793   2599
Give baby milk when wakes at night (6m)        -0.075    (0.068)    0.557   13.331   2362
Give baby other drink when wakes (6m)         0.158**    (0.070)    0.307   13.331   2362
Cuddle baby when wakes at night (6m)            0.078    (0.063)    0.748   13.331   2362
Give baby dummy when wakes at night (6m)        0.107    (0.069)    0.429   13.331   2362
Baby to mum's bed when wakes (6m)               0.014    (0.066)    0.487   13.331   2362
Nappy change when wakes at night (6m)          0.136*    (0.072)    0.644   13.331   2362
Other activity when baby wakes (6m)             0.029    (0.036)    0.111   13.331   2362
Partner interaction score (42m) [0-36]         -0.464    (0.816)   21.778   10.989   2223
Mother interaction score (42m) [0-36]          -0.172    (0.589)   28.966   12.812   2328
Other person interaction score (42m) [0-36]    -0.754    (0.749)   18.219   25.219   1102

Doctor and dentist visits
Child uses toothbrush (15m)                     0.010    (0.028)   0.953    22.580   2483
Child uses toothbrush (24m)                     0.005    (0.008)   0.997    11.160   2376
Child uses toothbrush (38m)                   -0.034**   (0.014)   0.978    12.476   2364
Child uses toothpaste (15m)                    -0.025    (0.038)   0.896    22.429   2482
Child uses toothpaste (24m)                     0.027    (0.023)   0.989    10.782   2373
Child uses toothpaste (38m)                   -0.026**   (0.011)   0.979    12.476   2364


                                                 47
Child ever visited dentist (38m)                -0.118**   (0.048)   0.829    12.476   2364
Mother took baby to health clinic (4w)           -0.051    (0.059)   0.689    14.337   2593
Doctor called to home for child (6m)             -0.000    (0.060)   0.271    13.353   2534
Doctor called to home for child (18m)            0.128*    (0.075)   0.378    11.722   2474
Doctor called to home for child (30m)            0.126*    (0.067)   0.280    14.059   2373
Specialist checked child (24m)                    0.020    (0.052)   0.188    12.694   2358
Child had surgery visit (30m)                    -0.015    (0.055)   0.814    13.079   2364
Child had routine check with doctor (30m)        -0.037    (0.055)   0.172    12.726   2332

Parenting and teaching scores2
Child's activity score (6m) [0-20]               -0.067    (0.330)   14.480   13.804   2543
Child's activity score (30m) [0-29]               0.032    (0.424)   18.589   14.381   2392
Child's activity score (42m) [0-28]               0.172    (0.364)   18.724   12.818   2324
Mother's parenting score (6m) [0-12]             -0.135    (0.193)   10.542   13.668   2539
Mother's parenting score (18m) [6-51]            -0.254    (0.572)   40.860   13.025   2481
Mother's parenting score (24m) [20-40]            0.462    (0.394)   34.547   10.632   2324
Mother's parenting score (38m) [4-30]            -0.291    (0.405)   25.250   12.614   2356
Partner's parenting score (6m) [10-30]            0.311    (0.496)   23.599   14.612   2493
Partner's parenting score (18m) [0-40]            1.057    (0.944)   24.486   11.804   2406
Partner's parenting score (38m) [0-30]           -0.097    (0.700)   21.447   11.186   2248
Mother's teaching score (30m) [0-8]              -0.007    (0.159)    6.637   14.167   2380
Mother's teaching score (42m) [0-8]               0.190    (0.179)    6.993   12.817   2325
Child's toy score (24m) [5-36]                   -0.532    (0.497)   23.512    9.978   2317
Child's toy score (42m) [1-9]                    -0.097    (0.090)    8.180   12.817   2325
Maternal care score (18m) [0-24]                  0.196    (0.683)   20.044   15.367   2655
Maternal overprotective score (18m) [0-20]       -0.342    (0.553)    6.288   15.367   2655
Maternal enjoyment score (8m) [0-15]             -0.254    (0.230)   13.243   13.240   2506
Maternal confidence score (8m) [4-18]            -0.033    (0.249)   15.088   13.240   2506
Maternal bonding score (8m) [4-33]               -0.286    (0.401)   28.331   13.240   2506

Time spent doing different activities
TV is on for most of the day (30m)                0.033    (0.066)    0.463   14.043   2224
TV is on for most of the day (42m)                0.052    (0.083)    0.475    9.271   2166
Hours p/wk spent in car (38m) [0-14]             -0.084    (0.211)   3.928    12.854   2331
Hours p/wk spent outdoors (38m)[0-14]             0.811    (0.500)   9.652    12.394   2319
Hours p/wk spent watching TV (38m)[0-14]         -0.181    (0.488)   7.487    12.872   2327
Hours p/wk spent w/ other kids (38m)[0-14]        0.009    (0.464)   11.668   12.411   2312
Mother has nights out each week (8m)             -0.010    (0.052)   0.196    12.954   2417

Mother worried that child may:
 Get accident (18m)                              0.093     (0.065)   0.717    13.032   2477
 Get meningitis (18m)                             0.057    (0.065)   0.639    13.019   2472
 Get asthma (18m)                                 0.073    (0.065)   0.350    11.574   2429
 Get fits (18m)                                   0.005    (0.049)   0.162    12.996   2470
 Be mentally handicapped (18m)                    0.011    (0.030)   0.052    13.020   2471
 Get AIDS (18m)                                  -0.005    (0.035)   0.098    12.818   2470
Worried about any aspect of behaviour (42m)     -0.123*    (0.063)   0.194    13.224   2259

Household characteristics3
Other children in house (6m)                     -0.003    (0.067)   0.540    13.178   2529
Other children in house (18m)                    -0.077    (0.070)   0.574    12.343   2471
Older children in house (18m)                    -0.038    (0.068)   0.538    12.285   2468
Younger children in house (18)                   -0.042    (0.035)   0.047    12.441   2456
Total number of hh members (8m) [1-14]           -0.117    (0.143)   3.793    13.131   2461
Financial difficulties score (8m) [0-15]         -0.147    (0.467)   2.752    13.348   2497

Child care
Expect to use partner (at 32 wks gest)          0.075*     (0.041)   0.163    15.699   2670
Expect to use family (at 32 wks gest)            0.051     (0.049)   0.188    15.469   2661
Expect to use child minder (at 32 wks gest)     -0.004     (0.039)   0.116    15.314   2648
Expect to use nanny (at 32 wks gest)            -0.017     (0.024)   0.038    14.801   2647
Expect to use nursery (at 32 wks gest)           0.028     (0.028)   0.046    15.386   2620
Expect to use other (at 32 wks gest)            -0.015     (0.016)   0.017    15.465   2663
Partner regularly looks after child (15m)        0.032     (0.050)   0.778    21.799   2473
Grandparent regularly looks after child (15m)   0.103*     (0.057)   0.443    21.799   2473
Other relative reg. looks after child (15m)     -0.014     (0.034)   0.099    21.799   2473
Friend regularly looks after child (15m)        -0.056     (0.043)   0.097    21.799   2473


                                                   48
Child minder regularly looks after child (15m)               0.010            (0.039)         0.142         21.799          2473
Nanny regularly looks after child (15m)                     -0.022            (0.030)         0.062         21.799          2473
Nursery regularly looks after child (15m)                  0.056**            (0.024)         0.061         21.799          2473
Someone else reg. looks after child (15m)                    0.020            (0.016)         0.017         21.799          2473
Partner regularly looks after child (24m)                    0.062            (0.064)         0.720         11.060          2363
Grandparent regularly looks after child (24m)              0.171**            (0.081)         0.447         11.060          2363
Other relative reg. looks after child (24m)                  0.021            (0.042)         0.116         11.060          2363
Friend regularly looks after child (24m)                    -0.001            (0.047)         0.140         11.060          2363
Child minder regularly looks after child (24m)              -0.011            (0.051)         0.147         11.060          2363
Nanny regularly looks after child (24m)                      0.019            (0.035)         0.066         11.060          2363
Nursery regularly look after child (24m)                     0.041            (0.043)         0.101         11.060          2363
Other person regularly looks after child (24m)               0.017            (0.019)         0.012         11.060          2363
Partner regularly looks after child (38m)                    0.009            (0.057)         0.766         12.476          2364
Grandparents regularly look after child (38m)               0.136*            (0.071)         0.429         12.476          2364
Other relative reg. looks after child (38m)                 -0.038            (0.044)         0.094         12.476          2364
Friend regularly looks after child (38m)                    -0.016            (0.043)         0.122         12.476          2364
Child minder regularly looks after child (38m)              -0.083            (0.051)         0.094         12.476          2364
Nanny regularly looks after child (38m)                      0.041            (0.033)         0.073         12.476          2364
Nursery regularly looks after child (38m)                    0.052            (0.067)         0.359         12.476          2364
Other person regularly looks after child (38m)              -0.111            (0.072)         0.319         12.476          2364
Number of types of child care (38m) [0-6]                   -0.010            (0.157)         2.255         12.476          2364

Social support4
Mother's social support score (8w) [0-30]                   0.334             (0.646)        20.374          15.599         2578
Partner's social support score (8w) [0-30]                 -0.647             (0.607)        19.422          20.743         1991
Mother's social help score (8w) [0-24]                     -0.696             (0.522)        16.306          15.596         2577
Partner's social help at home (8w) [0-27]                 -1.384**            (0.621)        15.298          21.418         1998
Partner's social help with child (8w) [0-35]                0.871             (0.802)        20.669          21.418         1998

Notes: All variables are measured after the child is born, unless otherwise stated. All variables are binary unless otherwise
stated, indicating the range of the variable, e.g. [0-30]. The coefficients (column 1) and standard errors (column 2) denote the
estimates from an IV regression of the effect of alcohol exposure in utero on the outcome of interested listed in the first
column, where the mother’s ADH1B is used as the instrument. Column 3 shows the mean of the outcome of interest, column
4 shows the first-stage F-statistic, and column 5 shows the sample size for each analysis. All ‘score-variables’ are derived
from multiple questions. 1The interaction scores indicate the frequency and type of interactions with the child, with higher
scores indicating more interactions. 2The activity scores measure activities such as going to the park, supermarket, visiting
friends, etc., with higher scores indicating more activity. The parenting scores measure activities such as reading stories,
eating together, cuddling, slapping, singing to the child, etc., where higher scores indicate better parenting. The teaching
scores capture activities such as teaching numbers, rhymes, shapes, politeness, etc., where higher scores indicate more
teaching. The toy scores capture the number and types of toys the child has, such as push/pull, co-ordination toys, lego,
books, etc., where higher scores indicate more toys. The maternal care and overprotective scores measure the relationship
between the mother and her mother (e.g. whether the mother’s mother was friendly, cold, controlling, affectionate, etc.). The
maternal enjoyment, confidence and bonding scores capture whether the mother enjoys looking after, is confident, and bonds
with her baby. 3The financial difficulties score measures how difficult it is to afford food, clothing, heating, rent, etc. 4The
social support score measures the extent of support available to the mother and partner (including emotional support, sharing
happiness, relying on each other, etc.). The social help scores measure the extent to which the mother and partner receive
help with the baby, doing shopping, cleaning, cooking, washing, etc.




                                                              49
Appendix D: Robustness checks


Table D1: Robustness checks on use of covariates, IV estimates with Key Stage 1 as the
outcome variable and the number of alcoholic units consumed as the treatment variable.
                                                                             (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)
                                                                       Coefficient on
                                                                        average no.       Standard     First stage
                                                                        units during        error      F-statistic       N
                                                                         pregnancy

Panel A: Controlling for additional alcohol-related covariates
1: Replicates the results from Table 5                                    -0.245**        (0.114)        16.366        2433

2: Includes maternal smoking during pregnancy as covariate                -0.242**        (0.114)        15.909        2431

3: Excludes child ADH1B (i.e. only the principal components)              -0.182**        (0.084)        33.526        2433

4: Includes binary indicators for maternal post-natal alcohol              -0.204         (0.138)         7.922        1861
    intake when the child was 8, 21, 33, and 47 months old

5: Includes binary indicators for the child’s own alcohol intake           -0.140         (0.119)        11.816        1125
    at 157, 166, and 185 months

6: Includes mother’s partner’s and parents’ alcohol consumption           -0.232**        (0.113)        14.216        2035


Panel B: Controlling for covariates specified in Appendix B
7: Includes all ‘standard’ covariates                                      -0.217*        (0.122)        10.856        1551

8: Same as model (7), but using (single) multivariate imputation          -0.273**        (0.128)        11.030        2433
   for missing values on the covariate to obtain the same sample
   size as the original specification

9: Includes mother’s tea, coffee and milk intake, 8 wks gestation         -0.299**        (0.150)        11.373        2345

10: Includes mother’s diet and nutrition, 32 weeks gestation               -0.198*        (0.105)        14.975        2241

11: Includes mother’s attitude to parenting                                -0.209*        (0.121)        12.881        2254

12: Includes mother’s religious believes                                  -0.234**        (0.118)        14.168        2385

13: Includes household characteristics                                    -0.319**        (0.130)        12.888        2292

14: Includes variables related to the mother’s pregnancy                   -0.221         (0.142)         7.479        1914

15: Includes mother’s physical health during pregnancy                     -0.294*        (0.153)         9.274        1273

16: Includes mothers’ physical activity during pregnancy                  -0.211**        (0.095)        28.892        2280

17: Includes mother’s mental health during pregnancy                       -0.160         (0.116)        12.127        2200

18: Includes mother’s use of medication during pregnancy                  -0.206**        (0.100)        15.147        2246

19: Includes mother’s substance use during pregnancy                       -0.199*        (0.113)        12.940        2096

20: Includes mother’s use of chemicals                                     -0.183*        (0.101)        16.751        2426

21: Includes mother’s social support network                               -0.225*        (0.117)        14.856        2296

22: Includes mother’s perception of neighbourhood                         -0.222**        (0.108)        16.577        2339

Notes: All estimates come from separate regressions. All regressions also control for the ten ancestry-informative principal
components and the child’s ADH1B, apart from specification 3 that only controls for the principal components. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                                                50
Tables and Figures

                                                                  Figure 1: The Metabolism of Alcohol

                ADH: Alcohol dehydrogenase                                                        ALDH: Aldehyde dehydrogenase


      Ethanol                                                                       Acetaldehyde                                       Acetate




                                                              ADH1B                                              ALDH2



                                                                         Figure 2: Weight functions
                                                                        Weight function of average units per week
                                                    .14
                    (1-CDF) Difference; A(0)-A(1)




                                                         .1



                                                    .06



                                                    .02



                                                    -.02
                                                              0                      5                     10                    15
                                                                                    Number of units per week




   Figure 3: The effect of low-to-moderate and heavy drinking on the child’s KS1 score
                                                                     IV Estimate and 95% Confidence Interval
                                                              Maternal Average Alcohol Consumption during Pregnancy
                                                    2




                                                    0
                    IV Estimate




                                                    -2




                                                    -4
                                                         1-5                      6-10                   11-15                   16+
                                                                  Average number of drinks per week (compared to non-drinkers)


   Note: The 95% confidence intervals are presented as two points above and below the
                                       estimate.

                                                                                          51
Table 1: Descriptive statistics, mean and standard deviation of variables of interest
                                            (1)                     (2)                          (3)                  (4)
                                       Full sample           Homozygous for the          Carrying at least one       t-test
                                                            ADH1B common allele           ADH1B rare allele
                                     Mean (std dev)            Mean (std dev)              Mean (std dev)           p-value

Panel A: Any alcohol consumption

 Any alcohol (binary)                 0.627 (0.484)              0.633 (0.482)              0.507 (0.501)            0.001
 N                                        4201                       3990                        211


Panel B: Pattern and duration

 Bingeing (trimester 2)               0.167 (0.373)              0.170 (0.375)              0.112 (0.316)            0.022
 N                                        4714                       4482                        232

 Length of exposure                   0.971 (1.165)              0.991 (1.172)              0.592 (0.963)           <0.001
 N                                        2880                       2733                        147


Panel C: Average alcohol consumption

 No. of units p/w                     1.503 (2.980)              1.549 (3.031)              0.646 (1.583)           <0.001
 [min - max]                             [0 35]                     [0 35]                     [0 11]
 N                                        2781                       2639                        142

 No. of units of wine                 0.565 (1.388)              0.584 (1.421)              0.261 (0.608)            0.012
 [min - max]                             [0 17]                     [0 17]                     [0 3]
 N                                        2116                       1991                        125

 No. of units of beer                 0.377 (1.543)              0.395 (1.582)              0.101 (0.552)            0.057
 [min - max]                             [0 35]                     [0 35]                     [0 5]
 N                                        1803                       1697                        106



Standard deviations                Between     Within         Between     Within         Between     Within

 All alcohol                          3.318    1.881             3.370    1.911             1.975    1.177
 Wine                                 1.796    1.143             1.818    1.153             1.285    0.930
 Beer                                 1.966    1.268             2.004    1.288             0.988    0.809

Note: The p-value is based on a test of equality between the mean for the homozygotes for the common allele and those
carrying at least one rare allele. ‘Any alcohol’ is a binary variable indicating whether the foetus was exposed to any alcohol
in utero. ‘Length of exposure’ ranges from zero to three trimesters. The average number of units of wine is calculated among
women who either indicate to drink no beer, spirits or other alcoholic drinks, or who did not report their beer, spirit or other
alcoholic consumption (i.e. have missing values for beer, spirit and other alcoholic drinks). Similarly, the average number of
units of beer is calculated among women who either indicate to drink no wine, spirits or other alcoholic drinks, or who did
not report their wine, spirit or other alcoholic consumption. Therefore, the sample sizes of the number of units of wine and
beer do not add up to the total number of units. Indeed, some mothers may report to drink alcohol, but do not define which
drink they consumed.




                                                              52
Table 2: OLS regressions of child academic achievement on maternal prenatal alcohol
consumption
                                              Entry          KS1, age 7      KS2, age 11      KS3, age 14     KS4, age 16
                                            Assessment

Panel A: Any alcohol intake
  Any alcohol intake                           0.054           -0.037           0.026            0.026           -0.033
                                              (0.039)          (0.033)         (0.034)          (0.037)          (0.035)
  N                                            2614             3319            3132             2872             3201

Panel B: Pattern and duration
  Bingeing                                   -0.107**        -0.210***        -0.159***        -0.225***       -0.235***
                                              (0.045)          (0.038)          (0.040)          (0.041)         (0.040)
  N                                            3238             4088             3868             3572            3955
  Length of exposure                         0.061***          0.028*          0.053***         0.046***        0.044***
                                              (0.019)          (0.015)          (0.015)          (0.017)         (0.016)
  N                                            1982             2518             2372             2179            2428

Panel C: Average alcohol intake
  Average units of alcohol                     0.010          -0.010*           -0.002           -0.006           -0.005
                                              (0.007)         (0.006)          (0.007)           (0.007)         (0.006)
  N                                            1922             2433             2293             2106             2345
  Average units of wine                      0.064***         0.033**         0.053***          0.052***        0.041***
                                              (0.016)         (0.014)          (0.013)           (0.017)         (0.014)
  N                                            1473             1862             1747             1600             1795
  Average units of beer                       -0.015         -0.044***         -0.039*         -0.061***       -0.049***
                                              (0.019)         (0.016)          (0.022)           (0.015)         (0.015)
  N                                            1275             1569             1475             1381             1521

Notes: The table presents the correlations between academic achievement shown in the columns and the measures of alcohol
exposure shown in the rows. All estimates come from separate regressions and control for ancestry-informative principal
components and the child’s ADH1B. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                          53
Table 3: The correlation between alcohol consumption and background characteristics
                                   (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)
                               Any alcohol        Binge           Length of       Average no.       Average no.      Average no.
                                 intake          drinking         exposure         of units of       of units of      of units of
                                                                                    alcohol             wine             beer


Covariates
 Child’s ADH1B                  -0.116***          -0.026         -0.325***        -0.637***         -0.260**          -0.269**
                                  (0.038)         (0.024)           (0.090)          (0.203)          (0.132)           (0.108)
 Girl                             -0.031*          -0.006            -0.047           -0.121           0.019             -0.080
                                  (0.016)         (0.011)           (0.043)          (0.113)          (0.066)           (0.065)
 Mother’s age                    0.008***           0.001          0.034***        0.068***          0.073***           0.016*
                                  (0.002)         (0.001)           (0.005)          (0.014)          (0.008)           (0.008)
 Older siblings                  0.032***        0.031***             0.041         0.214***          0.107**           0.114**
                                  (0.011)         (0.008)           (0.030)          (0.080)          (0.047)           (0.052)
 Younger siblings                  -0.006          0.021             0.062            0.152            0.250              0.097
                                  (0.038)         (0.028)           (0.107)          (0.298)          (0.200)           (0.194)
 Father’s education              0.035***       -0.024***          0.163***         0.169***         0.260***            -0.027
                                  (0.008)         (0.005)           (0.021)          (0.059)          (0.035)           (0.035)
 Mother’s education              0.026***       -0.039***          0.148***           0.043          0.249***         -0.141***
                                  (0.009)         (0.006)           (0.025)          (0.068)          (0.039)           (0.042)
 Father’s social class           0.027***       -0.021***          0.103***          0.098**         0.176***            -0.017
                                  (0.006)         (0.004)           (0.017)          (0.040)          (0.024)           (0.023)
 Ln(income)                     0.063***        -0.062***          0.359***           0.158          0.466***            -0.118
                                  (0.018)         (0.013)           (0.049)          (0.137)          (0.075)           (0.078)
 Mother employed                 0.056***           0.004          0.193***           0.128          0.214***            0.025
                                  (0.017)         (0.011)           (0.046)          (0.112)          (0.071)           (0.063)
 Father employed                    0.016       -0.065***           0.148**           -0.196         0.291***          -0.434**
                                  (0.027)         (0.019)           (0.070)          (0.241)          (0.096)           (0.189)
 CCEI                           0.005***        0.006***            0.007**        0.036***            0.008          0.020***
                                  (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.003)          (0.011)          (0.005)           (0.007)
 EPDS                           0.008***        0.009***            0.010**        0.058***           0.017**         0.031***
                                  (0.002)         (0.001)           (0.005)          (0.017)          (0.008)           (0.010)
 Smoke (Trimester 1)            0.084***        0.163***            0.108*         1.004***            0.010          0.775***
                                  (0.021)         (0.018)           (0.061)          (0.236)          (0.104)           (0.153)

Notes: The coefficient estimates are obtained from separate regressions of the alcohol exposure of interest (denoted in the
columns) on each of the covariates in column 1. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                            54
Table 4: First Stage IV results
                                    (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
                                Any alcohol        Binge          Length of     Average no.    Average no. of    Average
                                  intake          drinking        exposure       of units of    units of wine   no. of units
                                                                                  alcohol                         of beer

Sample for Entry Assessment
  ADH1B                           -0.131**        -0.062**       -0.327***       -0.818***       -0.325**        -0.245***
                                   (0.051)         (0.028)        (0.113)         (0.189)         (0.128)         (0.063)
  First stage F-statistic           6.62             4.95           8.32           18.74            6.40           15.17
  N                                 2614            3238            1982            1922           1473             1275

Sample for Key Stage 1
  ADH1B                          -0.131***        -0.061**       -0.364***       -0.822***       -0.396***       -0.239***
                                  (0.046)          (0.025)        (0.108)         (0.203)         (0.115)         (0.051)
  First stage F-statistic           8.18             5.90          11.48           16.37           11.90           21.54
  N                                 3319            4088            2518            2433            1862            1569

Sample for Key Stage 2
  ADH1B                          -0.147***        -0.070***      -0.375***       -0.859***       -0.417***       -0.241***
                                   (0.048)         (0.025)        (0.106)          (0.189)         (0.111)        (0.049)
  First stage F-statistic           9.52             7.79          12.51            20.66           13.98          24.76
  N                                 3132             3868           2372            2293            1747            1475

Sample for Key Stage 3
  ADH1B                           -0.108**        -0.071***       -0.282**       -0.773***       -0.338***       -0.265***
                                   (0.050)         (0.026)         (0.118)        (0.208)         (0.131)         (0.058)
  First stage F-statistic           4.61             7.31           5.74           13.84            6.69           20.57
  N                                 2872             3572           2179            2106            1600            1381

Sample for Key Stage 4
  ADH1B                          -0.147***        -0.067***      -0.379***       -0.857***       -0.391***       -0.254***
                                   (0.047)         (0.025)        (0.105)          (0.180)         (0.107)        (0.049)
  First stage F-statistic           9.96             7.41          12.97            22.77           13.26          26.46
  N                                 3201             3955           2428            2345            1795            1521

Notes: All estimates come from separate regressions and control for ancestry-informative principal components and the
child’s ADH1B. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                         55
Table 5: Second Stage IV results
                                              (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
                                            Entry          KS1, age 7      KS2, age 11      KS3, age 14      KS4, age 16
                                          Assessment

Panel A: Any alcohol intake

  Any alcohol intake                         -0.685          -1.372†          -1.536†          -1.724           -1.557†
  95% Confidence intervals                [-4.45, 0.84]   [-4.85, -0.24]   [-4.59, -0.43]   [-18.6, -0.23]   [-4.57, -0.47]
  N                                           2614             3319             3132            2872              3201

Panel B: Pattern and duration

  Bingeing                                   -1.782          -2.623†          -2.855†          -2.618†          -3.134†
  95% Confidence intervals                [-13.8, 1.51]   [-12.7, -0.46]   [-9.68, -0.84]   [-9.84, -0.58]   [-11.1, -1.06]
  N                                           3238            4088             3868             3572             3955

  Length of exposure                         -0.486          -0.591†          -0.693†          -0.665           -0.610†
  95% Confidence intervals                [-2.21, 0.13]   [-1.67, -0.14]   [-1.81, -0.20]   [-3.74, 0.01]    [-1.64, -0.13]
  N                                           1982             2518             2372            2179              2428

Panel C: Average alcohol intake

  Average units of alcohol                   -0.193          -0.245†          -0.298†          -0.232           -0.274†
  95% Confidence intervals                [-0.57, 0.06]   [-0.57, -0.05]   [-0.64, -0.08]   [-0.63, 0.02]    [-0.60, -0.06]
  N                                           1922             2433             2293            2106              2345

  Average units of wine                      -0.480          -0.554†          -0.657†          -0.520           -0.621†
  95% Confidence intervals                [-2.95, 0.21]   [-1.60, -0.10]   [-1.66, -0.17]   [-2.24, 0.14]    [-1.68, -0.10]
  N                                           1473             1862             1747            1600              1795

  Average units of beer                      -0.895          -1.061†          -1.462†          -1.176†          -1.105†
  95% Confidence intervals                [-2.53, 0.09]   [-2.39, -0.25]   [-2.96, -0.54]   [-2.54, -0.35]   [-2.40, -0.22]
  N                                           1275             1569             1475            1381              1521

Notes: All estimates come from separate regressions and control for ancestry-informative principal components and the
child’s ADH1B. Weak-instrument robust 95% confidence bounds in square brackets. † p<0.05 using weak-instrument robust
95% confidence bounds.




                                                          56
Table 6: Reduced form estimates – academic achievement regressed on mother’s and/or
offspring ADH1B
                                                (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
                                              Entry           KS1, age 7      KS2, age 11      KS3, age 14      KS4, age 16
                                            Assessment

Panel A: Separate regressions

  Maternal ADH1B (rs1229984)                    0.030           0.159**        0.180***          0.142*          0.214***
                                               (0.086)          (0.068)         (0.068)          (0.074)          (0.069)
  N                                             2564              3255           3067             2812             3138

  Offspring ADH1B (rs1229984)                 -0.146*            0.011           -0.007           -0.011           0.040
                                              (0.088)           (0.071)         (0.080)          (0.078)          (0.065)
  N                                            2564              3255             3067             2812            3138

Panel B: Including both genotypes simultaneously

  Maternal ADH1B (rs1229984)                    0.118           0.198***       0.239***          0.192**         0.250***
                                               (0.096)           (0.075)        (0.082)          (0.085)          (0.079)
  Offspring ADH1B (rs1229984)                 -0.202**           -0.082          -0.122           -0.103           -0.075
                                               (0.098)           (0.079)        (0.093)          (0.089)          (0.074)
  N                                             2564              3255            3067             2812             3138

Notes: All estimates come from separate regressions that control for ten ancestry-informative principal components. Robust
standard errors in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                           57
Table 7: Subgroup analysis, number of alcoholic units
                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
                                               Entry           KS1, age 7      KS2, age 11      KS3, age 14      KS4, age 16
                                             Assessment

By gender
  Boys                                         -0.167            -0.278**          -0.217          -0.240*         -0.390**
                                               (0.170)            (0.128)         (0.133)          (0.141)          (0.168)
  First stage F-statistic                      12.832             15.681          15.618           12.007           15.307
  N                                             1000               1239             1151            1060             1188

  Girls                                        -0.182             -0.185           -0.438          -0.180            -0.087
                                               (0.212)           (0.207)          (0.274)          (0.310)          (0.192)
  First stage F-statistic                       7.838             4.200            7.533            3.740            9.415
  N                                              922               1194             1142            1046              1157

By mother’s age at birth
  Mothers aged 27 or less                       0.150            -0.233            -0.420          -0.412           -0.174
                                               (0.239)           (0.227)          (0.307)          (0.291)          (0.221)
  First stage F-statistic                       5.362             6.317             5.141           4.864            7.030
  N                                              789               962               909             867              928

  Mothers aged over 27                        -0.424**           -0.265**        -0.261**           -0.158         -0.326**
                                               (0.185)            (0.126)         (0.129)          (0.162)          (0.141)
  First stage F-statistic                      11.197              9.545          13.909            7.712           13.849
  N                                             1133               1471            1384              1239            1417

By social class
  Low social class                             -0.221            -0.255*         -0.440**          -0.305*          -0.293*
                                               (0.213)           (0.144)          (0.204)          (0.172)          (0.176)
  First stage F-statistic                       7.232             9.245           10.037            7.951            9.939
  N                                              817               977              941              889              952

  High social class                            -0.262            -0.303*           -0.184          -0.184           -0.258
                                               (0.237)           (0.180)          (0.164)          (0.240)          (0.178)
  First stage F-statistic                       8.050             6.593             9.273           5.496           11.589
  N                                             1010              1346              1254            1118             1287

By maternal educational level
  Low education                                -0.188             -0.279           -0.507           -0.232          -0.433*
                                               (0.313)           (0.209)          (0.310)          (0.230)          (0.257)
  First stage F-statistic                       3.422             5.770            4.878            4.241            6.395
  N                                             1231               1478             1414             1353            1444

  High education                               -0.156             -0.140           -0.060          -0.106            -0.051
                                               (0.126)           (0.105)          (0.086)          (0.114)          (0.100)
  First stage F-statistic                      20.346            10.947           20.855           11.266           21.018
  N                                              688               952              876              750              898

By income
  Low income (less than median)                -0.404             -0.319           -0.405          -0.258            -0.321
                                               (0.272)           (0.195)          (0.260)          (0.271)          (0.212)
  First stage F-statistic                       6.580             8.471            7.814            4.602            8.437
  N                                              853               1027             978              939              1005

  High income (more than median)                0.007            -0.081            -0.104          -0.087           -0.061
                                               (0.199)           (0.131)          (0.110)          (0.139)          (0.136)
  First stage F-statistic                       7.161             5.263             8.165           4.775            9.427
  N                                              820              1090              1020             883             1040

Notes: All estimates come from separate regressions where the treatment of interest is the number of alcoholic units
consumed. All analyses control for ancestry-informative principal components and the child’s ADH1B. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Low social class indicates non-skilled, semi-skilled or skilled manual occupations; High social class
indicates skilled non-manual, managerial or professional occupations. Low education denotes O-level or less, high education
indicates A-level or university degree. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.



                                                            58
