                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TWO TALES OF ADJUSTMENT:
                     EAST ASIAN LESSONS FOR EUROPEAN GROWTH

                                            Anusha Chari
                                           Peter Blair Henry

                                        Working Paper 19840
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19840


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




We thank participants at the IMF's Annual Research Conference for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19840.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Two Tales of Adjustment: East Asian Lessons for European Growth
Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 19840
January 2014
JEL No. E62,E65,F4,F43,F68,O11,O57

                                             ABSTRACT

Paths into the Asian Crisis of 1997-98 and the recent global financial crisis were similar, but the roads
out could not be more different. Common wisdom has it that on impact Asia endured fiscal austerity
imposed by the IMF whereas the IMF recommended stimulus in the case of the advanced nations at
the epicenter of the crisis in 2008-09. While the IMF did recommend different policies to begin with,
the fiscal adjustment in Asia was far more modest than is commonly known and the switch from stimulus
to austerity in Europe was quite abrupt. The difference in fiscal stance helps explain the difference
in the post-crisis paths of output and employment in the two regions.


Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu

Peter Blair Henry
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, 11-58
New York, NY 10012
pbhenry@stern.nyu.edu
Introduction

       When a country experiences a significant change in its macroeconomic circumstances,

flexible policies can play a significant role in mitigating the impact of the shock on output,

employment, and other key measures of economic performance (Dornbusch and Fischer, 1987,

Ch. 12). While there are generally a range of relevant policy options for leaders to consider in

such scenarios, recent events in Europe and the United States have focused the collective

imagination of the economics profession on the role of fiscal policy. Specifically, in the

aftermath of the Great Recession, an acerbic debate has emerged over the issue of whether fiscal

consolidation, colloquially known as “austerity,” has been helpful or harmful to the recovery of

growth and employment in advanced economies.

       Conventional wisdom holds that fiscal expansion during a downturn can stimulate growth

and return the economy to full employment, provided that debts are not so high as to preclude

new borrowing. In contrast to this view, a small but influential literature documents that

austerity actually spurs economic expansion when countries reduce their cyclically adjusted

primary balance (CAPB) through lower spending rather than higher taxes (Alesina and Perotti,

1995; Alesina and Ardagna, 2010). Given the extended slowdown in Europe following the onset

of fiscal consolidation in 2010, however, and the relatively weak U.S. recovery in the aftermath

of sequestration, the counter intuitive notion of expansionary austerity faces increasing

skepticism. Recent research at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reports a negative

relationship between fiscal consolidation forecasts and subsequent forecast errors of GDP growth

(Blanchard and Leigh, 2013). This evidence suggests that the IMF under-estimated the size of

fiscal multipliers with respect to the fiscal consolidation programs that were announced in

Europe in early 2010.




                                                                                                   2
         Despite mounting evidence in favor of Blanchard and Leigh, the austerity dispute

remains unresolved in the academic community, and there is certainly no indication that the view

of rapid fiscal consolidation as harmful to growth carries the day with policy makers in advanced

countries (Jorda and Taylor, 2013). Given the inconclusive state of the debate, it is surprising

that both intellectual camps continue to direct their analytical machinery exclusively at episodes

where countries pursue fiscal consolidation, ignoring the wealth of information inherent in

comparing the economic performance of countries that pursue fiscal austerity with those that do

not.

         In contrast to the previous literature on fiscal adjustment, this is precisely the approach

we adopt in this paper. Specifically, we exploit the similarities between the causes of the Asian

Financial Crisis of 1997-98 and the Global Financial Crisis of 2008-09—and the differences in

economic policy responses in each case—to provide a setting in which we can more definitively

answer the following question. Do countries that pursue countercyclical fiscal policy in response

to a negative macroeconomic shock experience a faster recovery of output and employment than

those that implement fiscal austerity?

         At the onset of the Asian Crisis, officials from the International Monetary Fund (IMF)

urged national authorities to pursue fiscal consolidation as a means of stabilizing the balance of

payments—improving the current account through a decrease in absorption.2 On the brink of

losing capital market access and in desperate need of liquidity, Asian Crisis countries complied

with the IMF’s conditions in order to receive emergency loans. Shortly after the initial

agreements were signed, however, the IMF reversed course with respect to its initial prescription




2
 Citations to buttress the claim that the IMF insisted on fiscal austerity during the Asian Crisis include Posen
(2010), Krugman (2001), Frankel (2002), Roach (2012) and various Article IV consultation reports.



                                                                                                                   3
on fiscal consolidation, allowing countries to increase their deficits by enabling automatic

stabilizers to take hold.

        The tack in Europe following the Global Financial Crisis was exactly the opposite.

There, the IMF initially encouraged countries to pursue fiscal stimulus, starting in the fall of

2008.3 Two years later the European Commission and the European Central Bank (led by

Germany) began to demand fiscal consolidation in return for contributing to the funding of

emergency loans to the peripheral countries of Europe. Austerity measures were announced in

2010, budget deficits as a fraction of GDP were reduced and the European Fiscal Compact was

announced in March 2011.

        Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate the economic consequences associated with the drastically

different policy adjustments taken by Asian and European governments in response to the

respective crises. Figure 1, which plots the evolution, in event time, of the growth rate of GDP

in affected countries before and after the East Asian and European crises, tells the central story

that the rest of the paper explores in detail. The two crises caused sharp economic contractions

in both East Asia and in the peripheral countries of Europe (GIIPS). But while the recovery in

Asia was a rapid and robust “V”-shaped affair, Europe is still struggling to mount a recovery,

more of a “W”, as it were—less the final upstroke.

        In the countries hit by the East Asian Crisis—Indonesia, Malaysia, South Korea, and

Thailand—the average growth rate of GDP fell from an average of about 7 percent per year in

the 4 years before the onset of the crisis to negative 9 percent upon impact. A striking feature of

the data is the speed with which growth recovered. Within a year of the crisis, GDP growth

turned positive. The average growth rate of GDP during the four-year period after the crisis was


3
 Text Documenting the IMF’Encouraging Fiscal Expansion Early in the Crisis
http://www.ieo-imf.org/ieo/files/completedevaluations/RITA_-_Background_Studies.pdf



                                                                                                     4
about 5 percent—not quite back to the pre-crisis average but strong economic performance by

most standards.

        The event-time profile of GDP growth in the five European Crisis countries (GIIPS)

stands in sharp contrast to their Asian counterparts. Output falls on impact. The average growth

rate of GDP in the GIIPS, approximately 3 percent per year before the crisis, bottoms out at

almost negative 5 percent in the first year after the crisis. In the second year after the crisis, GDP

growth becomes slightly less negative, but then begins to contract even more sharply in year 3,

and falls to about negative 2.5 percent by year 4. While output falls on impact and the recession

deepens in the first year after the crisis hits, the pace of contraction slows as fiscal stimulus

begins to take effect. But rather than growth continuing to recover as it did in East Asia, the

GIIPS economies experience a “double dip.” It is interesting to note that the decline in growth

accelerates about a year after the move to fiscal consolidation in Europe.

        Figure 2, which shows unemployment rates across the two regions in event time, tells a

similar story of downturn and rapid recovery in Asia versus prolonged stagnation in Europe. The

average unemployment rate across the four East Asian countries in the four years prior to the

crisis was about 3.5 percent. The unemployment rate jumps above 5 percent in the year the crisis

hits before falling to just under 4 percent in the fourth year after the crisis. In contrast, the

behavior of unemployment rates in the GIIPS countries tells a consistent story of weakening

economies that start to deteriorate even faster with the onset of austerity. The average

unemployment rate in the five European countries before the crisis was about 8 percent and

jumps to 12 percent in the year after the crisis. Mirroring the decrease in GDP growth shown in

Figure 2, the rise in unemployment slows between the first and second year after the crisis (from

12 to 14 percent), before surging to about 18 percent in the fourth year following the crisis.




                                                                                                    5
       Our formal statistical results support this simple visual story. Irrespective of the data

series we choose, t-tests of means confirm that Asia tightened government finances early and

then loosened as the need for countercyclical fiscal policy became clear. Europe began with

fiscal stimulus but tightened and pursued fiscal consolidation before economic recovery took

hold. Moreover, the differences in the changes in the fiscal policy stance explain the response of

output across the two regions. Panel regression estimates with country-fixed effects corroborate

that the change in fiscal stance from stimulus to austerity had a statistically significant impact on

the decline in real GDP growth in Europe. The change in the cyclically-adjusted primary balance

has a negative and statistically significant impact on output growth when the fiscal stance

switches from stimulus to austerity in Europe. In East Asia, on the other hand, the

contractionary impact of fiscal austerity is evident on impact during the crisis, but fiscal policy

does not appear to have a statistically significant effect on real GDP growth in the pre-crisis and

post-crisis periods. Our findings are consistent with the argument that the size of the fiscal

multiplier may depend on the state of the economy with significantly larger multipliers during

recessions than in normal times (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012).

       The regression estimates also suggest that investment ratios and growth rates in East Asia

still remain below their pre-crisis levels. There are at least two possible explanations for this

finding. One is that these countries have reached the limits of catch up growth and are settling

into a new steady state characterized by investment and growth more akin to the advanced

economy cohort of which they are now a part. An alternative explanation is that despite the

quick change of tack from fiscal consolidation to a stance that allowed the automatic stabilizers

to kick in, the Asian countries suffered permanent output losses. Resolving which of these

hypotheses is correct lies beyond the scope of this paper. But if the Asian Crisis did result in




                                                                                                      6
permanent output losses in spite of attempts to use countercyclical fiscal policy (and other tools)

as a means of adjustment to cushion the blow of financial crisis and recession then there is an

important lesson here. Deep economic contractions—especially those induced by financial

crises—can have lasting effects.

       Beyond the specific contribution of advancing the debate on fiscal austerity, this paper

contributes more broadly to a growing number of studies that demonstrate the power of

comparative macro case studies to tell us about the impact of policy. Using the narrative

approach to identifying changes in fiscal policy popularized by Romer and Romer (1989, 2007),

Guajardo, Leigh and Pescatori (2011) demonstrate that in the short-run all consolidations lead to

contraction. Henry and Miller (2009) demonstrate the power of the policy-experiment approach

in an emerging economy context. This paper uses the approach to illustrate the insights we can

gain about advanced economies by using the narrative approach to compare the impact of policy

changes in advanced economies with those in emerging markets.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section I narrates the two tales of adjustment and

documents the changes in fiscal policy stance in East Asia and Europe during and in the

aftermath of the two crises. Section II describes the data and methods. Section III presents t-tests

of means for debt and deficit variables as well as the absorption variables. Section IV describes

the results from the formal estimations. Section V concludes.



I. Two Tales of Adjustment

       Despite a few warning signs such as growing current account deficits, the Asian financial

crisis of 1997–1998 was largely unanticipated. While some skeptics had argued that claims of

the Asian economic miracle were overstated and that Asian economies would eventually run into




                                                                                                    7
diminishing returns (Krugman 1994; Young 1994, 1995), the complexity and severity of the

crisis surprised most observers. Domestic asset markets collapsed, banks failed, and firms went

bankrupt. Over-borrowing, insufficient regulatory oversight, large foreign-currency-denominated

debt burdens, and collapsing exchange rates were seen as the main culprits that led to a vicious

deleveraging cycle in which foreign investors lost confidence in East Asia, and net private

capital flows declined dramatically both during and in the aftermath of the crisis.

       In the years prior to the Asian Financial Crisis, fiscal positions in the East Asian crisis

countries were strong. Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia entered the crisis with fiscal surpluses

(Figure 4). Although fiscal deficits in the crisis countries were moderate, the policy measures in

the original IMF programs nevertheless included fiscal consolidation. The fiscal adjustment was

intended to help stem the reversal of international capital flows that had precipitated the crisis.

The planned fiscal consolidation was strongest in Thailand, where the fiscal deficit had increased

in the year prior to the crisis. In Indonesia and Korea, even the initial programs contained little

overall adjustment and policy makers anticipated that expenditures would be cut elsewhere in the

budget to cover the costs of recapitalizing banks (Lane et. al, 1999).

       As the crisis progressed, however, the collapse in domestic demand and deterioration in

the real economy was far worse than anticipated. For instance, the original IMF forecast for real

GDP growth of 3% for Indonesia in 1997 was subsequently revised to -12.1% and actually

turned out to be -13.13% (Appendix Table 2, Panel A). Similarly, for Thailand the original

forecast for 1998 was 3.5%, the estimate was revised to -5% and the realized GDP growth rate

was -10.51% (Appendix Table 2, Panel C). There was also a severe investment decline in the

crisis countries from 36% to 22% of GDP.

       As the deterioration in the economic situation became apparent, subsequent program




                                                                                                      8
reviews noted that the severity of the economic downturn was not anticipated in the original

program targets. Accordingly, the IMF adopted a new approach that was clearly articulated in

April of 1998 by Stanley Fischer, then First Deputy Managing Director of the IMF:

         “On the question of the appropriate degree of fiscal tightening, the balance is a
         particularly fine one. At the outset of the crisis, countries needed to firm their
         fiscal positions, both to make room in their budgets for the future costs of
         financial restructuring, and --depending on the balance of payments situation --
         to reduce the current account deficit… Among the three Asian crisis programs,
         the balance of payments factor was important only in Thailand, which had
         been running a current account deficit of about 8 percent of GDP.
                The amount of fiscal adjustment in Indonesia was one percent of GDP;
         in Korea it was 1.5 percent of GDP; and in Thailand -- reflecting its large
         current account deficit -- the initial adjustment was 3 percent of GDP. After
         these initial adjustments, if the economic situation in the country weakened
         more than expected, as it has in the three Asian crisis countries, the IMF has
         generally agreed with the country to let the deficit widen somewhat, that is, to
         let automatic stabilizers operate” (Fischer, 1998).


       In other words, the deteriorating economic environment had led to substantial increases

in fiscal deficits, which, from the beginning of 1998 on, were accommodated by easing the

programs' fiscal objectives (Lane et. al, 1999). For instance, Appendix Table 2 shows that the

original projections for the change in the fiscal balance for Indonesia in 1997/98 and 1998/99

were -0.9% and 0.2% of GDP, respectively (Panel A). These targets were subsequently revised

upward to -2.2% and -9.2% of GDP during the mid-year program reviews. The actual numbers

for the change in the fiscal balance turned out to be -2.47% in 1997 and -1.04% in 1998. A

similar pattern prevails for Korea and Thailand as well with the IMF fiscal targets being revised

upwards in comparison with the projections made in the original programs (Panels B and C).

       At the time the East Asian IMF programs were implemented, their goal was to use fiscal

policy to facilitate external adjustment and bolster market confidence. In hindsight, it is easy to

say that the severity of the economic downturn was not accurately forecast in the original




                                                                                                      9
program formulations and that the IMF should have permitted greater fiscal flexibility from the

outset. Be that as it may, the Fund did loosen the fiscal straitjacket as the Asian Crisis unfolded

and output recovered quickly. These facts are at odds with the perception that the IMF applied a

standard prescription of strict fiscal austerity during the East Asian crisis and suggest that the

IMF adopted a far more accommodative fiscal stance in East Asia than is commonly known.

The real question, therefore, is not whether the IMF got things right from the outset, but whether

policy makers in Europe learned from the flexibility the Fund showed with respect to fiscal

policy in Asia.



IA. European Policy Responses to the Global Financial Crisis

       Much like the crisis that swept through Asia a decade earlier, the complexity and severity

of the Global Financial Crisis cum Great Recession was also largely unanticipated. Credit

spreads spiked, housing prices and stock markets collapsed, bank failures were widespread, and

firms went bankrupt. Only this time the crisis began in the developed world, which also bore the

brunt of the impact. Over-borrowing and deregulation in financial markets led to a vicious

deleveraging cycle from which the United States and Europe have yet to recover.

       Figure 3a demonstrates the evolution, in event time, of the cyclically adjusted primary

balance (CAPB) as a percentage of potential GDP in Asia and Europe (also referred to as the

government’s structural fiscal balance). The structural balance is widely-used as a measure of

policy induced changes in fiscal policy as it filters out changes in fiscal balances that are due to

business cycle fluctuations. Figure 3b demonstrates the evolution, in event time, of the primary

fiscal balance as a percentage of GDP in Asia and Europe.




                                                                                                     10
        Figure 3a and Figure 3b show that East Asia pursued a relatively neutral to expansionary

fiscal policy stance in the midst and immediate aftermath of the crisis. The modest tightening

about two years after the crisis coincides with the rapid recovery in real GDP growth followed by

fiscal expansion during the 2001 recession. The primary fiscal balance starts off positive (about

1.8 percent of GDP) in 1997 and begins to deteriorate mildly a year before the start of the crisis

in 1997. In the year the crisis hits, the average fiscal balance is about negative 1.8 percent of

GDP. One can see the impact of the qualitative story of changes in fiscal projections by the IMF

within the year. GDP recovers and the fiscal balance improves for cyclical reasons.

       By contrast, the peripheral countries of Europe follow a markedly different approach to

fiscal policy. Figure 3a shows that, on impact, structural balances expanded significantly in 2008

and 2009 in the European periphery countries (GIIPS). The primary fiscal balance changed from

-1.9% of GDP on average in 2007 to -5.5% in 2008 and -11.2% in 2009, an overall fiscal

expansion of 3.6 percentage points of GDP between 2007/08 and 5.7 percentage points between

2008/09 (Figure 3b). Figure 3a and Figure 3b therefore show that following the onset of the

Global Financial Crisis the initial policy response was one of fiscal stimulus in line with

textbook prescriptions of counter-cyclical fiscal policy adjustment. Starting in 2010, however,

the modus operandi in European economic policy switched from flexibility to austerity.

       The abrupt reversal in fiscal policy stance—especially in the European periphery—is

striking in size, composition and speed even when compared to the initial fiscal adjustment path

prescribed by the IMF in East Asia before Fund officials realized the depth and severity of the

East Asian Crisis. For the European periphery, the primary fiscal balance changed from -13% of

GDP to -7.7% of GDP, a consolidation of 5.3 percentage points of GDP on average between

2010 and 2011—almost twice as large as the adjustments initially prescribed in Thailand and




                                                                                                    11
three to five times as large as those in Korea and Indonesia. In addition to the primary fiscal

adjustments in Europe being larger than in Asia, they have also been more persistent—a further

fiscal consolidation of approximately 1.6 percentage points of GDP took place in Europe

between 2011 and 2012. It is therefore important to note that whereas consolidation was never

fully took implemented in Asia because of the IMF’s relatively quick change in course, fiscal

consolidation in Europe took hold and persisted for more than two years in the midst of a severe

downturn.

       Taken together, Figure 3a and Figure 3b paint a consistent picture of the change in fiscal

policy stance in peripheral Europe relative to the East Asian crisis countries during and in the

aftermath of the two crises. The central point that Asia and Europe took diametrically opposite

approaches to fiscal policy is robust to the way in which one measures the level and changes in

the fiscal stance. Indeed, turning to the primary deficit, there is some evidence that the switch to

countercyclical fiscal policy in Asia took place so quickly as to suggest the following

characterization. Asia, like Europe, pursued expansionary fiscal policy when the crisis hit (albeit

modest). The main difference is that once Asia began pursuing expansionary fiscal policy it

stayed the course until economic activity rebounded. One may argue that this was only one to

two years since output rebounded so quickly. Europe changed tack in the third year after the

crisis hit and this seems to have exacerbated the initial fall in output and increase in

unemployment.



IB. Alternative Channels of Adjustment

       While the response of fiscal policy played a significant role in mitigating the impact of

the Asian financial crisis on the real economy, it is important to remember that fiscal policy is




                                                                                                   12
just one of the tools available to policymakers confronted with a negative shock. In addition to

allowing automatic fiscal stabilizers such as the expansion of spending on the social safety net to

kick in once the IMF recognized the importance of fiscal flexibility, the adjustment of prices—

specifically the exchange rate—played a central role in the rapid recovery of output in East Asia.

Figure 4 demonstrates that the average crisis-stricken country in East Asia experienced a 23

percent depreciation of the nominal exchange rate vis a vis the dollar during 1998 followed by an

additional 10 percent over the course of the next three years.

       With a cumulative depreciation of over 30 percent against the dollar, the Asian crisis

countries were able to quickly restore external balance. In the three years before the onset of the

crisis, current account balances in the Asian Crisis countries averaged about 5 percent of GDP.

In Year 0 the crisis countries ran current account surpluses of almost 10 percent of GDP and the

average current account balance over the course of the next three years was a surplus in excess of

five percent of GDP. Of course, the large depreciation of the nominal exchange rate was not a

costless exercise. The extensive short term dollar-denominated borrowing that in many ways

precipitated the crisis meant that rapid depreciation led to financial distress for many

corporations that did not have dollar revenues. Nevertheless, the flexibility in prices played a

significant role in allowing the economy to adjust through price adjustment and expenditure

switching.

       In contrast, because the exchange rate has barely moved in Europe (Figure 4), the burden

of adjustment in Europe has fallen on quantities rather than prices—expenditure reduction rather

than expenditure switching. There are of course many reasons why the Euro has not depreciated

against the dollar. The exchange rate is not a policy instrument for Europe in the same way that

it is for a small open economy. In the absence of the nominal exchange rate as a tool of




                                                                                                   13
adjustment, policy makers within the GIIPS are not without means to restore competitiveness.

To the extent that policy makers cannot avail themselves of fiscal and monetary policy

(exchange rate) to achieve internal and external balance, the remaining choices are to either push

hard on structural reforms that raise the productivity of workers, or to accept internal

devaluation.

       Between 2004 and 2009 average unit labor costs across the GIIPS rose over 16 percent.

Indeed, from 2000 to 2009 unit labor costs in the GIIPS experienced a cumulative rise of 30

percent. With growth in wages outstripping growth in productivity by more than 3 percentage

points per year, it is not surprising that the average current account deficit in the GIIPS reached

almost 10 percent of GDP by 2008. While unit labor costs have fallen by about 5 percent since

2009, this is not nearly enough to undo the erosion of competitiveness that took place since the

outset of the Euro. Furthermore, the fall in unit labor costs has been almost exclusively the result

of falling wages. Average labor productivity in the GIIPS has been relatively flat (see Figure 5).

The question is whether falling wages alone can bear the brunt of adjustment. This will take a

long time and be very painful. Structural reform holds out the promise of productivity increases,

but so far there is little evidence of productivity gains or structural changes that would bring

about more rapid productivity growth in the future.



II. Data and Methodology

       The principal data sources used in this paper are the IMF's World Economic Outlook

(April 2013) and the International Financial Statistics (IFS) database. The WEO provides

numerous series related to output, government debt, deficits, savings and investment. Other

absorption indicators such as household consumption, exports and imports and data for nominal




                                                                                                   14
variables like exchange rates and interest rates come from the IFS database. The primary country

panel includes the four countries most hard hit by the East Asian crisis namely Indonesia, Korea,

Malaysia and Thailand and the peripheral countries of the original Euro zone4—Greece, Ireland,

Italy, Portugal and Spain (GIIPS). The formal estimations also consider a wider Asian sample

that includes China, India, Hong Kong, Philippines, Singapore and Taiwan and the remaining

(original) Euro zone countries of Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,

Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Sweden. The sample also includes the United Kingdom.

Appendix B presents the exact definitions of the variables used. The sample period is 1990-2012.

        For the European countries, the WEO includes a measure of the government structural

balance also referred to as the cyclically-adjusted primary balance. Changes in the cyclically-

adjusted primary balance are used as a measure of changes in the government's discretionary

balance or fiscal policy stance. For a number of the East Asian countries, coverage of this

variable begins after 2000 following the East Asian crisis. Since the CAPB is a principal variable

of interest for this paper, we constructed this measure for the East Asian countries following the

methodology prescribed by Fedelino, Ivanova, and Horton (2009) in a technical note for the

IMF. Briefly, the cyclically adjusted primary balance is:




                                                                             ,


        The first term is the cyclically-adjusted component of government revenues where                        is

the nominal primary revenue,            is potential output,      is actual output and       is elasticity of

revenue with respect to the output gap. The second term is the cyclically-adjusted component of


4
  The original Euro zone refers to member countries that adopted the Euro before physical notes and coins were first
introduced in January 2002.



                                                                                                                     15
government expenditures where       is the nominal government expenditure and        is the elasticity

of government expenditures with respect to the output gap.

       Fedelino, Ivanova, and Horton (2009) suggest that if revenue elasticity is equal to one

(i.e., revenues are perfectly correlated with the cycle) and expenditure elasticity is equal to zero

(i.e., expenditures are not affected by the cycle the cyclically adjusted primary balance becomes:




       Since measures of potential output of       were also missing from the WEO database,

using the IMF's methodology, estimates of trend output were computed using a HP-filter with a

smoothing parameter of 100. This measure of potential output was used to compute estimates of

the output gap for the East Asian countries as well as the cyclically-adjusted primary balance as a

percent of potential output (or GGSB_NPGDP in the WEO).



III Simple Statistical Tests

       In this section we present simple t-tests of means to examine changes in the debt and

deficit variables and in the absorption indicators over time and across regions. For each variable

of interest, yit, where subscript i refers to the country and subscript t to the period, our approach

is to examine the evolution of the variable from a pre-crisis baseline through the crisis and post-

crisis periods across the different groups of countries—East Asia, the GIIPS, Asia-other and

Europe-other. A point regarding the timing of the two crises and the implications for statistical

analysis is worth noting. While the formal estimates have to be presented separately by group

since the two crises did not occur contemporaneously, this does not preclude simple t-tests of

differences in means across cohorts or groups of countries in the same way that labor economists



                                                                                                    16
employ cohort-analysis to examine the determinants of the earning potential of cohorts that enter

the labor force at different points in time. Therefore we can present a simple t-test of means of a

change in the government’s structural balance across East Asia and the GIIPS pre-crisis or post-

crisis in event time. However, it is important to note that differences across East Asia and the

GIIPS cannot be used to compute difference-in-difference estimates to compare the change in

fiscal stance in the GIIPS between 2008-2012 with East Asia in 1998-2002 as the control group.



IIIA. T-Tests of Means: Debt and Deficits

         The t-tests of means are presented across time periods for each group and across groups

within each time period. For example, t-tests for the change in the growth rate of real output

between the pre-crisis and crisis periods or the crisis and post-crisis periods are presented for the

GIIPS and East Asia separately in Table 1. Table 2 presents t-tests of means across groups for

East Asia versus the GIIPS in the pre-crisis, crisis, and post-crisis periods—all in event time.

         Table 1 shows the t-tests of means for debt and deficit variables by country group across

four time periods. The first is a pre-crisis baseline period which begins four years prior to the

crisis and ends one year before (T-4, T-1). The second is the crisis-period which is the year of the

crisis (T), the third is the immediate post-crisis period (T+1, T+2) and a second post-crisis phase

three to four years out (T+3, T+4).5 The post-crisis period is broken into two phases to capture

the effects of the fiscal policy stance on impact and any change in fiscal policy stance as the

crisis progresses. In particular examining the two post-crisis periods separately is designed to

quantify the qualitative narrative of a change in fiscal stance from austerity on impact to stimulus


5
  Note that we take the crisis year to be 1998 for East Asia and 2008 for the global financial crisis. The four calendar
time periods for the East Asian crisis are therefore 1994-1997(pre-crisis), 1998(crisis), 1999-2000(post-crisis I),
2001-2002(post-crisis II). For the global financial crisis the time periods are 2004-2007 (pre-crisis), 2008 (crisis),
2009-2010 (post-crisis I) and 2011-2012 (post-crisis II).



                                                                                                                     17
as the real effects of the East Asian crisis began to unfold and the contrasting change in stance

from fiscal stimulus on impact to austerity in 2010 for the GIIPS and Europe overall.

        For each variable, group means by time period were computed in two steps. First, a

country-mean was calculated for each country and each of the four time periods. Second, the

group mean was calculated by taking the mean across all countries in the group for each time

period. For example, the first panel shows group averages for the general government gross debt

as a percent of GDP for the four time periods. To obtain the group mean of 25.65 for the East

Asian crisis countries in the pre-crisis period, a country mean was computed for each of the four

crisis countries between 1994 and 1997. The group average was computed by taking an average

of the four country averages. The same procedure was followed for all the variables in Table 1

for each of the four time periods.

        The last three columns show t-tests of means for each group (by country) to examine

whether the debt and deficit variables under consideration changed significantly (i) in the crisis

period relative to the pre-crisis baseline, (ii) in the first phase post-crisis relative to the pre-crisis

period, (iii) the second phase of the post-crisis period relative to the first phase.

        Panel 1 shows that while debt-to-GDP ratios rose for East Asia during and in the

aftermath of the crisis, the changes across time periods were not statistically significant. It is

noteworthy, however, that by 2002 East Asian debt-to-GDP ratios stood at about 48% of GDP

relative to an average of 26% in the pre-crisis period. A similar pattern holds for the other Asian

countries as well with the post-crisis build up in the debt-to-GDP ratio being statistically

significant. For the peripheral countries of Europe (the GIIPS) in contrast the increase in debt-to-

GDP ratios post-crisis has been strikingly large and statistically significant. It is worth noticing

that the pre-crisis average debt-to-GDP ratio for the GIIPS stood at about 68% while violating




                                                                                                        18
the Maastricht criterion of 60% is nowhere close to the 120% average between 2011-2012 (Post-

Crisis II). The European core also experienced an increase in debt-to-GDP ratios, however, not

as significantly large as the European periphery.

       Several measures of fiscal policy illustrate the differences in fiscal policy between the

GIIPS and the East Asian countries. Panel 2 shows the government's fiscal balance as a percent

of GDP which is inclusive of interest payments. The t-tests suggest that for the East Asian

countries, a steady overall stimulus was applied throughout the crisis and post-crisis periods.

While the IMF prescribed austerity measures initially, the policy was quickly reversed as

Appendix Table B shows. Since the policy reversal takes place within the crisis year, and the

WEO data simply show the final numbers which suggest an expansion in the fiscal balance--

initially by drawing down the pre-crisis budgetary surplus and then by incurring deficits. A

similar pattern is seen in the other East Asian countries as well.

       The Post II- Post I column tells a compelling story in the difference between the

evolution of the fiscal deficit in East Asia versus Europe. In years 3 and 4 after the crisis, the

average overall fiscal balance as a fraction of GDP in Asia becomes 1.82 percentage points more

negative and is significant at the 10 percent level of confidence. The average GIIPS country on

the other hand experiences a 6.15 percentage point fiscal consolidation that is significant at the 5

percent level. The average core European country also experiences a fiscal tightening in the

third and fourth years after the crisis of 1.26 percentage points of GDP that is significant at the 5

percent confidence level.

       Panel 3 shows the primary fiscal balance exclusive of net interest payments which

reflects a similar pattern of stimulus or fiscal expansion in East Asia and stimulus followed by




                                                                                                     19
austerity in Europe with the magnitude of the adjustment being much larger for the GIIPS

relative to the European core.

        Row 1 of Panel 4 demonstrates that In East Asia, the structural balance or CAPB rises

from 0.16 percent of potential GDP before the crisis to 0.57 percent reflecting a mild but

statistically insignificant tightening of 0.41 percentage points. This observation is also consistent

with our basic assertion that the fiscal consolidation imposed by the IMF was not particularly

stringent. The increases in the CAPB in the Post I and Post II periods are even smaller, 0.14 and

0.05 percentage points. For the other Asian countries there was a very small discretionary

stimulus suggesting that across Asia the discretionary fiscal policy stance was almost neutral

during and in the aftermath of the crisis.

        We see a very different pattern of the CAPB in Europe. Prior to the great recession, the

average CAPB in the GIIPs was negative 4.72 percent of potential GDP. On impact, the average

deficit widens to negative 7.93 percent of potential GDP, a fiscal loosening of 3.21 percentage

points that is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. In the first two years after the crisis,

the CAPB becomes slightly more negative and bottoms out at an average of negative 9.26

percent of potential GDP. Things turn radically in 2010 following the adoption of austerity

measures that were part of the conditions imposed by the IMF/EU loan programs. In the third

and fourth year after the crisis, fiscal policy tightens significantly as the CAPB goes from

negative 9.26 percent of GDP to negative 5.42 percent of potential GDP, a fiscal tightening of

3.84 percentage points of potential GDP that is significant at the 5 percent level. The core

European countries demonstrate a similar pattern. The average CAPB becomes 1.76 percentage

points more negative in the first two years after the crisis; this is statistically significant at the 1

percent level. In the third and fourth years after the crisis, the CAPB becomes less negative by




                                                                                                        20
0.87 percentage points of potential GDP, a fiscal tightening that is significant at the 5 percent

confidence level.

        Panels 5 and 6 decompose the government's net borrowing and lending into revenues and

expenditures, respectively. The t-tests show that while government revenues fell during the East

Asian crisis they had increased significantly by 2002 for the crisis countries and fallen although

not statistically significantly for the other East Asian countries. For the GIIPS, revenues fell in

the initial aftermath of the crisis but rose by on average 1.48% of GDP. For the European core,

revenues as a fraction of GDP appear to have remained remarkably stable. Panel 6 shows that the

bulk of the adjustment in the fiscal balance for the GIIPS following 2010 has been in the form of

government expenditure cuts. Government expenditures rose by 3.3% during the crisis year and

by a further 5.6% in the two years following the crisis and then fell by 3.72% after 2010. The fall

in expenditures (3.72%) and rise in revenues (1.48%) accounts for the 5.2% consolidation in the

fiscal balance for the GIIPS in Panel 3. T-tests show a similar pattern of rising government

expenditures to cuts following 2010 for the core European countries.

        Table 2 presents t-tests of means for the GIIPS relative to East Asia in event time. These

statistics therefore represent cross-group comparisons of means by time period. The t-tests show

that in event time difference in debt-to-GDP ratio for the GIIPS relative to East Asia changes

significantly from Post-Crisis I to Post Crisis II. The fiscal stimulus in the immediate aftermath

of the crisis is significantly different to the East Asian crisis countries at the 1% significance

level. The reversal in fiscal position in the GIIPS relative to East Asia from stimulus to austerity

in the last three columns is also highly statistically significant in event time.

        Notice that the last three columns represent changes across groups across event-time

periods and are therefore a “surrogate difference in difference” estimate of the changes that take




                                                                                                      21
place in the GIIPS relative to the East Asian crisis countries across event-time. We refer to these

as surrogate estimates since the event time periods for the two groups do not coincide in calendar

time—the East Asian crisis took place in 1998 and the global financial crisis in 2008. Therefore

the East Asian crisis countries cannot be used as a control group in a strict or formal difference in

difference sense. However, it is legitimate to present t-tests of means as a simple statistical

comparison across country-groups and as is often done in the labor-literature to make cross-

cohort statistical comparisons. We discuss this issue in greater detail when we present the formal

estimations.

        The general government overall balance in the GIIPS relative to East Asia shows a

statistically significant fiscal stimulus in the GIIPS in the crisis and the first post-crisis period.

After 2010, however, the fiscal stimulus changes to a highly statistically significant fiscal

consolidation of 7.97% of GDP relative to East Asia and relative to the immediate aftermath of

the crisis. A similar and statistically significant pattern of changes is seen in the t-tests of means

for the government's primary fiscal balance, structural balance, government revenues and

expenditures.

        The patterns in Tables 1 and 2 suggest that not only are the within group changes

significant across time for the GIIPS as a group, the reversal in fiscal stance is also highly

significant across groups, i.e., relative to the East Asia crisis countries as a group in event time.

In particular, note the highly significant reversals in sign in the last two columns of Table 2 for

all the government fiscal balance variables. For example, government expenditures in the GIIPS

increase dramatically relative to East Asia and then fall equally dramatically--the difference in

the government expenditure ratio across the two regions changes from a positive 5.72% of GDP

(in the penultimate column of Table 2) to a negative 5.78% of GDP (the last column of Table 2.




                                                                                                         22
        The bottom line is that irrespective of the data series we choose the story remains the

same. Asia tightened government finances early and then loosened as the need for

countercyclical fiscal policy became clear. Europe began with fiscal stimulus but tightened and

pursued fiscal consolidation before economic recovery took hold.



III B. T-Tests of Means: Real GDP Growth and Absorption Indicators

        Table 3 confirms the statistical and economic significance of Figure 3. The average

growth rate of GDP falls by 16.56 percentage points during the Asian Crisis but growth rebounds

quickly. The column labeled (Post I- Crisis) demonstrates that GDP growth two years after the

crisis is 15.25 percentage points higher than during the crisis. A simple t-test of means shows

that this difference is statistically significant at the 1 % level of confidence.

        Turning to the GIIPS we see the opposite pattern. The average pre-crisis growth rate in

the GIIPs was 3.17 percent. During the crisis the average growth rate falls to -0.51 percent.

Unlike Asia, however, growth does not begin to recover in the two years after the crisis. The

contraction actually gets worse. The average growth rate in the GIIPS in the two years after the

crisis is -2.23 percent. The Post I-Crisis column indicates that the 3.68 percentage point decline

in growth is statistically significant at a 5 percent level of confidence. Growth remains negative

in the third and fourth year after the crisis, averaging negative 1.88 percent. For the core

countries of Europe, the change in average growth rates (Post II-Post I) is positive and

significant.

        Turning to unemployment reveals a similar pattern. At the onset of the Asian Crisis

unemployment jumped from an average of 3.09 percent to 5.12 percent, an increase that is

significant at a 10 percent level of confidence. There is no significant increase in the




                                                                                                  23
unemployment rate in the Asian Crisis countries in the two years after the crisis. Prior to the

crisis, the average unemployment rate in the GIIPs was 7.54 percent. On impact, the GIIPs

unemployment rate rises slightly to 7.93 percent but the increase is not statistically significant.

Things change dramatically, however, in the Post-Crisis I period where the average

unemployment rate jumps to 12.19 percent—an increase of 4.25 percentage points that is

statistically significant at the 5 percent confidence level. The unemployment rate rises by

another 4.22 percentage points to an average of 16.41 percent in the Post-Crisis II period. This

increase is also significant at the 5 percent confidence level.

       Investment ratios also fell and recovered in East Asia following the crisis while

investment ratios continue to fall significantly in the post-crisis period for the peripheral

countries of Europe. Consistent with a continuing decline in domestic absorption, current

account deficits in the GIIPS in the pre-crisis and crisis period have shrunk in a statistically

significant manner in the post-crisis period.

       Table 4 shows that the East Asian crisis countries grew faster by 4.2% on average relative

to the GIIPS in the pre-crisis period in event time. The collapse of growth on impact during the

crisis in East Asia was far more drastic and statistically significant relative the GIIPS (a fall of

8.7%). Combined with the evidence in the first column that these countries were growing faster

than the GIIPS by about 4.2 percent, on average, the fall of 8.7% on average during the crisis

represents a change of approximately 12.9% in the gap in growth rates relative to the pre-crisis

period. By the same token, the recovery in East Asia was also very fast and significantly higher,

8.29% on average, relative to the GIIPS in two years after crisis. The difference in the growth

rates in the second phase of the crisis in the GIIPS relative to East Asia narrows a bit in event

time due to the world recession in 2001 (t+3 in event time for East Asia).




                                                                                                       24
        Table 4 shows that the unemployment rate was significantly higher in the GIIPS relative

to East Asia in pre-crisis period in event time. The increase in unemployment on impact during

crisis in GIIPS was lower relative to East Asia and average gap relative to Asia narrows relative

to the average gap in the pre-crisis period. The increase in unemployment in post-crisis period,

however, is significantly higher (7.44%) and the average unemployment gap relative to East Asia

increases by 4.6%. Unemployment continues to rise to on average 11.7% higher than East Asia

in the second post-crisis period and the change relative to first post-crisis period is also

significantly higher--the average gap in unemployment in the GIIPS increases by a further 4.3%

relative to East Asia in event time. The changes in the average gap in unemployment across the

different phases of the crisis are highly statistically significant.

        Consumption ratios are higher in GIIPS relative to East Asia in pre-crisis period. The gap

widens significantly on impact during crisis and then narrows significantly in the post-crisis

period. Turning to investment, investment ratios were significantly higher in East Asia in pre-

crisis period by on average 12.5%. The collapse in investment ratios on impact was very

dramatic during crisis relative to the GIIPS such that gap between investment ratios across the

two regions in event time changes by 14.16% with investment ratios in GIIPS higher by 1.64%

on average relative to East Asia. The trend in gaps reverses dramatically in post-crisis period

with investment in Asia recovering and in the GIIPS collapsing such that the gap is 6% and 4.4%

higher in East Asia relative to the GIIPS in the two phases of the post-crisis period. The changes

in the investment ratio gaps are statistically significant. Note that the gap between investment

ratios in East Asia and the GIIPS does not return to pre-crisis levels suggesting that East Asian

investment ratios do not recover to pre-crisis levels. We explore this finding further in the formal

estimations.




                                                                                                    25
       Savings ratios were higher in East Asia relative to GIIPS in pre-crisis period. The gap

widens on impact during crisis suggesting that the fall in savings ratios is higher in the GIIPS

relative to East Asia on impact during the crisis. The gap in savings ratios narrows a little in the

post-crisis period and remains wider than the pre-crisis period. Finally, current account deficits

were higher in the GIIPS, on average, relative to East Asia in the pre-crisis period. The gap in

current account balances widens on impact with deficits growing larger in the GIIPS and current

account surpluses in East Asia. This trend reverses in the post-crisis period with deficits falling

dramatically in the GIIPS while East Asia maintains small surpluses on the current account.



IV. Formal Estimations

The formal estimations employ a fixed effects panel specification as follows:

                                1   ∗              1    2   ∗   ,   1    3   ∗   ,   1



       Where       is output growth or the unemployment rate or the output gap in period t.

estimates the impact of a change in the cyclically-adjusted primary balance lagged one period.

controls for a one-period lag of the dependent variable,            ,   , and    measures the impact of

various lagged control variables,       ,     , designed to control for initial conditions such as the

initial debt-to-gdp ratio, the balance on the current account, the level of the fiscal balance,

exchange rates and interest rates.          represents the country-fixed effects and      is the error term.

The specifications are estimated for each group of countries separately and for three different

event-time periods around the crisis episodes.

       We address the challenge of unobserved heterogeneity at the individual or country-level

by incorporating fixed effects into the econometric specifications. However, it is not possible to

control for calendar-time effects which are different across cohorts or in our case crises that



                                                                                                          26
occurred at two different points in calendar time. Since the East Asian crisis and the global

financial crisis did not occur contemporaneously, we cannot directly employ a difference-in-

difference methodology in our formal estimations to estimate the impact of say a change in fiscal

stance on output growth across East Asia and Europe.

       We use these formal estimations to examine whether the qualitative story shown

graphically and via t-tests of means are borne out in the formal estimations. The patterns are

striking. Panels a-c of Table 5 present group-wise regressions for the pre-crisis, crisis and post-

crisis periods. Beginning with the first set of results for the European countries, Column 1a

shows that the lagged structural balance is positively correlated with real GDP growth in the pre-

crisis period. However, Column 2a controls for lagged real GDP growth, we see that the period

of consolidation is associated with a period of positive and significant real GDP growth. In other

words, the results in Column 2a are consistent with a countercyclical fiscal policy stance.

       During the crisis period, 2008-2009, the coefficient on the lagged structural balance in

Column 3a remains positive and statistically significant but once a control for lagged GDP

growth is included the coefficient loses significant (Column 4a). In Column 5a we see a negative

and highly significant coefficient on the change in the lagged structural balance. The coefficient

suggests that the change in fiscal stance from stimulus to austerity had a statistically significant

impact on the decline in real GDP growth in Europe. Moreover, the sign and statistical

significance of this variable remain robust to the inclusion of lagged real GDP growth as a

control. A similar pattern obtains for the peripheral countries of Europe in panel B. Note that the

number of observations comes from just five countries and therefore the robustness of the result

varies when real GDP growth in included as a control.




                                                                                                   27
       Turning to East Asia in Panel C, we see that the contractionary impact of fiscal austerity

is evident on impact during the crisis. However in the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods the effect

of discretionary fiscal policy does not appear statistically significant. Note that these regressions

include all ten Asian countries in the sample. Insufficient numbers of observations precluded a

similar regression exercise limited to the four East Asian countries most badly affected by the

Asian crisis. The results in Panels a-c of Table 5 confirm the simple visual story in Figures 1-4

corroborated by the t-tests of means.

       Our findings are consistent with the argument that the size of the fiscal multiplier may

depend on the state of the economy with significantly larger multipliers during recessions than in

normal times (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012). Factors that could drive the state-dependent

size of the fiscal multiplier include: the prevalence of a zero lower bound that precludes further

monetary easing to counteract fiscal austerity measures; and the response of consumption and

investment to current rather than future income and profits. In the face of contracting aggregate

demand on the consumption and investment front, fiscal austerity measures can have a

significantly higher impact on output.

       Table 6 shows that a cross-country growth regressions using panel data for the East Asian

crisis countries (1980-2012). The regression specification includes country fixed effects. The

first column shows that, on average, real GDP growth is lower by 2.6% when a post-crisis

dummy is included in the growth regression. For the pre-crisis period, the average growth rate of

real GDP is on average 7.3% and the average post-crisis growth rate is 4.7% in the four countries

that experienced the brunt of the East Asian crisis. The evidence therefore suggests that while the

crisis-afflicted economies recovered quickly real GDP growth did not return to the pre-crisis

average. Column (2) shows that on average post-crisis investment ratios are about 8.9% lower




                                                                                                    28
that the pre-crisis average of approximately 35% of GDP. The data suggest that investment ratios

also did not recover to their pre-crisis levels. Taken together the evidence in Column (1) and (2)

suggests that both real GDP growth and investment ratios are significantly lower in the East

Asian crisis countries.

       Disentangling whether the decline in growth and investment represents a new steady state

for the East Asian countries due to convergence and declining marginal returns a la Krugman

(1994) and Young (1994, 1995) or a permanent loss in output lies beyond the scope of this paper.

However, in Column (3) a simple regression of real GDP growth on investment ratios suggests

that for the full sample of data, a 1% increase in the investment-GDP ratio leads to a 0.26%

increase in real GDP growth. Column (5) shows that in the pre-crisis period a 1% increase in the

investment ratio led to a 0.1% increase in real GDP growth while in Column (6) a 1% increase in

the investment ratio leads to a 0.27% increase in real GDP growth. The evidence in Columns 5

and 6 is possible evidence of a higher marginal product of capital or a more efficient use of

capital following the crisis.

       The evidence in Table 6 suggests that investment rates and growth rates in East Asia still

remain below their pre-crisis levels. There are at least two possible explanations for this

observation. One is that these countries have reached the limits of catch up growth and are

settling into a new steady state characterized by investment and growth more akin to the

advanced economy cohort of which they are now a part. An alternative explanation is that

despite the quick change of tack from fiscal consolidation to a stance that allowed the automatic

stabilizers to kick in, the Asian countries suffered permanent output losses. Resolving which of

these hypotheses is correct lies beyond the scope of this paper. But if the Asian Crisis did result

in permanent output losses in spite of attempts to use countercyclical fiscal policy (and other




                                                                                                  29
tools) as a tool of adjustment to cushion the blow of financial crisis and recession then there may

be an important additional lesson here. Deep economic contractions—especially those caused by

financial crises—can have lasting effects. Policy makers would be wise to use all tools at their

disposal—including fiscal policy—to avoid them, even if it means running larger deficits than

they would like in the short to medium term.



V. Conclusion

       A re-examination of the Asian Crisis in light of the slow recovery in Europe following

the 2008 Global Financial Crisis reveals the limitations of the “It’s mostly fiscal”

characterization of the IMF as a wholesale purveyor of austerity. While the Fund initially

pushed for fiscal consolidation during the Asian Crisis, officials in the organization moved to a

more accommodative stance within a year. The story of adjustment in Europe is exactly the

opposite. Europe began with an accommodative stance that turned to fiscal austerity two years

later. Furthermore, the size of the initial adjustments in Asia pale in comparison with the size of

the fiscal consolidation imposed on the GIIPS by the EC, ECB, and the IMF during their

emergency loan agreements. In the European Story, moreover, the Fund has been the voice of

moderation, pushing for fiscal measures rather than targets such as those required under the

European Fiscal Compact.

       While there are many possible explanations for why Asia’s recovery from its crisis has

been more rapid and robust than that of Europe, a leading candidate is the decision by policy

makers in the two regions to adopt very different adjustment strategies. In one case there was

initial fiscal consolidation followed by greater flexibility to allow for automatic stabilizers. In

the other case there was initial fiscal expansion with a quick pivot to fiscal consolidation. The




                                                                                                      30
impact of this quick pivot on output and employment may have been exacerbated by the absence

of other policy levers such as exchange rate flexibility and monetary policy independence.

        That said, the data behave in a manner that would seem to reflect the theory of

countercyclical fiscal policy at work: by running surpluses when times are good governments

can accumulate a stockpile of funding that allows them to spend, stimulate aggregate demand

and cushion the blow when the economy is hit with a negative shock. The initial contraction in

Asia came about as fiscal policy tightened. Output and employment rebounded as policy became

more expansionary. The moderated fiscal stance in Asia plus the commitment to reform was the

key to the quick recovery.6 Expansionary policy in Europe in the early days of the financial crisis

helped mitigate the real economic impact. The switch to fiscal consolidation seems to have

contributed to the onset of a double dip.

        It is also worthwhile noting that the IMF’s emphasis on structural reforms in Europe has

been less aggressive than its stance on reforms in Asia. The reforms that were formally part of

the agreements in Europe appear to have been less deep and extensive, particularly those

addressing critical bottlenecks such as product market, labor market and banking sector reforms.7



6
  Summary of structural reforms during Asian Crisis on page 21:
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/wp98128.pdf
7
  An IMF review of the progress to date under the new Greek program noted that Greece’s fiscal and external
imbalances are improving, but its substantial economic contraction has continued. The IMF found that the structural
transformation of economy is proceeding at a slow place outside of the labor market, “…and this is making Greece’s
adjustment more costly.” There was agreement with the Greek authorities that “…structural reforms to date had
been uneven at best, and that a reinvigoration of the reform agenda would be critical to boost potential growth.”
The review cited a lack of movement in deregulating product markets by removing barriers to entry. The
privatization of state-owned assets was another area of major concern, since the targets that had been set “…have
been missed by a wide margin”, in part because of political resistance. The IMF acknowledged that the reform of
Greek labor markets had been initiated, but called for further measures, such as the implementation of a new
minimum wage system. The liberalization of entry to regulated professions also needed to be advanced.
A recent IMF review of Portugal’s record in the program found that structural reforms have been advanced, and
gave these efforts some of the credit for the decline in Portuguese government bond yields. The government has
moved to tackle excessive regulatory procedures, and adapt wage bargaining to allow differences in wages across
sectors. A number of judicial reforms are also underway. But the IMF’s staff worried that “…it remains unclear
whether reforms to date are sufficient to address the large external competitiveness gap or will engender an
adequately strong supply response to avoid a prolonged demand-driven slump.



                                                                                                                31
       When financial markets lose confidence in the policies of a nation, it may have no choice

but to embrace tough measures—including fiscal austerity—to regain access to international

capital markets and put public finances back on a sustainable trajectory. While the long-run

benefits of austerity may outweigh the short-run costs for a small country that is cut off from

world capital markets, this may not be the case for a set of large, systemically important

countries such as the European Union or the United States. In this context, the circumstances

under which the benefits of austerity outweigh the costs and the optimal speed of fiscal

adjustment are not absolute. While cold-turkey deficit reduction may be the optimal strategy for

balancing the budget in some circumstances, on other occasions a gradual path toward

eliminating the deficit may actually constitute the disciplined course of action. Indeed, the facts

uncovered in this paper suggest that discipline in the GIIPS does not mean fiscal austerity but

rather a commitment to countercyclical fiscal policy coupled with an unwavering commitment to

structural reforms that have the capacity to increase productivity.




                                                                                                  32
References
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberti Perotti. 1995. Fiscal Expansions and Adjustments in OECD
       Economies. Economic Policy 10 (21): 207–47.

Alesina, Alberto, and Silvia Ardagna. 2010. Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes versus
       Spending. In Tax Policy and the Economy, edited by Jeffrey R. Brown, vol. 24. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, pp.35–68.

Auerbach, Alan., & Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2012). Fiscal multipliers in recession and expansion.
      In Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis. University of Chicago Press.

Ball, Laurence (1994). "What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?" NBER Chapter in: Monetary
       Policy, N. Gregory Mankiw, ed., pp. 155-193, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Blanchard, Olivier and Daniel Leigh (2013). “Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers”
      IMF Working Paper WP/13/1.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, André Meier and Gernot J. Müller, 2012. “What Determines Government
       Spending Multipliers? ” Economic Policy, vol. 27(72), pages 521-565, October.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer, 1987, Macroeconomics, McGraw-Hill, New York,
      1990, Chapter 12.

Fedelino, Annalisa, Anna Ivanova, and Mark A. Horton (2009). Computing cyclically-adjusted
       balances and automatic stabilizers. International Monetary Fund.

Stanley Fischer, “The Asian Crisis, the IMF, and the Japanese Economy”April 8, 1998:
       http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/1998/040898.HTM:

Antonio Fatás and Ilian Mihov (2003).The Case for Restricting Fiscal Policy Discretion. The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4), pp. 1419-1447.

Frankel, Jeffrey (2002). “Fourteen Suggested Questions to be Investigated in the IMF’s
       Handling of Capital Account Crises with Specific Examples in Korea, Indonesia, and
       Brazil” A Report to the Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) of the International
       Monetary Fund.

Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori (2011). “Expansionary Austerity: New
       International Evidence.” IMF Working Paper 11/158.

Henry, Peter Blair, and Conrad Miller (2009). "Institutions versus Policies: A Tale of Two
       Islands." The American Economic Review, 99 (2), pp. 261-267.

Kochhar, Kalpana, Prakash Loungani, and Mark R. Stone (1998). The East Asian crisis:
      Macroeconomic developments and policy lessons. Vol. 98, International Monetary Fund.

Krugman, Paul (1994). "The Myth of Asia's Miracle." Foreign Affairs, pp. 62-78.



                                                                                              33
Krugman, Paul (2001). "Analytical afterthoughts on the Asian crisis." Economic Theory,
     Dynamics and Markets. Springer US, pp. 243-255.

Lane, Timonthy, Atish Ghosh, Javier Hamann, Steven Phillips, Marianne Schulze-Ghattas, and
       Tsidi Tsikata (1999). “IMF-Supported Programs in Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand A
       Preliminary Assessment” IMF Occasional Paper 178.
Adam Posen, 2010. “Fiscal Austerity Lessons from the South East Asian Crisis-Don’t Do It.”
      Blog post: http://mostlyeconomics.wordpress.com/2010/07/19/fiscal-austerity-lessons-
      from-south-east-asian-crisis-dont-do-it/

Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey D. Sachs (2000). "The onset of the East Asian financial crisis."
       Currency crises. University of Chicago Press, pp. 105-162.

Stephen Roach (2012). “Asia’s Take on Austerity.” Blog post:
       http://www.projectsyndicate.org/commentary/asia-s-take-on-austerity

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. "Does monetary policy matter? A new test in the
      spirit of Friedman and Schwartz." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Volume 4. MIT
      Press, 1989. 121-184.

Sargent, Thomas J. 1982. The ends of four big inflations. In Inflation: Causes and Effects, ed.
       Hall. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jordà, Oscar and Alan M. Taylor (2013). "The Time for Austerity: Estimating the Average
       Treatment Effect of Fiscal Policy," NBER Working Papers 19414, National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Inc.

International Monetary Fund (2013). Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal
        Consolidation, Chapter 3, World Economic Outlook, Fall 2013.
Young, Alwyn (1994). "Lessons from the East Asian NICs: a contrarian view." European
      Economic Review 38, 3, pp. 964-973.

Young, Alwyn (1995). "The tyranny of numbers: confronting the statistical realities of the East
      Asian growth experience." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 3, pp. 641-680.




                                                                                                  34
Figure 1. Growth in Asia following the Asian financial crisis rebounds more quickly than growth
in the European Periphery countries following the 2008 Financial Crisis

                                       Figure 1: Real GDP Growth
            10
            5                         Group Average in Event Time
         Percent
            0
            -5
            -10




                   -4            -2                 0                   2             4
                                               event_time1

                                        East Asian Crisis               GIIPS


  Figure 2. Unemployment in Asia following the Asian financial crisis rises less rapidly than it
          does in the European Periphery countries following the 2008 Financial Crisis

                                      Figure 2: Unemployment Rate
                                          Group Average in Event Time
            20
            15
         Percent
           10
            5
            0




                   -4            -2                 0                   2             4
                                                Event Time

                                        East Asian Crisis               GIIPS




                                                                                               35
Figure 3. Policy Makers in Asia and Europe adopted very different approaches to fiscal policy
following their financial crises.

                                        Figure 3a: Cyclically Adjusted Primary Balance
                     0                               Group Averages in Event Time
         % of potential GDP (Yp)
                  -5 -10




                                   -4         -2               0                    2       4
                                                           Event Time

                                                   East Asian Crisis                GIIPS



                                        Figure 3b: Primary Fiscal Balance in Event Time
                                                     Group Average in Event Time
                     5
                     0
         % of GDP
            -5       -10
                     -15




                                   -4         -2               0                    2       4
                                                           Event Time

                                                   East Asian Crisis                GIIPS




                                                                                                36
Figure 4: Exchange Rates Decline Significantly in East Asia compared to the Relative Stability
of the Euro.

                             Figure 4: Nominal Effective Exchange Rate Index
                                      Group Average in Event Time, 2005=100
          200
          180
          160
          140
          120
          100
          80




                 -4              -2                  0                         2                 4
                                                event_time1

                                        East Asian Crisis                     GIIPS


Figure 5: Unit Labor Cost Increases have Outpaced Labor Productivity Growth in the European
Periphery

                         Figure 5: Unit Labor Costs & Labor Productivity Index
                                               (GIIPS, 2005=100)
          120
          100
          80
          60
          40
          20
          0




                2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
                                              year

                         Average Unit Labor Costs                   Average Labor Productivity




                                                                                                     37
                                     Table 1: T‐Tests of Means: Debt and Deficits
                                         By Country‐Group in Crisis Event Time
                                  Panel 1: General government gross debt (% of GDP)
Averages            Pre‐Crisis    Crisis     Post‐Crisis I Post‐Crisis II                     Changes
                                                                                                Post I‐ Post II‐
                    (t‐4, t‐1)     (t=0)     (t+1, t+2)     (t+3,t+4)              Crisis‐Pre
                                                                                                Crisis   Post I
East Asian Crisis    25.65        33.96        51.62          47.78                   8.32      17.66    ‐3.85
GIIPS                67.82        74.92        95.68         119.35                  7.10*    20.75*** 23.67***
East Asia‐other      46.21        47.35        50.22          51.92                   1.14      2.87*   1.70***
Europe‐core           51.2        52.68        60.39          64.74                   1.48     7.71*** 4.35***



                  Panel 2: Government Fiscal Balance Inclusive of Net Interest Payments (% of GDP)
Averages           Pre‐Crisis   Crisis    Post‐Crisis I Post‐Crisis II                         Changes
                                                                                                 Post I‐    Post II‐
                    (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)     (t+1, t+2)      (t+3,t+4)               Crisis‐Pre
                                                                                                 Crisis      Post I
East Asian Crisis      4.09      2.04         ‐1.15          ‐2.97                   ‐2.05        ‐3.19      ‐1.82*
GIIPS                  0.63     ‐2.58         ‐8.88          ‐2.73                  ‐3.21*      ‐6.30**     6.15**
East Asia‐other        3.97     ‐0.44          1.2           ‐0.51                   ‐4.41        1.64       ‐1.70*
Europe‐core            1.29      1.37         ‐2.98          ‐1.72                    0.08     ‐4.35***     1.26***



                                 Panel 3: Government Primary Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)
Averages            Pre‐Crisis     Crisis    Post‐Crisis I Post‐Crisis II                       Changes
                                                                                                  Post I‐   Post II‐
                    (t‐4, t‐1)     (t=0)     (t+1, t+2)     (t+3,t+4)              Crisis‐Pre
                                                                                                  Crisis     Post I
East Asian Crisis      1.56       ‐1.88         ‐1.84         ‐1.84                   ‐3.44**      0.04         0
GIIPS                  ‐2.3       ‐5.55        ‐12.14         ‐6.94                    ‐3.26*    ‐6.58**     5.20**
East Asia‐other       ‐0.12       ‐3.01         ‐2.22         ‐4.04                    ‐2.89*      0.79     ‐1.81**
Europe‐core           ‐0.09       0.26          ‐4.23         ‐2.99                     0.35    ‐4.49***    1.24***




                                                                                                                       38
                             Panel 4: Government Structural Balance (% of Potential GDP)
                    Pre‐Crisis   Crisis    Post‐Crisis I Post‐Crisis II                        Changes
                                                                                                Post I‐   Post II‐
                    (t‐4, t‐1)    (t=0)     (t+1, t+2)     (t+3,t+4)              Crisis‐Pre
                                                                                                 Crisis    Post I
East Asian Crisis     0.16        0.57        0.71           0.76                     0.41        0.14      0.05
GIIPS                 ‐4.72       ‐7.93       ‐9.26          ‐5.42                  ‐3.21*       ‐1.33    3.84**
East Asia‐other       ‐0.01       ‐0.05       ‐0.05          ‐0.06                 ‐0.05***         0     ‐0.02**
Europe‐core           ‐0.61       ‐0.84       ‐2.59          ‐1.72                   ‐0.23     ‐1.76***   0.87**



                                 Panel 5: General Government Revenues (% of GDP)
Averages            Pre‐Crisis   Crisis    Post‐Crisis I Post‐Crisis II                        Changes
                                                                                                Post I‐   Post II‐
                    (t‐4, t‐1)    (t=0)     (t+1, t+2)     (t+3,t+4)              Crisis‐Pre
                                                                                                Crisis     Post I
East Asian Crisis    20.73       19.27        19.16         21.23                      ‐1.46     ‐0.11    2.07**
GIIPS                39.97       40.02        39.01         40.49                       0.05   ‐1.01**    1.48**
East Asia‐other      20.63       19.19        19.19         17.96                     ‐1.44*       0       ‐1.24
Europe‐core          47.56       47.51         47.2         47.48                      ‐0.05     ‐0.31      0.28



                                 Panel 6: General Government Expenditure (% of GDP)
Averages            Pre‐Crisis    Crisis    Post‐Crisis I Post‐Crisis II                       Changes
                                                                                                Post I‐    Post II‐
                    (t‐4, t‐1)    (t=0)     (t+1, t+2)     (t+3,t+4)              Crisis‐Pre
                                                                                                Crisis      Post I
East Asian Crisis     19.17      21.15         21           23.06                     1.97       ‐0.15      2.06*
GIIPS                 42.27      45.57        51.15         47.43                     3.30*     5.57*      ‐3.72*
East Asia‐other       20.75      22.2         21.42         21.99                     1.45*      ‐0.78       0.58
Europe‐core           47.65      47.26        51.43         50.47                      ‐0.4    4.17***    ‐0.96***




                                                                                                                      39
                                        Table 2: T‐Tests of Means: Debt and Deficits
                                         GIIPS versus East Asia in Crisis Event Time
                                                          Post‐Crisis Post‐Crisis
                                    Pre‐Crisis   Crisis        I           II                       Changes
                                                                                                     Post I‐   Post II‐
                                    (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)    (t+1, t+2) (t+3,t+4)         Crisis‐Pre    Crisis     Post I
                                        Average Difference (GIIPS‐East Asia)
General government gross debt (%
of GDP)                              42.17       40.96      44.05      71.57             ‐1.21       3.09      27.52***
Government Overal Fiscal Balance
(% of GDP)                            ‐3.46      ‐4.62      ‐7.72      0.25              ‐1.15       ‐3.10*    7.97***
Government primary fiscal balance
(% of GDP)                            ‐3.86      ‐3.68     ‐10.30      ‐5.10             0.18       ‐6.62**     5.20**
Government Structural Balance (%
of Potential GDP)                     ‐4.88      ‐8.50      ‐9.97      ‐6.18            ‐3.62**      ‐1.47      3.78**
General Government Revenues (%
of GDP)                              19.24       20.75      19.85      19.27             1.51*      ‐0.90**     ‐0.58
General Government Expenditure
(% of GDP)                           23.10       24.43      30.15      24.37             1.33       5.72**     ‐5.78**




                                                                                                                          40
                                     Table 3: T‐Tests of Means: Absorption Indicators
                                             By Country‐Group in Event Time
                                               Panel 1: Real GDP Growth (%)
                                          Averages
                    Pre‐Crisis   Crisis    Post‐Crisis I     Post‐Crisis II                       Changes
                    (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)       (t+1, t+2)       (t+3,t+4)           Crisis‐Pre   Post I‐Crisis   Post II‐Post I
East Asian Crisis      7.38      ‐9.18          6.07             4.08             ‐16.56***     15.25***          ‐1.99
GIIPS                  3.17      ‐0.51         ‐2.23            ‐1.88               ‐3.68**      ‐1.72**           0.35
East Asia‐other        6.90       1.42          6.14             3.45               ‐5.49**      4.72**          ‐2.69**
Europe‐core            3.18       0.35         ‐1.02             1.17              ‐2.83***     ‐1.36***         2.19***



                                            Panel 2: Unemployment Rate (% )
                                          Averages
                    Pre‐Crisis   Crisis    Post‐Crisis I  Post‐Crisis II                         Changes
                    (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)      (t+1, t+2)      (t+3,t+4)             Crisis‐Pre   Post I‐Crisis   Post II‐Post I
East Asian Crisis      3.09      5.12          4.75           4.67                  2.03*         ‐0.37            ‐0.08
GIIPS                  7.54      7.93         12.19           16.41                  0.39        4.25**          4.22**
East Asia‐other        3.67      4.61          4.97           5.85                 0.94**        0.36**          0.88**
Europe‐core            6.57      5.52          7.08           6.69                ‐1.04***      1.56***           ‐0.39*



                                          Panel 3: Consumption Ratio (% of GDP)
                                          Averages
                    Pre‐Crisis   Crisis    Post‐Crisis I  Post‐Crisis II                         Changes
                    (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)      (t+1, t+2)      (t+3,t+4)             Crisis‐Pre   Post I‐Crisis   Post II‐Post I
East Asian Crisis     53.27      53.45        55.08           56.13                  0.18         1.62*            1.06
GIIPS                 59.44      61.22        60.99           61.13                  1.78         ‐0.24            0.14
East Asia‐other       55.95      56.78        56.93           58.01                  0.84         0.15             1.08
Europe‐core           51.31      50.36         51.8           51.58                ‐0.95**      1.44***           ‐0.22




                                                                                                                                41
                                          Panel 4: Investment Ratio (% of GDP)
                                          Averages
                    Pre‐Crisis   Crisis    Post‐Crisis I   Post‐Crisis II                         Changes
                    (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)      (t+1, t+2)      (t+3,t+4)              Crisis‐Pre   Post I‐Crisis   Post II‐Post I
East Asian Crisis     37.47      22.24        23.21           24.92                ‐15.23***        0.97            1.72
GIIPS                 24.95      23.88        18.68           16.00                   ‐1.07      ‐5.20***        ‐2.68***
East Asia‐other       30.88      28.23        27.24           25.43                 ‐2.65***       ‐0.99           ‐1.81
Europe‐core           20.34      21.09        18.12           19.35                  0.76**      ‐2.98***         1.23***



                                      Panel 5: National Gross Savings Rate (% of GDP )
                                          Averages
                    Pre‐Crisis   Crisis     Post‐Crisis I    Post‐Crisis II                       Changes
                    (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)       (t+1, t+2)        (t+3,t+4)           Crisis‐Pre   Post I‐Crisis   Post II‐Post I
East Asian Crisis     33.28      32.69         30.63             29.32                 ‐0.60      ‐2.05**          ‐1.31
GIIPS                 18.58      14.72         12.90             12.82                 ‐3.86     ‐1.83***        ‐0.08***
East Asia‐other       32.26      33.02         30.47             30.18                 0.76        ‐2.55           ‐0.29
Europe‐core           24.52      24.12         21.21             22.30                  ‐0.4     ‐2.91***         1.09**



                                         Panel 6: Current Account Balance (% of GDP)
                                            Averages
                    Pre‐Crisis    Crisis     Post‐Crisis I    Post‐Crisis II                      Changes
                    (t‐4, t‐1)    (t=0)       (t+1, t+2)       (t+3,t+4)           Crisis‐Pre   Post I‐Crisis   Post II‐Post I
East Asian Crisis     ‐0.72       0.92            0.88            0.54                1.64        ‐0.04**          ‐0.34
GIIPS                 ‐8.20      ‐13.48          ‐7.94           ‐4.36              ‐5.28***     5.54***          3.58**
East Asia‐other        1.72       2.28           1.51             1.42                0.56         ‐0.77           ‐0.09
Europe‐core            4.00       2.90            2.80            2.35                 ‐1.1         ‐0.1           ‐0.45




                                                                                                                                 42
                             Table 4: T‐Tests of Means: Absorption Indicators
                                GIIPS versus East Asia in Crisis Event Time
                                            Post‐Crisis Post‐Crisis
                     Pre‐Crisis    Crisis        I          II                               Changes
                                                                                              Post I‐     Post II‐
                     (t‐4, t‐1)   (t=0)    (t+1, t+2) (t+3,t+4)                 Crisis‐Pre    Crisis       Post I
                         Average Difference (GIIPS‐East Asia)                        Difference in Difference
Real GDP Growth
(percent)              ‐4.21      8.67       ‐8.29      ‐5.96                   12.88*** ‐16.96***         2.33*
Unemployment Rate
(percent )             4.45       2.81        7.44      11.74                    ‐1.64**     4.63***      4.30**
Consumption Ratio
(% of GDP)             6.17       7.77        5.91       4.99                     1.60*     ‐1.86***      ‐0.92**
Investment Ratio
(% of GDP)            ‐12.52      1.64       ‐4.53      ‐8.92                   14.16*** ‐6.17***        ‐4.39***
Gross Savings Rate
(% of GDP )           ‐14.70     ‐17.96      ‐17.73     ‐16.51                   ‐3.26**       0.23        1.23*
Current Account
Balance (% of GDP)     ‐7.48     ‐14.40      ‐8.82      ‐4.90                   ‐6.92***     5.58***      3.92**




                                                                                                                     43
Table 5: Changes in the Structural Fiscal Balance and Real GDP Growth
                               Dependent Variable: Real GDP Growth
                                         Panel A: European 15
                               2002-2007                  2008-2009                 2010-2012
                            (1a)       (1b)          (1c)         (1d)       (1e)               (1f)
 Lagged Structural
 Balance (Δ)            0.312***    0.394***    1.576*       0.007       -0.367***      -0.295***
                        (3.22)      (4.23)      (1.98)       (0.01)      (3.76)         (2.91)
 Lagged GDP Growth                  0.397***                 1.115***                   -0.111*
                                    (3.51)                   (5.61)                     (1.85)

 Constant               2.782***    1.809***    -1.082       -4.225***   0.632***       0.568***
                        (23.49)     (6.06)      (1.33)       (5.84)      (3.44)         (3.16)
 Adjusted R-squared     0.05        0.08        0.62         0.49        0.02           0.06
 N                      90          90          30           30          45             45

                                           Panel B: GIIPS
                               2002-2007                 2008-2009                  2010-2012
                            (2a)       (2b)         (2c)         (2d)        (2e)               (2f)
 Lagged Structural
 Balance (Δ)            0.262       0.217       1.562**      0.987*      -0.309*        -0.302*
                        (-1.67)     (1.24)      (3.15)       (2.62)      (2.18)         (2.00)
 Lagged GDP Growth                  -0.139                   0.487*                     -0.054
                                    -0.61                    (2.69)                     -0.32

 Constant               3.062***    3.455***    0.385        -1.273      -1.218**       -1.325**
                        (16.27)     (5.17)      (0.39)       -1.45       (3.19)         (2.53)
 Adjusted R-squared     0.08        -0.11       0.35         0.75        0.02           -0.13
 N                      30          30          10           10          15             15

                                          Panel C: Asia 10
                               1992-1997                 1998-1999                  2000-2007
                            (3a)       (3b)         (3c)         (3d)        (3e)               (3f)
 Lagged Structural
 Balance (Δ)            -0.445      -0.465      -8.119**     -1.62       -0.351         -0.305
                        (1.41)      (1.55)      (3.04)       (1.04)      (1.03)         (0.9)
 Lagged GDP Growth                  0.419**                  -0.861***                  0.156
                                    (2.15)                   (6.30)                     (1.33)

 Constant               7.467***    4.234***    3.039**      2.792***    5.935***       5.049***
                        (26.34)     (2.77)      (2.30)       (4.86)      (23.21)        (7.09)
 Adjusted R-squared     0.2         -0.1        0.04         0.8         0.13           -0.11
 N                      49          49          20           20          80             80
* p <0.1; ** p <0.05; *** p <0.01


                                                                                                   44
             Table 6: The Impact of the East Asian Crisis on Real GDP Growth Rates and Investment Ratios (1980‐2012)
                                                (Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia and Thailand)
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)
                                      Real GDP       Investment       Real GDP      Real GDP       Real GDP       Real GDP
                                       Growth           Ratio          Growth        Growth         Growth         Growth
                                    (Full Sample)   (Full Sample)   (Full Sample) (Full Sample)   (Pre-crisis)   (Post-Crisis)
Post-Crisis Dummy                    -2.557***       -8.923***                      -1.613**
                                       (5.18)          (9.62)                        (2.51)
Investment Ratio                                                      0.263***      0.106**         0.103*         0.267***
                                                                       (0.046)       (2.24)         (1.68)             (3.05)
Constant                              7.309***       34.989***         -2.382       3.606**         3.72*              -2.202
                                       (22.40)         (57.06)         -1.446        (2.14)         (1.72)             -0.96
                                       26.87           92.62             33          16.39           2.82              9.32
Adjusted R-squared                      0.15            0.41            0.18          0.18           0.02              0.09
N                                       128             128             132           128             72                56


Country Fixed Effects                   Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes
* p <0.1; ** p <0.05; *** p <0.01




                                                                                                                                 45
Appendix Table 1: Variable definitions
                   Variable                                                 Definition                                     Data Source
General government gross debt (% of GDP)           General government gross debt                            World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Government Overal Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)        General government primary net lending/borrowing         World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Government primary fiscal balance (% of GDP)       General government net lending/borrowing                 World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Government Structural Balance (% of Potential GDP) General government structural balance                    World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
General Government Revenues (% of GDP)             General government revenue                               World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
General Government Expenditure (% of GDP)          General government total expenditure                     World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Real GDP Growth (percent)                          Gross domestic product, constant prices                  World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Unemployment Rate (percent )                       Unemployment rate (Percent of total labor force)         World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Consumption Ratio (% of GDP)                       Household Final Consumption Expenditure                  International Financial Statistics
Investment Ratio (% of GDP)                        Total investment                                         World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Gross Savings Rate (% of GDP )                     Gross national savings                                   World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)                 Current account balance                                    World Economic Outlook (April 2013)
Labor Producitivity                                Hourly labor productivity, total economy index (2005==100) Eurostat dataset
Unit Labor Costs                                   Unit labor costs, total economy index (2005=100),          Eurostat dataset
Nominal Exchange Rate                              Nominal effective exchange rate index (2005=100)         International Financial Statistics
Inflation (%)                                      Consumer Prices, All Items (2005=100)                    International Financial Statistics
Interest Rate (%)                                  Interest rate, government securities, government bonds   International Financial Statistics




                                                                                                                                                 46
                              Appendix Table 2: Panel A
                                IMF Target       WEO         IMF Target    WEO
                           Original    Revised Actual     Original Revised Actual
Percent of GDP                                Indonesia
                           1997/98    1997/98       1997 1998/99   1998/99     1998

Change in fiscal balance    –0.9        –2.2      -2.41    0.2     –9.2       -1.04
Fiscal balance (levels)      0.3        –0.9      -1.25    0.5     –10.1      -2.29

Change due to economic
environment                 –1.3        –4.2               0.3     –11.1
Exchange rate               –1.4        –3.5               0.2      –6.4
GDP growth                   0.3        –0.5               0.1     –4.0
Oil Price Change            –0.2        –0.2                0       –0.7

Policy changes              0.3         2.7               0.2       1.7
Outlays                      0.2        2.7               0.4       3.8
Social Safety Net             0          0                 0       –1.0
Bank Restructuring          –0.5         0                 0       –1.6
Statutory Revenue Change     0.6         0                –0.2      0.5
Residual (unexplained)       0.2        0.7               –0.2      0.2
Real GDP Growth rate          5         4.6         4.7    3       –12.1    -13.13
Sources: WEO October
2012, Lane et. al (1999)




                                                                               47
                              Appendix Table 2: Panel B
                                   IMF Target       WEO     IMF Target   WEO
                                Original Revised Actual Original Revised Actual
Percent of GDP                                      Korea
                                   1997      1997      1997  1998   1998  1998

Change in fiscal balance           .      –0.3     0.03    0.2     –5.0    -1.35
Fiscal balance (levels)            0       0       2.56    0.2     –5.0     1.21

Change due to economic
environment                         .       .             –0.4     –1.9
Exchange rate                       .       .             –0.3     –0.9
GDP growth                          .       .             –0.1     –1.0
Oil Price Change

Policy changes                      .       .             –0.1     –2.8
Outlays                             .       .              0.1     –1.1
Social Safety Net                   .       .             –0.2     –2.1
Bank Restructuring                  .       .             –0.8     –1.4
Statutory Revenue Change            .       .              0.8      1.8
Residual (unexplained)              .       .              0.7     –0.4
Real GDP Growth rate                       5.5   5.77      2.5     –7.0   -5.71
Sources: WEO October 2012, Lane
et. al (1999)




                                                                            48
                              Appendix Table 2: Panel C
                                    IMF Target      WEO       IMF Target   WEO
                                 Original Revised Actual Original Revised Actual
Percent of GDP                                     Thailand
                                 1996/97 1996/97      1997 1997/98 1997/98  1998

Change in fiscal balance          –3.3     –4.0    -4.43   1.0     –3.5    -4.61
Fiscal balance (levels)           –1.1     –1.6    -1.68   –0.1    –5.1    -6.29

Change due to economic
environment                       –1.1     –0.3            –0.9    –3.1
Exchange rate                     –0.2     –0.2            –0.9    –2.0
GDP growth                        –1.0     –0.1             0      –0.9
Oil Price Change

Policy changes                    –1.2     –2.6            1.9     –0.6
Outlays                           –0.6     –1.9             1.8     2.6
Social Safety Net                 –0.6      0                0     –0.6
Bank Restructuring                  0      –0.7            –1.1    –2.0
Statutory Revenue Change            0       0               1.2    –0.7
Residual (unexplained)            –1.0     –1.1              0      0.1
Real GDP Growth rate               2.5     –0.4    -1.37   3.5     –5.0   -10.51
Sources: WEO October 2012, Lane
et. al (1999)




                                                                             49
Appendix 3: Crisis Timeline in the European Periphery and East Asia

Greece
10/19/2009- Socialist government reveals that Greece has been greatly under reporting their debt
level, doubling the estimate of the previous government to 12% of GDP
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/greek-debt-crisis-timeline).
12/14/2009- Greece announces plans to reduce deficit by 4% in next year and pledges to bring
the deficit to 3% by the end of the 4 year term
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/14/greece-unveils-reforms-to-public-finances).
3/4/2010- Greece announces austerity plan, increase in VAT and cigarette/alcohol tax as well as
freeze on pensions and cap on civil service pay
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/greek-debt-crisis-timeline).
5/1/2010- Greece implements austerity budget in order to receive loan package
(http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/survey/so/2010/car050210a.htm).
7/7/2010- Greek parliament passes pension reform as required by IMF/EU deal and raises
women's retirement age to 65
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/greek-debt-crisis-timeline).
6/29/2011- Greek parliament passes second austerity bill cutting spending and increasing taxes
as required by EU loan program
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/greek-debt-crisis-timeline).
12/14/2011- IMF says Greek reforms are running behind schedule
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/greek-debt-crisis-timeline).
6/24/2011- European leaders agree to new loan program for Greece in return for Euro 28bn in
cuts and tax raises plus a Euro 50bn privatization program
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/24/greece-eu-bailout-david-cameron).
9/11/2011- Greece announces property tax increases to stave off the denial of a new round of
loans (http://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/11/greece-emergency-property-tax).
9/21/2011- Greece announces further austerity measures in response to demands from the Troika
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/21/greece-to-cut-more-jobs-and-spending).
1/28/2012- German government insists more on more austerity measures as precondition for
continuing loans to Greece
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/greek-debt-crisis-timeline).
2/12/2012- Greece announces further austerity plans in order to receive another round of loans
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/12/greece-austerity-cuts-euro-bailout).
7/24/2012- Troika officials claim that Greece's austerity measures have not been carried out
under good faith continued pressure by lending countries to implement austerity in debtor
countries (http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/24/greek-exit-from-euro-fears-
heighten).
9/19/2012- Greece begins plans to sell off public property to shrink deficit
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/19/debt-ridden-greece-firesale).




                                                                                              50
Spain
2/5/2010- Spain plans to cut deficit to 3% by 2013 to qualm market fears that it is the next
Greece (http://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/05/spain-bid-calm-turmoil).
9/30/2010- Moody cuts Spain's government debt rating citing concerns about government debt
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/30/spain-loses-top-credit-rating).
8/26/2011- Spanish Government announces it will add Balanced Budget Amendment to
Constitution with cap of 60% on public debts except in cases of emergency
(http://www.businessinsider.com/spain-balanced-budget-amendment-2011-8#ixzz1b4rERjoW).
12/19/2011- Spain's new government pledges public spending cuts of at least Euro 16.5bn
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/19/spain-prime-minister-spending-cuts).
3/25/2012- Spain's PM announces new budget with Euro 40bn in spending cuts and taxes
increase (http://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/25/eurozone-spain-cuts-mariano-rajoy).
7/11/2012- Spain announces a new round of austerity measures totaling Euro 65bn as a
precondition of receiving a new round of loan program
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/11/mariano-rajoy-spain-65bn-cuts).


Portugal
4/28/2010- In the face of further trouble in Greece and a Spanish debt downgrade, Portugal
announces austerity measures.
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/28/greek-debt-crisis-europe-bailout).


Ireland
11/4/2010- Ireland announces plans to cut Euro 6bn from upcoming budget, double what had
been predicted, includes cuts in social welfare, increases in petrol duties and increases in income
taxes coupled with decreases in tax credits
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/04/ireland-slashes-budget-greek-bailout-fears).
11/29/2010- Ireland announces 4 year austerity plan in order to receive loan program from EU,
IMF, UK, Denmark and Sweden
(http://money.cnn.com/2010/11/28/news/international/ireland_bailout/index.htm).
12/5/2011- Ireland announces austerity measures along with Greece and Italy
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/05/cuts-tax-rises-ireland-italy).
12/5/2012- Ireland implements a further Euro 2.5bn austerity plan mainly with new property tax
and cut in child benefits
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/05/ireland-austerity-budget).

Italy
9/14/2011- Italy votes to adopt a Euro 54bn austerity plan with aims to eliminate fiscal deficit by
2013, details include cutting spending, delaying public pension payouts, raising VAT and
implementing a new wealth tax
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2011/sep/14/french-banks-downgraded-europe-debt-
crisis).
12/4/2011- Italy announces another austerity plan with taxes increases and spending cuts totaling
Euro 30bn
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/04/austerity-italy-minister-tears).




                                                                                                 51
General European Union
7/21/2011- European Council agrees to increase fiscal consolidation in Euro Area, member states
(except those under a loan program) are required to reduce their deficits below 3% by 2013
(http://www.european-council.europa.eu/home-page/highlights/a-common-response-to-the-
crisis-situation.aspx?lang=en).
12/9/2011- EC (with UK not joining) agree on intergovernmental treaty to place strict caps on
government spending and borrowing with penalties for violators, will take effect Jan 1 2013 if 12
members have approved the treaty
(http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/12/09/eurozone-idUSL5E7N900120111209).
5/11/2012- EC announces new outlook for Eurozone further austerity measures are
recommended to keep members in compliance with 3% deficit limit previously laid out
(http://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/may/11/more-austerity-unemployment-europe).


East Asian Crisis IMF program date announcements

Thailand:
8/1997‐ IMF approves financial aid package
(http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/ib/2000/062300.htm#box1)

Indonesia:
11/1997‐ IMF announces financial aid package
(http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/op/op178/op178.pdf Box 1.2 page 4)

South Korea:
12/1997‐ IMF announces 3 year financial program
((http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/op/op178/op178.pdf Box 1.3 page 6)

Malaysia:
No program implemented by the IMF




                                                                                              52
