                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CHINA’S REGIONAL AND BILATERAL TRADE AGREEMENTS

                                            Chunding Li
                                             Jing Wang
                                           John Whalley

                                       Working Paper 19853
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19853


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2014




This paper has been prepared for the Palgrave Handbook of China’s Transformation to be edited by
David Greenaway, Shujie Yao and Chang Liu. We are grateful to the Ontario Research Fund for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Chunding Li, Jing Wang, and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
China’s Regional and Bilateral Trade Agreements
Chunding Li, Jing Wang, and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 19853
January 2014
JEL No. F15,F60

                                             ABSTRACT

China has been increasingly active on the regional trade agreement front over since WTO Accession
occurred in 2001. These agreements, unlike the US and EU cases, follow no template form of agreement
but vary substantially one among the others and are in part an attempt to customize agreements to
partner prior agreements. There are presently 12 concluded agreements, 6 under negotiation, and four
others under consideration. These concluded are in the main with smaller countries. Those in prospect
are with major trading areas (US, Japan, Korea, and India). All are driven in part by China’s needs
for export access to fuel continuing export lead growth, but other elements enter including using regional
agreements to offset unwelcome elements of multilateral arrangements (such as the non-market economy
labelling), and attempting to put in place via RTA building blocks an Asian trading hub. Outstanding
issues not centrally addressed by these agreements include anti-dumping duties, and investment and
competition issues.


Chunding Li                                         John Whalley
Institute of World Economics and Politics           Department of Economics
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences                  Social Science Centre
No.5 Jianguomenneidajie                             University of Western Ontario
Beijing, PRC                                        London, ON N6A 5C2
Postcode: 100732                                    CANADA
chundingli@gmail.com                                and NBER
                                                    jwhalley@uwo.ca
Jing Wang
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
1151 Richmond St.
London, ON, N6A 5C2
CANADA
wangj.uwo@gmail.com
1. Introduction

    In 2001 China acceded to the WTO driven in large part by the view that

integration into the world economy was central to China’s development ambitions in

helping provide improved access to key export markets. There has since been

considerable debate over whether the terms of WTO accession provided much by way

of concrete improvement in access commitments by trading partners beyond the

technical firming up of MFN by trading partners which some have argued that China

already defacto enjoyed. Instead, the claim is often made that the more important

impact of WTO accession was in terms of underpinning domestic market oriented

reforms and establishing clearer rules of law internationally which proved key in

fueling large increase in foreign direct investment which, in turn, fueled growth in

both GDP and exports.

    But China’s efforts at international economic diplomacy have not stopped at

WTO accession, and since accession China has been increasingly active in its pursuit

of regional and bilateral trade agreements. Since 2001 China has concluded

agreements with 12 different entities (both countries and groups of countries), has 6

other under negotiation, and 4 under consideration. While that is a similar picture to

elsewhere in Asia (Japan, Korea, for example), the picture in the Chinese case is of

initial agreements focusing on local (Hong Kong) or smaller entities (Iceland, for

example) that were easier to negotiate, before moving to larger and more

consequential agreements (with ASEAN, for instance). Agreements now under

consideration emphasize large country arrangements and are more important for
                                          3
China. These include a possible China-US FTA, possible participation in the Trans

Pacific Partnership negotiation with 12 other Pacific countries, a bilateral agreement

with India, and a trilateral China-Japan-Korea agreement.

    China is not alone in pursuing a network of bilateral trade agreements. But China,

more than any other larger economy reflects the need to attempt to enhance export

access in this way. While export growth which has been falling since the financial

crisis and in May 2013 turned negative, given export oriented growth is still the norm,

access driven negotiation and bilateralism logically follow. In what following we

argue not only that this strategy is now poised to enter a new stage of negotiation with

large partners (using TPP, India), but also that China could benefit from a clearer

focus on access related problems in such negotiation. Included in the list are

anti-dumping duties, which we discuss in more detail, and where China faces

continuing problems.


2. China’s Regional and Bilateral Trade Strategy

    China clearly sees both Regional and Bilateral Trade Agreements (RTAs) as an

increasingly key element of its integration into the global economy, a broader strategy

which still underpins her overall growth strategy. The current focus of such

agreements is mainly on Asia, and to a further degree the Pacific. The basic idea is to

use RTAs to further open up the economy to the outside world and speed up domestic

reforms. They are seen as strengthening economic cooperation with other economies,

as well as providing a supplement to the WTO based multilateral trading system at a

time when given the post Doha Rounds impasse, major progress in the WTO on
                                           4
access seems unlikely.

    As Table 1 indicates, China has 12 RTA partners (and with 33 separate economies)

with which 11 Agreements have already been signed. These 12 partners are the

Association of Southeast Asian Countries (ASEAN), Pakistan, Chile, New Zealand,

Singapore, Peru, Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, Costa Rica, Iceland, and Switzerland.

Appendix I to the paper itemizes and gives more details on each of these along with

negotiation in progress and in prospect.
                                      Table 1: China’s RTAs
1. Existing RTA                                                         Date Concluded
China-Pakistan                                                          November 2006
China-Chile RTA                                                         November 2005
                                  Bilateral-with Developing Countries
China-Peru FTA                                                          April 2009
China-Costa Rica FTA                                                    April 2010
China-New Zealand FTA                                                   April 2008
China-Singapore FTA                                                     October 2008
                                  Bilateral-with Developed Countries
China-Iceland FTA                                                       April 2013
China-Switzerland FTA                                                   July 2013
China-ASEAN FTA                   Multilateral                          November 2004
CEPA                                                                    March 2003
ECFA                              Domestic FTAs                         June 2010
China Pilot Free-trade Zone                                             September 2013
2. RTAs Under Negotiation                                               Negotiations Started from
China-Australia FTA                                                     May 2005
China-Norway FTA                  Bilateral-with Developed Countries    September 2008
China-South Korea FTA                                                   May 2010
China-GCC FTA                                                           July 2004
China-Japan-South Korea FTA       Multilateral                          August 2013
RCEP                                                                    May 2013
                                                                        Joint Feasibility   Study
3. RTAs Under Consideration
                                                                        Started from
China-India RTA                                                         2003
China-Columbia FTA                Bilateral                             May 2012
China-US FTA                                                            Not Yet
China-TPP FTA                     Multilateral                          Not Yet
   Source: Compiled by authors.

    Most of the existing RTAs are bilateral and most partners are from Asia and

belong to developing countries or country groups. Within the group of existing
                                                  5
agreements, the China-ASEAN FTA, CEPA (Hong Kong | Macro) and ECFA (Taiwan)

are important RTAs since they involve partners with whom there is large trade. Other

RTAs including both developed countries and developing countries are with small

countries. China’s RTAs under negotiation on consideration mainly involve large

partners (US, TPP (12 Trans Pacific Partner countries), RCEP, Japan, Korea and

India).

    Access for Exports

    Since the opening of China to the outside world in 1992 following Deng Xiao

Ping’s Southern tour, exports have grown rapidly from China. Today around 70% of

all goods manufactured in China are exported and manufacturing, while now smaller

than services still accounts for nearly 40% of GDP and a similar proportion of

employment. Since the early 1990’s GDP growth has averaged 10% per year even

with the lowered growth rates since the financial crisis of 2008. Continued export

growth is thus seen as vital to China in order to continue with high GDP growth, and

in recent years export growth which touched 30% a year before the financial crisis has

been in the 3-4% range. With a WTO negotiation structure seemingly not yielding

much by way of improved access, RTAs seem to offer the most fruitful alternative and

hence are being actively embraced by China.

    While China’s regional trade agreements thus far concluded are mainly with

small developing or developed countries, prospective agreements under discussion are

with large countries and China’s RTA strategy is to move from RTA coverage of

perhaps 30% of trade to 70% of trade marking the growing importance of RTAs to

                                          6
China. As such, they clearly reflect the dominant export interest of China in the form

of search for access to foreign markets.

    Domestic Reform

    Another reason China seeks to negotiate RTAs is to continue to use international

disciplines to underpin and support domestic reforms, including enterprise reform,

reform of state owned enterprises, financial sector reform and others reformist

directions. The broad idea is that added competition from abroad in the domestic

market acts as a spur to improved efficiency of domestic production. In addition,

pressures for protectionist and growth slowing policy interventions can be more easily

resisted emphasizing again the need to compete with foreign producers both at home

and abroad. This domestic policy component of trade policy was a key element in

Chinese decision making to join the WTO in 2001, and it continues as a key element

in underpinning China’s RTA strategy.

    Dealing with Issues in the Multilateral System

    Another Chinese objective in RTA negotiation is to use RTAs as a way of

improving on their current treatment multilaterally under the WTO. Two major issues

stand out here. One is China’s labelling under WTO Accession as a non-market

economy. This label, to which China agreed on Accession, has made it both easier to

impose antidumping actions against China, and if imposed to do so at (often much)

higher duty rates. China has thus used a strategy in her RTA negotiation of bilaterally

seeking reclassification as a market economy regionally. This strategy has been

successfully followed in China’s negotiations with New Zealand. Another is the broad

                                           7
area of antidumping duties. Because China’s growth of exports has been so rapid,

domestic producers in importing countries seek protection and antidumping duties are

often the most effective route for them to pursue. These are special trade restrictions

design as to offset alleged unfairness in trade from selling below cost. China is now

subject to around 50% of worldwide dumping actions (many from other developing

countries)1 while WTO disciplines under the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade

(GATT) do little to help China. China seeks relief, and bilateral arrangements (joint

exemptions from dumping and sunset procedures) could help.

     Framing New Trade Rules

     Since the 2008 financial crisis trade there has been much discussion of the

experience of developing countries with current multinational organizations and rule

regimes (World Bank, WTO, IMF). These were framed in the 1940’s and were

designed to deal with wholly different problems from those today’s trading system

focuses on. Some argue they do not fit the modern world economy, and global rules,

including in trade, should be reassessed in light of the difficulties in the WTO Doha

round. These have reflected developing country frustration with what they often see

as a “rich men’s club”. As such, a further objective China has in participation in RTAs

(also including the large country RTAs now being discussed) is to use new RTA

structures to help shape the evolution of future global trade rules and arrangements.


3. Characteristics of the RTA Strategy

1
  See the discussions in Bown (2009), “Self-enforcing Trade: Developing Countries and WTO Dispute
Settlement”, Brookings Institute; Bown (2010), “China's WTO Entry: Antidumping, Safeguards, and Dispute
Settlement”, and Bown (2011) “Taking Stock of Antidumping, Safeguards and Countervailing Duties,
1990–2009”.
                                                    8
    China’s RTA negotiating strategy has been marked by a number of characteristics

which can be seen in the documentation in the Appendix. These include the following.

    Begin Local / Small

    China’s strategy has been framed from an initial situation of no regional

agreements at the time of WTO accession in 2001. China’s strategy was to begin local

and small, in part reflecting the ease of negotiation and also the learning experiences

involved in sequential negotiation. The first RTA was with Hong Kong and Macro in

2003, and the first developed country RTA was with New Zealand in 2008. With the

notable exception of the ASEAN agreement, all of the first 12 China’s RTAs have

been with relatively small trading entities. In this way, it is easier to achieve

precedents in coverage and for later negotiation, as well as pursuing new initiatives.

China’s RTAs in this initial group also show more variation than is true of US or EU

regional agreements. US regional agreements typically offer accelerated tariff

elimination bilaterally in return for what is effectively unilateral service liberalization

by the partner. EU agreements emphasize legal structure and competition law and

have partners progress through a graduation of agreements before achieving a full

FTA. Chinese agreements are in contrast more varied by partners.

    Aim to be Inclusive of Key WTO Members

    By beginning small and local, China’s FTA strategy has implicitly set a goal of

aiming to eventually be inclusive of most key WTO members. The list includes the

US, the EU, and India, all major trading partners of China. A bilateral agreement with

India is the subject of a joint feasibility study, but for now remains blocked by Indian

                                            9
manufacturing interests who fear loss of domestic markets. This strategy has enabled

Chinese negotiations to learn about the negotiating process and also gives China the

strategic benefits in delaying US/EU negotiation bilaterally until other arrangements

are in place. The effective trilateral China/US/EU negotiation which seems likely to

happen in the next few years will also help shape the system of trade rules which will

guide the world economy in the decades to come, and China through its large country

RTAs will have played a major role in this.

    BITs as Separate Treaties

     A further feature of China’s FTAs has been their linkage to bilateral investment

treaties (BITs). There are near 3000 BITs in place today as negotiated bilateral

agreements covering dispute settlement over investment related matters, guarantees

on repatriation of funds for investors, expropriation limits and other matters. These

negotiations typically either predate or follow a full RTA as a separate negotiation and

it has been notable in the Chinese case how this separateness has been the norm.

Currently for the initial China-Japan-Korea RTA negotiation there is a prior tri initial

investment treaty negotiation. BITs negotiations do not typically, however, deal with

the rules governing investment flows, including MFN, and so given China’s interest

now in outward foreign investment a broadening in approach would seem to be in the

Chinese interest.

    Customize RTAs to Partner

    As already noted the Chinese approach to RTAs has not been to adopt a template,

one size fits all, approach to all RTAs. Instead, diversity seems more the norm. This

                                           10
reflects a Chinese negotiating strategy that by fitting into the preferred broad structure

of the partner more can be obtained in the detail of the negotiation. Thus the

China-ASEAN agreement devotes considerable coverage to broad commitments of

cooperation in development in general. These broad political commitments are in

addition to precise and concrete commitments on tariff issues. In the New Zealand

agreement in contrast there is less focus on developmental cooperation and more on

targeted precise commitments, given New Zealand’s developed country status.


4. Some Features of Key Arrangements

     Arrangements in Place

    Among the already negotiated agreements the key RTA agreements are with

ASEAN and with Hong Kong/Macao. The Hong Kong/Macao agreements are notable

in several areas. One is a bilateral agreement to exempt each other from their own

antidumping duty arrangements. This is similar to the bilateral exemption in the

Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relationship RTA. Another is a special

arrangement introduced for Hong Kong service companies in their operations in

mainland Chinese market. The ASEAN agreement is notable in yielding the largest

internal market of 1.7 billion people in one RTA arrangement in the world. At the

same time, however, China and ASEAN have more competition in joint country

markets (EU) than joint bilateral trade, and hence the focus on economic cooperation

mechanisms, in part, for coordinating in third country markets.

    Arrangements to Come

    The arrangements potentially to come for RTAs with the US, with Japan/Korea,
                                            11
with India and with the TPP countries suggest major potential impact on China’s trade

and international arrangements generally. The US has, in recent years, repeatedly

labeled China as a “currency manipulator” and claimed China keeps an artificially

low exchange rate leading to large Chinese trade surpluses. The effective 25%

appreciation of the RMB since 2005 has done much to eliminate the large trade

surplus, but US concerns remain. US objectives in a bilateral RTA would also involve

new rules in trade for state owned enterprises, and heightened enforcement of

intellectual property agreements. The Japan/Korea negotiation may be the most

straight forward in economic terms because the joint focus on economic growth,

especially given China’s trade deficit with Japan, but political frictions between China

and Japan and specially the island dispute threaten to slow the negotiation. India has

seen rapid growth in its trade with China (by a factor of 30 since the mid-90s) and so

the prospects are for a significant RTA, made complex to negotiate by protectionist

pressures on the Indian side. The transpacific partnership situation is one where

Chinese participation is neither assumed nor yet sought from the Chinese side.


5. Possible Impacts of RTAs for China

    How much will China’s RTAs, and especially prospective RTAs, impact on

China’s growth, trade and overall economic performance. By including all of China’s

major trading partners in RTAs and with an average current tariff of 10% to be

reduced to zero the medium term impact of the RTA strategy could be substantial as a

one off increment to trade growth.

    China’s problem remains how to keep elevated growth of trade for perhaps 2
                                           12
decades while China continues to grow. Under this strategy, the one off contribution

of RTAs seems welcome and not inconsequential, but in the long run not the single

solution to growth. Much debate currently surrounds growth strategies in China with

the prevailing view being the need to promote domestic consumption growth to

replace trade growth as the engine of developments. In this sense of helping with the

transition to a new growth strategy, RTAs perhaps take on more significance.

     In terms of overall growth impacts China also faces a situation post the 2008

financial crisis of not being able to continue to rely on infrastructure spending as the

latest growth source to replace trade when growth has slowed. The most rapid

component of China’s trade growth is with other Southern countries (India, Brazil)

and RTAs can have a further positive impact in promoting the most dynamic

components of China’s trade.

     Several researchers have explored various dimensions of China related potential

RTAs. For the China-Japan-Korea FTA, Liu et al (2012) have investigated the

environmental impacts of China-Japan-Korea FTA on China with CGE methodology,

and find that a China-Japan-Korea FTA will lead to a notable environmental impact.

Jin et al (2006) evaluate the economic effects of FTA among China, Japan, and South

Korea on the world economy. Results show that there are strong trade diversion

effects.

     For the ASEAN+3 FTA, Loke (2013) examines the likely industry effects on

China of ASEAN Plus Three (APT), and find that there might be opportunities for

agriculture industries fishery to expand. Some manufacturing industries like textiles

                                           13
and clothing are likely to expand even further. However, motor vehicles may face

challenges given that Japan and Korea are much more developed in this area.

     Siriwardana and Yang (2007) analyzed the impact of the proposed

Australia-China FTA. Their results suggest that both Australia and China will gain by

removing protection on trade bilaterally. The benefits are greater for Australia than

for China. Patricio (2011) has also explored Australia-China FTA effects.

     For the TPP, Li and Whalley (2013) have explored the TPP effects on China and

related other countries, the results reveal that China will be slightly hurt by TPP

initiatives in welfare when China is out, but total production and exports will increase.

If China takes part in TPP, she will significantly gain and increase other TPP

countries’ gain as well. Petri et al (2011) has also investigated the potential effects of

TPP and other Asia FTAs.

     For the China-Pakistan FTA, Shabir and Kazmi (2007) have analyzed the

economic effects of the Pakistan-China FTA, and reveal that this will enhance

interregional trade and export diversification by further deepening cooperation with

China.

     Other literature include Choi (2013) has analyzed the effects of Korea-China

FTA, Tan and Li (2009) explore the impact of China-New Zealand FTA.




                                            14
                     Appendix: China’s RTA Agreements1


1. China’s Existing RTA Agreements

        (1) CEPA (Mainland China with Hong Kong and Macao)
     Mainland China and Hong Kong CEPA (Closer Economic Partnership
Arrangement) was the first Chinese RTA. It was signed on 29 June 2003 and Macao
signed the pact in October 2003.2
     For Trade in goods, Hong Kong continues to apply zero tariffs to all imported
goods of Mainland origin. In the beginning of CEPA enforcement, the Mainland
applied zero tariffs to 273 kinds of the import of goods of Hong Kong origin. Since 1
January 2006, all goods of Hong Kong origin importing into the Mainland enjoy tariff
free treatment, upon application by local manufacturers and upon the CEPA rules of
origin (ROOs) being agreed and met. 3 The two sides undertake that either side will
not apply anti-dumping measures to goods imported and originated from the other
side.
        For trade in services, mainland China issued various liberalization measures
under CEPA which provides Hong Kong service suppliers with preferential access to
the Mainland market. Under CEPA Hong Kong service suppliers receive preferential
access to the Mainland market. The preferential treatment takes various forms,
including allowing wholly-owned operations, relaxing restrictions on equity
shareholding, reducing registered capital requirements, relaxing restrictions over
geographical location and business scope, etc. 4 Since 2004, mainland China has
issued 41 liberalisation measures covering 18 service areas, and this increased to 338
measures by 2013.5 Professional bodies of Hong Kong and the regulatory authorities


1
  The majority of China’s Regional and Bilateral Trade Agreements (RTAs) are labeled as Free Trade Agreements
(FTAs). When discussing individual agreements we keep the label used in the legal texts.
2
  http://www.ipim.gov.mo/en/cepa/topic.html.
3
  http://www.tid.gov.hk/english/cepa/index.html.
4
  http://www.tid.gov.hk/english/cepa/tradeservices/trade_services.html.
5
  http://gaoyan.mofcom.gov.cn/article/speeches/201308/20130800271162.shtml.
                                                        15
in the Mainland have also signed a number of agreements or arrangements on mutual
recognition of professional qualification. 1
         Both sides also agreed to enhance co-operation in various trade and investment
facilitation areas to improve the overall business environment. These includes
Customs Clearance Facilitation; Commodity Inspection and Quarantine, Food Safety,
Quality and Standardization; Cooperation of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
(SMEs); Cooperation in Industries; Electronic Business; Trade and Investment
Promotion; Transparency in Laws and Regulations; Protection of Intellectual Property;
Cooperation on Branding; and Cooperation on Education.2
         The outward direct investment from mainland to Hong Kong in 2012 was 35.6
billion USD, double than it was in 2007. Hong Kong and mainland China are the
largest trading partners for each other, with total trade amounting 341.49 billion USD
in 2012, which is 3 folds larger than as in 2003 (87.44 billion USD). Hong Kong also
keeps the position of the largest source and recipient of investment for mainland.3
        (2) ASEAN-China FTA
        The ASEAN – China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) is a free trade area among the
ten Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
China. The initial Framework Agreement (FA) was signed on 04 November 2002.
The ASEAN–China Free Trade Area is the largest free trade area in terms of
population and third largest in terms of nominal GDP.
        Under the ASEAN – China Trade in Goods Agreement (ACTIGA), Parties
reduced their tariffs for goods listed under the Normal Track 1 (NT1) from 2005-2010
and Normal Track 2 (NT2) from 2010-2012. China allowed ASEAN Member States
to have a list of products that were granted flexibility until 2012 (NT2) for 150 tariff
lines. For the Philippines and Indonesia however, 400 tariff lines were accorded
flexibility. The Sensitive Track under the ACFTA consists of a “Sensitive List” (SL)
and the “Highly Sensitive List” (HSL). The timeframe for SL requires tariffs to be
reduced to 20% in 2012 and shall be subsequently reduced to 0-5% in 2018. For HSL,
1
    http://www.tid.gov.hk/english/cepa/tradeservices/trade_services.html.
2
    http://www.tid.gov.hk/english/cepa/facilitation/summary_invest.html.
3
    http://gaoyan.mofcom.gov.cn/article/speeches/201308/20130800271162.shtml.
                                                          16
tariffs will be reduced to 50% in 2015. With these tariff cuts, the average tariff levels
under the FTA have declined to 4.5%, compared with the MFN rate of 8.1%. In
China’s case, the overall simple ad valorem average for 2009 under the ACFTA is
2.5%, compared with the 9.7% MFN rate.1 The average tariff rate on Chinese goods
sold in ASEAN countries decreased from 12.8% to 0.6% on 1 January 2010 pending
implementation of the free trade area by the remaining ASEAN members. Meanwhile,
the average tariff rate on ASEAN goods sold in China decreased from 9.8% to 0.1%.2
           Under the ASEAN – China Trade in Services Agreement, services and
services suppliers/providers in the region enjoy improved market access and national
treatment in sectors/subsectors where commitments have been made. The Agreement
provides for liberalization of substantial coverage of sectors/subsectors especially in
more than 60 additional subsectors committed by ASEAN Member Countries which
are parties to the GATS/WTO.
           The ASEAN – China Investment Agreement is the third of three main
agreements concluded under the 2002 ASEAN – China Framework Agreement on
Comprehensive Economic Co-operation. This provides an environment that aims to
lead to enhanced investment flows between both sides at a time when ASEAN and
China are both key emerging economies with strong economic prospects. China’s
investment in ASEAN was a cumulative US$6.1 billion up to the end of 2008, while
ASEAN’s investments into China alone totaled US$5.6 billion in 2008.3
        (3) China-Chile FTA
        The China-Chile Free Trade Agreement was signed in November 2005 and
entered into force in October 2006. It includes agreements on goods trade and trade in
services. Under the agreement, China and Chile extended zero duty treatment phase
by phase to cover 97 percent of products in a ten-year time frame. The two countries
also showed willingness to further strengthen exchange and cooperation in areas such
as economy, SMEs, culture, education, science and technology, and environmental
protection.
1
    http://www.dti.gov.ph/dti/index.php?p=688.
2
    http://www.webcitation.org/5mSredK9W.
3
    http://www.dti.gov.ph/dti/index.php?p=688.
                                                 17
        The Supplementary Agreement on Trade in Services under China-Chile FTA
was signed on April 13, 2008. An agreement on investment is under negotiation.
        (4) China-Pakistan FTA
        China and Pakistan started negotiations on a free trade area in April 2005 and
reached a Free Trade Agreement in November 2006, which took effect in July 2007.
China and Pakistan signed an Agreement on Trade in Service on February 21, 2009,
which entered into force since October 10, 2009. The contents of the agreements
include an early harvest program, free trade agreements, trade in services, and
supplementary agreements.
        (5) China-New Zealand FTA
        China-New Zealand FTA is the first comprehensive RTA that China signed, as
well as the first RTA that China signed with a developed country. It was signed April
7, 2008 and entered into force since October 1, 2008. The agreements cover areas of
trade in goods, trade in services and investment.
        Under the agreement, 37% of Chinese exports to New Zealand and 35% of New
Zealand exports to China became tariff free by October 2008. All tariffs on Chinese
exports to New Zealand will be eliminated by 2016, and 96% of New Zealand exports
to China will be tariff free by 2019.1
        For trade in service the NZ-China FTA aims to reduce barriers to trade in
services. New Zealand and China have also agreed to ensure that their domestic
measures affecting trade in services are administered in a reasonable, objective and
impartial manner.2
        On the investment side, both countries have agreed to treat investors and
investments of the other country at least as well as they treat their own investors
('national treatment'), and both countries have also agreed to give Most Favoured
Nation treatment to investors and investors of the other country, except in respect of
fisheries and maritime matters. The FTA contains additional protections for
investments, including: International law standards of fair and equitable treatment;

1
    http://chinafta.govt.nz/1-The-agreement/1-Key-outcomes/1-Goods/index.php.
2
    http://chinafta.govt.nz/1-The-agreement/1-Key-outcomes/2-Services/index.php.
                                                        18
Compensation for losses arising from war, armed conflict or similar situations; and
protection from the funds of an investor being arbitrarily expropriated or
nationalised.1
        (6) China-Singapore FTA
        The China-Singapore Free Trade Agreement (CSFTA) is the first comprehensive
bilateral RTA that China signed with another Asian country, covering trade in goods,
trade in services, rules of origin, trade remedies, sanitary measures, technical barriers
to trade, customs procedures, economic cooperation and dispute settlement, among
others. It was signed on 23 October 2008 and entered into force on 1 January 2009.
        The CSFTA provided preferential coverage for about 95% of Singapore's exports
to China. More than 85% of Singapore exports to China were at zero-tariff upon the
CSFTA's entry into force since 1 January 2009, and an additional 10% became
duty-free on 1 January 2010. The agreement consists of general disciplines governing
trade in services between Singapore and China, and the committed sectors are subject
to market access, national treatment and domestic regulation disciplines.2
        (7) China-Peru FTA
        The China-Peru Free Trade Agreement was signed on April 28, 2009. This is the
first comprehensive FTA China has signed with a Latin American country and aims to
deepen economic and trade cooperation.
        This agreement lead to gradual removal of tariffs on more than 90 percent of
goods ranging from Chinese electronic products and machinery to Peruvian fishmeal
and minerals over 16 years. The two nations also pledged to further open their service
sectors and offer favorable treatment to investors.
        (8) China-Costa Rica FTA
        Costa Rica is China’s second largest trading partner in Central America while
China is the second largest trading partner of Costa Rica. After negotiations for
around one year and half, China and the Costa Rica signed the free trade agreement in
April 2010.
1
    http://chinafta.govt.nz/1-The-agreement/1-Key-outcomes/3-Investment/index.php.
2
    http://www.fta.gov.sg/fta_csfta.asp?hl=27.

                                                       19
        Provisions in the FTA enabled over 60% of the two countries’ products to enter
each other’s markets duty-free immediately, and allowed tariffs to be removed on
another 30 percent of products gradually over the next 5 to 15 years. Under the
agreement, Costa Rica allowed free service trades in 45 sectors including
telecommunications, business services, construction, real estate, distribution,
education, environment services, information technology (IT) services and tourism,
while China opened seven sectors including IT services, real estate, market research,
translation and interpretation, and sports.1
        (9) Mainland and Taiwan ECFA (Economic Cooperation Framework
Agreement)
        The Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) is a preferential
trade agreement between Mainland China and Taiwan (China) which aims to reduce
tariffs and commercial barriers between the two sides. The agreement was signed on
June 29, 2010.
        Under the agreement, Mainland agreed to cut duties on 539 items from Taiwan
valued at $13.8 billion, or about 16 percent of imports from the island in 2009.
Taiwan lowered tariffs on 267 items from Mainland, about 10.5 percent of the
country’s shipments to Taiwan in 2009. Tariffs would be cut over two years in three
stages to zero. Mainland China will also open markets in 11 service sectors such as
banking, securities, insurance, hospitals and accounting, while Taiwan agreed to offer
wider access in seven areas, including banking and movies.2
        (10) China-Iceland FTA
        Iceland is the first developed European country to recognize China as a full
market economy as well as the first European country to negotiate a free trade
agreement with China. The China- Iceland Free Trade Agreement was signed on 15
April 2013. It covers trade in goods and services, rules of origin, trade facilitation,
intellectual property rights, competition and investment. With the entry into force of


1
    http://www.china-briefing.com/news/2011/08/02/china-costa-rica-fta-comes-into-effect.html.
2

http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-09-11/china-taiwan-economic-agreement-to-take-effect-sept-12-to-boost-tr
ade.html.
                                                   20
the FTA, tariffs on most goods are removed. On trade in service, Iceland
commitments are based on its revised offer under the WTO General Agreement on
Trade in Services (GATS) and in recent EFTA FTAs. Commitments are not made in
the area of healthcare and education. China´s undertaking is in line with their revised
offer in the WTO. Certain areas of services will be fully exempted from liberalization,
including public services. The provisions on investment do not go beyond and simply
refer to an already existing bilateral agreement between Iceland and China on the
promotion and reciprocal protection of investments from 1994.1
        (11) China-Switzerland FTA
        China and Switzerland signed a free trade agreement on 6 July 2013, paving the
way for significant reductions in Customs duty rates between both parties that may
commence as early as in the middle of 2014. This further solidifies economic relations
between the two countries as it came only nine months after Hong Kong entered into
a double tax treaty with Switzerland.
        Once the FTA goes into effect, as much as 99.7% of Chinese exports to
Switzerland will be immediately exempted from tariffs, while 84.2% of Swiss exports
to China will eventually receive zero tariffs. The FTA is also expected to facilitate
industrial cooperation between both countries and set new rules in areas
of environment, labor, intellectual property and government procurement2.
        (12) China (Shanghai) Pilot Free-trade Zone
        The China (Shanghai) Pilot Free-Trade Zone is a free-trade zone launched in
Shanghai on September 29, 2013. It is the first free-trade zone launched by the
Chinese government. China (Shanghai) Pilot Free-trade Zone is not a FTA
arrangement between countries, instead it is a Chinese domestic free trade zone, but
we include it here given its potential significance.
        According to the Overall Plan for China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone “the
China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone shall expedite the functional transformation
of government, expand the opening up of service sectors and promote the reform of

1
    http://www.mfa.is/media/fta-kina/China_fact_sheet_enska_15042013_Final.pdf.
2
    See China Daily “China, Switzerland sign free trade agreement”, 2013-07-06.
                                                         21
the foreign investment administrative system, and develop headquarter economy and
new trade forms; shall explore RMB convertibility under capital account items and
opening up of financial services; shall explore to improve Customs' supervision
efficiency; and shall create a framework to support investment and innovation
activities to cultivate an internationalized business environment” (State Council,
2013). SFTA introduces a number of changes to the current regulatory framework for
foreign investments within the Zone including relaxation of certain foreign investment
restrictions within the Zone for 18 service industries spanning six service areas;
introduction of a “Negative List” approach towards foreign investment in the Zone;
simplification of approval requirements for investments by Zone enterprises outside
of China; and facilitation of further financial reform and promotion of new forms of
trading within the Zone.
        After the successful introduction of China (Shanghai) Pilot Free-trade Zone,
some other larger cities in China may also apply for this kind of free trade zone.


2. China’s FTAs under Negotiation

        (1) China-GCC (Gulf Cooperation Council) FTA
       China and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) announced the launch of
China-GCC Free Trade Agreement negotiations in July 2004. The two parties have
reached agreement on the majority of issues concerning trade in goods. Negotiations
on trade in services were also launched. A China-GCC FTA is likely to be concluded
in 2014.
        (2) China-Australia FTA
        China and Australia started negotiations on the establishment of China-Australia
Free Trade Area in May 2005. China aims to use this FTA to not only facilitate trade
and investment cooperation with Australia, but also for the stable development of the
Asian-Pacific region and the liberalization of global trade. Given only a couple of
details to be resolved, there seems a good chance this could be concluded in 2014.1
        (3) China-Norway FTA
1
    See China Daily “Australia-China FTA achievable in 12 months”, 2013-10-11.
                                                        22
        A joint FTA feasibility study on the establishment of China-Norway FTA was
initiated in 2007. The first round of negotiations was held on September 18, 2008.
Relations between China and Norway maintained a sound momentum from 2008 to
2010. But after October 2010, bilateral relations suffered a serious setback due to the
awarding of Nobel Peace Prize. But now, China and Norway are close to the ‘final
stage’ of negotiations for a free-trade agreement1.
        (4) China-South Korea FTA
        Korea and China launched negotiations on a Korea-China FTA in May 2012.
They completed the first-stage negotiations in early September 2013 with a total of
seven rounds of talks, agreeing on the modalities or basic guidelines for the
Sino-Korea FTA. Second-stage negotiations have moved on to discuss which items
that would be liberalized by lowering or removing tariff barriers.
        (5) Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)
        The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) is a proposed Free
Trade Agreement (FTA) between the 10 ASEAN Member countries and its FTA
Partners (Australia, China, India, Japan, Korea and New Zealand). The participants in
the RCEP FTA negotiations have a total population of over 3 billion people and a
share of around 27 per cent of global trade (based on 2012 WTO figures), covering
GDP of around $US21 trillion (2012 IMF figures).2
        RCEP is a significant step in the evolution of trade policy frameworks in East
Asia. RCEP’s history starts as a study group for an FTA between ASEAN, China,
Japan, and Korea (known as ASEAN+3), with a parallel study process for an
ASEAN+6 FTA, which included the ASEAN+3 partners plus Australia, India, and
New Zealand.
        There were two rounds of RCEP negotiations in May 2013 and September 2013
respectively. Three working groups (on Goods, Services and Investment) were
established in the first round. During the second round of negotiation, discussions
continued on a services chapter. In goods, among other things sessions were held on

1
    See Teddy Ng, “China-Norway free trade talks nearing agreement”, South China Morning Post, 2013-11-14.
2
    http://www.mfat.govt.nz/Trade-and-Economic-Relations/2-Trade-Relationships-and-Agreements/RCEP/.
                                                        23
Customs Procedures, Rules of Origin, and initial exchanges on tariff negotiations and
on non-tariff barriers to market access. A third round negotiation will be held in
January 2014 and RCEP is targeted to conclude the negotiations by the end of 2015.
     (6) China-Japan-South Korea FTA
     The China–Japan-South Korea Free Trade Agreement is a proposed free trade
agreement between China, Japan and South Korea. Negotiations on the agreement
were started in 2012. Three rounds of talks were held in 2013.
     In the first two rounds, the three sides discussed key issues such as ways to lower
tariffs and the scope of future negotiations based on terms of reference adopted at the
first round of talks. The second round of negotiation also included working-group
meetings on goods, service and competition along with expert dialogue on intellectual
property rights and e-commerce. The three Asian countries talked about the trilateral
FTA's modality such as how to draft liberalization for goods at the third round of
negotiation. Working group meetings were held to discuss a wide range of topics such
as indications of origin, customs, trade remedy, sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) and
technical barriers to trade (TBT) along with services, investment, competition, general
rules and intellectual property rights. Discussions among experts were on e-commerce,
environment, government procurement and food sectors.


3. FTA Agreements under Consideration

     (1) China-India Regional Trade Agreement
     China and India initiated a Joint Study Group which finalized a report on the
feasibility of a China-India Regional Trading Arrangement (RTA) in October 2007.
The report supports the position that a China-India RTA would benefit each other.
Both sides agreed to explore the possibility of commencing discussions on a RTA.
     In the meanwhile, economic relation between China and India have developed in
the past decade. As two main emerging countries, China and India have same benefit,
and they are near each other in geography (Antkiewicz and Whalley, 2005). These
factors suggust that China and India may initiate a regional trade agreement
negotiation in the near future.
                                          24
      (2) China-Columbia Free Trade Agreement
       China and Columbia signed the Memorandum of Understanding on a Joint
Feasibility Study on a Bilateral Free Trade Agreement and officially initiated a joint
feasibility study on bilateral free trade area in May 20121.
      (3) China-US Free Trade Agreement
      There are not yet official statements or discussions on China-US free trade
agreement, but at a research level, a China-US free trade agreement has been
discussed often. Although there will have a lot of difficulties, as the two biggest
countries in the world, it may be possible to initiate a free trade agreement in the
future. Trade and investment between the U.S. and China have continued to grow at a
substantial rate. As with any relationship between major powers, there is friction and
concern on both sides about how the trade relationship is conducted.
      (4) China-TPP Free Trade Agreement
      TPP is one of important FTA arrangements in the Asia pacific region; and it has
received global attention in recent years. As the second largest country in the world,
China is not involved in the TPP negotiation. Some researches propose that China
should take part in the TPP negotiation (Song and Yuan, 2012).
      Recently, there are many debates about whether China should join the TPP
negotiations seem quite lively. Not only Chinese media but also some from the US
and Europe have expressed interest in this topic and published numerous comments. A
Financial Times commentary regarded the US moves around TTP as designed to have
an Asia Pacific club that excludes China and doubted such an attempt would be
successful. Some media in the US expressed the view that the US never had any idea
to exclude China and that the US would welcome China's participation in the
negotiation. The Spokesman of the Chinese Commerce Ministry responded positively,
claiming that China would positively consider any proposal inviting China to TPP
negotiation2.


1
  See the website of Chinese Ministry of Commerce, “Joint Feasibility Study on Free Trade Area Initiated by
China and Columbia”, 2012-05-10, http://english.mofcom.gov.cn.
2
  See Ding, Y., “Should China Join the TPP Negotiation”, China-US Focus, 2013-07-03.
                                                      25
References
Antkiewicz A. & John Whalley, 2005. "China's New Regional Trade Agreements," The World
     Economy, Wiley Blackwell, vol. 28(10), pages 1539-1557, October. DOI information:
     /10.1111/j.1467-9701.2005.00746.x/.
Bown, C.P. (2009), “Self-enforcing Trade: Developing Countries and WTO Dispute Settlement”,
     Brookings Institute.
Bown, Chad P., 2010. "China's WTO Entry: Antidumping, Safeguards, and Dispute Settlement," NBER
     Chapters, in: China's Growing Role in World Trade, pages 281-337 National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Inc.
Bown, Chad P., 2011. "Taking Stock of Antidumping, Safeguards and Countervailing Duties,
     1990–2009," The World Economy, Wiley Blackwell, vol. 34(12), pages 1955-1998, December.
CFN. 2013. “China FTA Network”. http://fta.mofcom.gov.cn/.
China State Council, 2013. “Overall Plan for the China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone”,
     http://www.china.org.cn/business/2013-10/16/content_30310013.htm.
Choi, N. 2013. “Korea-China FTA: Expected Effects and Future Directions”. Korea Institute for
     International Economic Policy, Opinions, May 10.
Jin, H.J., W.W. Koo and B. Sul. 2006. “The Effects of The Free Trade Agreement Among China, Japan
     and South Korea”. Journal of Economic Development, 31(2), pp.55-72.
Li, C. and J. Whalley. 2013. “China and The Trans-Pacific Partnership: A Numerical Simulation
     Assessment of The Effects Involved”. The World Economy, Forthcoming.
Liu, Z., X. Mao, W. Tang, T. Hu and P. Song. 2012. “An Assessment of China-Japan-Korea Free Trade
     Agreement’s Economic and Environmental Impact on China”. Frontiers of Environmental
     Science & Engineering, 6(6), pp.849-859.
Loke, W.H. 2013. “East-Asia FTA: Effects on China’s Selected Industries”. The University of
     Nottingham Ningbo China Working Paper, 6th February.
Patricio, K. 2011. “The Welfare Impact of An Australia-China Free Trade Agreement”. School of
     Economics, The University of New South Wales Working Paper, 24 October.
Petri, P.A., M.G. Plummer and F. Zhai. 2011. “The Trans-Pacific Partnership and Asia-Pacific
     Integration: A Quantitative Assessment”. East-West Center Working Papers No.119, Octomber 24,
     2011.
Shabir, S. and R. Kazmi. 2007. “Economic Effects of the Recently Signed Pak-China Free Trade
     Agreement”. The Labore Journal of Economics, Sepetember, pp.173-202.
Siriwardana, M. and J. Yang. 2007. “Economic Effects of the Proposed Australia-China Free Trade
     Agreement”. Center for Contemporary Asian Studies, Doshisha University Working Paper No.4,
     April.
Song, G. and W.J. Yuan. 2012. “China’s Free Trade Agreement Strategies”. The Washington Quarterly,
     Fall, pp.107-119.
Tan, H. and C. Li. 2009. “Quantitative Analysis on the Impact of China-New Zealand FTA on Both
     Sides’ Economies”.




                                                26
