NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BREAKING THE LINK BETWEEN LEGAL ACCESS TO ALCOHOL AND MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS:
EVIDENCE FROM NEW SOUTH WALES
Jason M. Lindo
Peter Siminski
Oleg Yerokhin
Working Paper 19857
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19857

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

The authors thank Lena Hock and Daniel Thomason for research assistance, Kitt Carpenter, Monica
Deza, David Johnston, Daniel Rees, Michael Shields, Nathan Tefft, participants at the 9th World Congress
on Health Economics, the 2013 HILDA Survey Research Conference and the 2012 CAER Health
Economics Workshop, and seminar participants at Dalhousie University, Monash University, Queensland
University of Technology, University of Texas at Dallas, Tulane University, and the University of
Wollongong for their thoughtful comments. Special thanks go to the NSW Centre for Road Safety
for providing and assisting with crash and licensing data, especially Phil Sparkes and Roger Jerrems.
This paper uses unit record data from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA)
Survey. The HILDA Project was initiated and is funded by the Australian Government Department
of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs (FaHCSIA) and is managed by
the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research (Melbourne Institute). The findings
and views reported in this paper, however, are those of the authors and should not be attributed to
either FaHCSIA or the Melbourne Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jason M. Lindo, Peter Siminski, and Oleg Yerokhin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Breaking the Link Between Legal Access to Alcohol and Motor Vehicle Accidents: Evidence
from New South Wales
Jason M. Lindo, Peter Siminski, and Oleg Yerokhin
NBER Working Paper No. 19857
January 2014
JEL No. I18,K32
ABSTRACT
A large literature has documented significant public health benefits associated with the minimum legal
drinking age in the United States, particularly because of the resulting effects on motor vehicle accidents.
These benefits form the primary basis for continued efforts to restrict youth access to alcohol. It is
important to keep in mind, though, that policymakers have a wide variety of alcohol-control options
available to them, and understanding how these policies may complement or substitute for one another
can improve policy making moving forward. Towards this end, we propose that investigating the causal
effects of the minimum legal drinking age in New South Wales, Australia provides a particularly informative
case study, because Australian states are among the world leaders in their efforts against drunk driving.
Using an age-based regression-discontinuity design applied to restricted-use data from several sources,
we find no evidence that legal access to alcohol has effects on motor vehicle accidents of any type
in New South Wales, despite having large effects on drinking and on hospitalizations due to alcohol
abuse.

Jason M. Lindo
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jlindo@econmail.tamu.edu
Peter Siminski
School of Economics
University of Wollongong
NSW 2522 AUSTRALIA
siminski@uow.edu.au

Oleg Yerokhin
School of Economics
University of Wollongong
NSW 2522 AUSTRALIA
olegyer@gmail.com

1

Introduction
The minimum legal drinking age (MLDA) has long been a subject of heated debate. Many

U.S. states had a MLDA of 18 until the 1984 National Minimum Drinking Age Act threatened
to take highway funding from states with MLDAs below 21. Though all U.S. states have since
maintained a MLDA of 21, critics argue that this MLDA encourages more dangerous drinking
among 18-20 year olds than would occur in a legal environment, that it is inconsistent with all
of the other responsibilities bestowed upon 18 year olds, and that the volume and severity of
alcohol-related health problems among youths suggests that the current policy is ineﬀective.1
However, several studies have demonstrated that the current MLDA in the United States does
have substantial public health beneﬁts. In particular, Carpenter and Dobkin (2009, 2010, 2011)
and Deza (2013) leverage a regression-discontinuity (RD) design to document the eﬀects of
legal access to alcohol, ﬁnding signiﬁcant eﬀects on alcohol consumption, binge drinking, crime,
morbidity, and mortality.2 While these studies indicate that the health beneﬁts associated with
the MLDA in the United States are broad, they also indicate that the reduction in motor vehicle
accidents (MVAs) is the most important component of these beneﬁts. This also appears to be the
case for Canada where the MLDA reduces youth mortality 6%, almost entirely due to its eﬀects
on motor vehicle accidents (Carpenter et al. 2013). With all of this said, in order to properly
craft policy, we need to weigh the costs and beneﬁts of the wide variety of alcohol-control
options that are available and to determine how the eﬀects of these policies may complement or
substitute for one another. Towards this end, we propose that the MLDA in New South Wales,
Australia (NSW) provides a particularly informative case study because Australian states are
among the world leaders in their eﬀorts against drunk driving: they pioneered the use of random
breath tests and continue to use them extensively (today NSW drivers are stopped in a random
1
Though these sentiments have led to proposals to reduce the MLDA in several states, none have been adopted
at this point.
2
In similar studies, Crost and Guerrero (2012) and Deza (2013) ﬁnd evidence that the additional consumption
of alcohol has a displacement eﬀect on the use marijuana and the use of harder drugs, respectively, whereas Crost
and Rees (2013) ﬁnd no evidence of eﬀects on marijuana use. Also focusing on the United States, Carell et al.
(2011) and Lindo et al. (2013) also ﬁnd signiﬁcant eﬀects of the current MLDA on student achievement. Turning
to the New Zealand context, Conover and Scrimgeour (2013) and Boes and Stillman (2013) ﬁnd signiﬁcant
eﬀects on alcohol-related hospitalizations though Boes and Stillman (2013) ﬁnd no evidence of eﬀects on alcohol
consumption using survey data and no evidence of eﬀects on motor vehicle accidents. There are also several
studies that have exploited the state-level changes in that took place in the 1970s and 1980s in the United
States, including Birckmayer and Hemenway (1999), Dee (1999), Wagenaar and Toomey (2002), Lovenheim
and Slemrod (2010), Carpenter and Dobkin (2011). They ﬁnd signiﬁcant eﬀects on suicides and motor vehicle
accident fatalities, though Crost (2013) presents evidence that the eﬀect on motor vehicle accidents dissipates
as individuals become older. Fertig and Watson (2009) and Barreca and Page (2013) show that there are also
eﬀects on infant health outcomes.

1

breath test once a year on average, whereas 11 US states have prohibited these stops); they
have lower blood alcohol concentration (BAC) limits for drivers; and their penalties for drunk
driving are substantial.3
Two additional institutional features make NSW a particularly informative environment for
considering the eﬀects of minimum legal drinking ages. First, in contrast to the United States
where BAC limits for drivers jump from zero to 0.08 at the MLDA, the BAC in limit for drivers
remains at zero through the MLDA threshold in NSW.4 As such, NSW arguably oﬀers a cleaner
natural experiment.5 Second, and also in contrast to the United States, the MLDA in Australia
is 18. Given that we tend to expect youths to become more responsible between the ages of 18
and 21, we might expect legal access to alcohol to have more severe eﬀects at age 18. Moreover,
this diﬀerence in laws might lead to diﬀerent eﬀects because 18 year olds are more likely to live
at home and thus under the watchful eyes of their parents.6
This study uses a RD design that exploits the sharp change in legality at age 18 applied to
data from several sources to provide a comprehensive analysis of the health eﬀects of the MLDA
in NSW. To estimate the eﬀects on drinking behaviors, we use restricted-use data (including
exact dates of birth and survey dates) from the 2001 to 2011 waves of the Household, Income, and
Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey. To estimate the eﬀects on per driver accident
rates, we use data from 2000 to 2010 on individuals licensing dates and on the universe of MVAs
involving an injury or a vehicle being towed, provided by NSW Roads and Maritime Services. To
estimate the eﬀects on especially severe MVAs that lead to hospitalization in addition to hospital
admissions due to alcohol intoxication/poisoning, assault, and other injuries, we use restricteduse hospital admissions data from the National Hospital Morbidity Database (NMMD), which
contains the universe of inpatient episodes from 2001 to 2010.7
This analysis reveals that drinking behavior increases substantially when NSW youths obtain
3

While not focusing on alcohol-related accidents, DeAngelo and Hansen (forthcoming) demonstrate that police
enforcement has signiﬁcant eﬀects on overall traﬃc fatalities by exploiting variation generated by a mass layoﬀ
in Oregon. Additionally, Hansen (2013) shows that punishment for drunk driving has signiﬁcant eﬀects on
recidivism using a BAC-based RD design.
4
For unrestricted license holders, the BAC limit is 0.05. Drivers must be at least 20 years of age to obtain an
unrestricted license.
5
The evidence on the eﬀects of zero-tolerance drunk driving laws (i.e. very low BAC limits, typically 0.01 or
0.02) on motor vehicle accident fatalities is mixed. In a review study, Zwerling and Jones (1999) highlight that
all six previously published studies indicate these policies are eﬀective (while acknowledging that three of the six
yielded rather imprecise estimates). More recently, Dee and Evans (2001) and Carpenter (2006) ﬁnd that these
laws are not eﬀective while Eisenberg (2003) and Voas et al. (2003) provide evidence that they are eﬀective.
6
It is not clear whether this feature of the context is likely to lead to larger or smaller eﬀects. On one hand,
it may lead to greater compliance with the MLDA and thus a larger eﬀect on drinking-related behaviors. On the
other hand, it may lead youths to drink more responsibly upon gaining legal access.
7
The population of NSW is not large enough for a meaningful analysis of mortality using similar years of data.

2

legal access to alcohol. However, there is no corresponding increase in the probability of being
in an accident involving an injury or a vehicle being towed, or of being injured in an accident,
or of being in an accident with a high risk of death. These results are in stark contrast to
what we know about the eﬀects of the current U.S. MLDA on MVAs. Although we cannot
determine precisely why these results diverge from what is observed in the United States, the
fact that NSW has such strong policies to combat drunk driving seems like a likely candidate and
highlights the importance of further research in this area. Our analysis of hospital admissions
further corroborates our ﬁndings for MVAs, while also revealing that legal access to alcohol
increases hospitalizations due to alcohol abuse and assault. Overall, this set of results indicates
that legal access to alcohol need not result in additional MVAs but that a broad consideration
of its public health costs should inform policy.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we provide background information on NSW to put our analysis into context. We then describe our empirical
strategy and data. Next, we present our analysis of drinking behavior, MVAs, and hospital
admissions before discussing our results and providing some concluding remarks.

2

NSW Institutions and Culture
The anti-drunk-driving policy in NSW has a long and rich history. Historically, it has been

at the forefront of a number of policy initiatives designed to reduce the cost of alcohol-related
MVAs, including statutory BAC limits, random breath testing, and graduated licensing systems
with “zero tolerance” BAC limits for inexperienced drivers. While none of these policies are
unique to NSW, their simultaneous use and scope distinguishes the state’s regulatory regime
from that of most other jurisdictions around the world. Given the number and scale of antidrunk-driving measures implemented in NSW beginning in the early 1980s, it is perhaps not
surprising that it has experienced a dramatic decline in the fatality rate in road crashes (Figure
1A) and in alcohol related road crashes (Figure 1B). Moreover, while NSW had higher rates
of MVA-related fatalities per person than the United States in the 1970s, the NSW rate is
currently about half that of the United States; similarly, NSW has a fatality rate for alcoholrelated crashes that is about half that of the United States. Nevertheless, alcohol remains a
major contributing factor in MVA fatalities for NSW. In recent years, around 20% of MVA
fatalities were in alcohol related crashes in NSW (Figure 1C). This section provides a brief

3

history and description of the anti-drunk-driving measures in NSW in a comparative context.
The history of anti-drunk-driving laws starts in early twentieth century. The state of New
York was one of the ﬁrst jurisdictions worldwide to outlaw drunk driving in 1910, with the United
Kingdom following in 1925. In the 1930s various countries started to introduce laws imposing a
limit on drivers’ maximum allowable blood alcohol concentration (BAC). Particularly notable
were the so-called per se laws pioneered by Norway and Sweden in the 1940s, under which
drivers with a BAC level exceeding the legal limit are automatically deemed unﬁt for driving
and typically would have drunk-driving charges brought against them. Scandinavian countries
were also among the ﬁrst to apply relatively low BAC limits of 0.05 and 0.08 (the BAC limit
recommended by the American Medical Association at the time was 0.15). Following the lead
of Norway and Sweden in the 1940s, Victoria introduced a statutory BAC limit of 0.05 in
1966. Within a short period of time, other Australian states adopted similar policies, with
legal BAC limits set at 0.08 in Tasmania, NSW and South Australia and 0.10 in Queensland.
These limits initially applied to all drivers, but stricter BAC limits for probationary drivers
were introduced in the mid-1980s. This early adoption of the so-called “Scandinavian model”
of per se anti-drunk-driving laws with low BAC limits put Australian states (along with the
United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand, and France) among the global leaders in this policy
area.
Random breath testing (RBT) was introduced in Australia in Victoria in 1976, with NSW
following with its own RBT trial in 1982. Only a few other jurisdictions (notably France and
Norway) were experimenting with similar measures at that time. The distinguishing characteristics of the NSW policy were its scale and the publicity campaign that was conducted by
the government around the time of its introduction. In the ﬁrst year, NSW police conducted
nearly one million random breath tests, or approximately one test per three licensed drivers.
Homel (1988) points out that while the penalties for drunk driving in NSW in that period were
reasonably harsh, they were not fully enforced for institutional and cultural reasons. Thus, the
implicit policy goal behind the high level of intensity of the policy and the surrounding publicity
campaign was to inﬂuence the perception of the likelihood of being caught while drunk driving,
as well as to create a negative image of drunk drivers.
Survey data collected following the introduction of RBT in 1982 suggested that the policy
had an eﬀect on drinking behavior by forcing drinkers to be more aware of the amount of alcohol
they have consumed. Moreover, some commentators credited the policy with the 36% reduction

4

in alcohol-related road fatalities over the period 1981–1986 (see Figure 1A) though other factors
may have contributed to this sharp decline.8 In any case, surveys indicate that public support
for the policy grew to 90% by the end of 1980s and its use has only intensiﬁed since. By the
late 1990s, NSW police were conducting between 1.8 and 2.3 million random tests per year,
with about 0.5% of them leading to drunk-driving charges (RTA, 1997-1999). At present, about
4.5 million RBTs are conducted annually, or approximately one per licensed driver. This is
substantially higher than in other jurisdictions with similar policies such as Finland, where one
in three drivers is tested each year, and Sweden and France, where every ﬁfth driver is tested
(Laurell, 2004). The heavy use of RBT in NSW also contrasts sharply with the situation in the
United States, where 11 states prohibit sobriety checkpoints altogether and those that allow
them impose additional restrictions, such as mandatory warnings to the public about the police
plans.
Another important component of the NSW regulatory regime is the graduated licensing
system (GLS) which imposes various restrictions on novice drivers. The concept of GLS was
developed by the U.S. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration and was ﬁrst put in use
in the states of New York and Maryland in the 1970s. Such systems typically envision a multistage process in which restrictions on drivers are gradually relaxed as they gain more experience
and maintain a clean driving record. The ﬁrst country to adopt a modern full scale GLS in
1987 was New Zealand (Langley, Wagenaar & Begg, 1996). The majority of other jurisdictions,
including most of the United States and the Canadian states, implemented similar systems at
the end of the 1990s.
The current NSW graduated licensing system was adopted in 2000. It has a three-stage
structure, starting with the learner’s license that is available at age 16, followed by a ﬁrst
provisional license that is available at the age of 17, followed by a second provisional license
available one year after holding a ﬁrst provisional license, then an unrestricted license that is
available after two years of holding a second provisional license. As such, youths can only obtain
an unrestricted license in NSW turning 20 years old. In contrast, the intermediate stage lasts
for 18 months in New Zealand and for two years in Northern Ireland and Norway, while in many
U.S. states the probationary period is limited to one year or less. Another distinguishing feature
of the NSW graduated licensing system is its tough stance on speed restrictions for drivers with
8

Notably, the reduction of the statutory BAC limit from 0.08 to 0.05 in December 1980 may have played an
important role as well as the economic downturn experienced during this period.

5

learners’ and provisional licenses, requiring them to drive at speeds below the nominal speed
limits. In particular, learners cannot exceed the speed of 80 km/h; the ﬁrst-stage provisional
license allows for speeds of up to 90 km/h; and the second stage license has a limit of 100
km/h. These limits are stricter than in other jurisdictions with similar provisions in their GLS,
including Canada and some European countries.
Finally, one feature of the NSW GLS that is especially relevant for this study is the BAC
limit for both learners and drivers with provisional licenses: it was set at 0.02 initially and
reduced to zero in 2004.9 As a result, all drivers in NSW face a zero BAC limit for at least two
years after they gain legal access to alcohol at age 18. This feature of the NSW system allows
us to estimate the eﬀect of MLDA using an age-based RD design without concerns that the
estimates will be confounded by a simultaneous change in the BAC limit.

3

Methods and Data

3.1

Empirical Strategy

Our empirical strategy exploits the sharp change in legal access to alcohol that occurs at the
MLDA in a RD design to identify the causal eﬀects of youths gaining legal access to alcohol.
This strategy is motivated by the idea that characteristics related to behaviors and outcomes
of interest are likely to vary smoothly through the MLDA threshold; thus, any discontinuity
in behaviors or outcomes at this threshold can be reasonably attributed to the change in legal
access. We operationalize this identiﬁcation strategy by estimating
yi = β0 + β1 M LDA + f (agei ) + i ,

(1)

where yi is a measure of drinking behavior or a health outcome for individual i, f is some
smooth function of age, M LDA is a binary indicator for whether the individual’s age is 18+,
i is a random error term, and β1 is the eﬀect of legal access to alcohol. Following Imbens and
Lemieux (2008), we adopt an interacted local linear speciﬁcation for f (·), allowing the slope
term to to be ﬂexible on each side of the MLDA threshold. We show estimates for a range of
bandwidths while highlighting those estimates that use the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011)
9
Analyses focusing on the pre-2004 regime are imprecise but otherwise similar to our main results, oﬀering no
indication that there were any harmful eﬀects of legal access to alcohol on MVAs in the pre-2004 regime. These
results are available upon request.

6

(IK) optimal bandwidth. Following Lee and Card (2008), we present standard error estimates
that are clustered on the running variable (age in days).
With any RD design, the identifying assumption is that characteristics related to outcomes
of interest vary smoothly through the treatment threshold. The fact that our application uses
age as the running variable (that is, the variable that determines treatment) helps to address
concerns that this assumption may not hold. Because individuals have no control over their age,
manipulation of the running variable (McCrary 2008) is not possible. That said, with an agebased RD design, it is important to consider whether there might be “additional treatments”
related to outcomes that are coincident with the treatment of interest. Birthdays are one obvious
example. In particular, outcomes may change around the time an individual’s age (in years)
changes because of activities and behaviors related to celebrating one’s birthday. This particular
confounder is typically addressed in the literature by estimating a “donut RD” in which the
analysis omits observations that are in the immediate vicinity of the treatment threshold. The
assumption underlying this approach is that the conditional expectation function estimated by
the data outside the donut but within the chosen bandwidth correctly captures the expected
outcomes that would be observed at the treatment threshold in the absence of behavioral changes
associated with having a birthday. In short, this assumption implies that “birthday eﬀects” do
not exist outside of the donut and that the conditional expectation function is speciﬁed correctly.
RD-based studies of the MLDA have typically excluded the birthday itself and the subsequent
day after, or have included dummy variables for those days (e.g., Carpenter and Dobkin 2009,
2010, 2011). That said, a larger “donut” window may be appropriate. For instance, if a birthday
falls on a weekday, it may conceivably induce celebratory behavior on the following weekend,
perhaps also reducing similar behavior beforehand in anticipation of such celebrations. For this
reason, we consider the sensitivity of the estimates to a range of alternative donut sizes.10
One additional issue that we must consider in our setting is that the MLDA in Australia
corresponds to the age at which youths are no longer considered minors. Thus, we might be
concerned that our estimates of the eﬀect of legal access to alcohol could be confounded by
“coming of age eﬀects.” While we cannot rule out the existence of such eﬀects, which might
be related to the outcomes we consider, we ﬁnd no evidence that the proportion of individuals
living at home, being in school, or being employed changes discontinuously across the treatment
threshold. Nor do we ﬁnd any evidence that demographic characteristics, which could change
10

We apply the same donut exclusions around other birthdays as well.

7

as a result of coming-of-age-induced migration, are discontinuous across the threshold. Given
these results, perhaps our main outstanding source of concern is that youths may be aﬀorded
more freedom from their parents after turning 18. For example, they may be able to go out
more often and/or to stay out later at night. We note that this sort of phenomena, which seems
plausible, would serve to bias our estimated eﬀects on “negative outcomes” upwards (because
youths are likely to engage in risky behaviors more often with less parental supervision) and thus
imply that our estimates might be thought of as upper bounds. Because we ﬁnd no evidence
of any discontinuity in MVAs at age 18, we can then be especially conﬁdent in concluding that
legal access to alcohol does not increase the incidence of MVAs among NSW’s youths.
These are the primary issues associated with estimating the eﬀects of legal access to alcohol
in the Australian context. That said, some additional issues are relevant to the outcomes that
we consider and to the data that we use. We discuss these issues in greater detail below.

3.2

Data on Drinking Behavior

The source of the data on drinking behavior in NSW is the the Household, Income and
Labour Dynamics Australia (HILDA) survey. HILDA is a nationally representative household
panel survey, with data collected annually since 2001 for an initial sample of 19,914 persons in
7,682 households. We use an unconﬁdentialized version of the dataset, which includes respondents’ dates of birth and dates of interview, allowing for identiﬁcation of exact age in days at the
time each survey was completed. In each of the 11 currently available waves, all persons aged
15 and over within sampled households were asked to respond to the questionnaire.11 Appendix
Figure A1 shows the number of observations by age in 2-month bins, which appears to vary
smoothly through the threshold.
In each wave, respondents were asked “Do you drink alcohol?” and asked to choose responses
from which the frequency of drinking can be inferred.12 In three waves (2007, 2009, and 2011),
the respondents also were asked a gender-speciﬁc question about frequency of binge drinking.13
11
Parental consent was sought before interviewing persons aged under 18 years and living with their parents.
Persons for whom parental consent was denied are not identiﬁable. However, the refusal rate (for any reason)
does not vary through the threshold (9% for 16 year olds, 9% for 17 year olds, 9% for 18 year olds and 10% for
19 year olds).
12
The response options are: No, I have never drunk alcohol; No, I no longer drink alcohol; Yes, I drink alcohol
every day; Yes, I drink alcohol 5 or 6 days per week; Yes, I drink alcohol 3 or 4 days per week; Yes, I drink
alcohol 1 or 2 days per week; Yes, I drink alcohol 2 or 3 days per month; Yes, but only rarely.
13
Males (Female) were asked ‘How often do you have 7 (5) or more standard drinks on one occasion?’ Response
options were: Not in the last year; Less than monthly but at least once a year; Once a month; 2 to 3 times a
month; 1 to 2 times a week; 3 to 4 times a week; 5 or more times a week.

8

Using these data items, we construct ﬁve drinking behavior outcomes. Three of these are binary
indicators for whether the individual (i) drinks at all; (ii) drinks at least once per week; or (iii)
binge drinks at least once per week. The others indicate the implied proportions of days with
(iv) any drinking and (v) binge drinking.14
In terms of our estimation strategy, the case for a larger “donut” for our RD approach is
arguably stronger when we analyze drinking behavior using HILDA data, because the questions
on drinking behavior do not specify an explicit reference period. The cognitive process of
choosing a response to such a question is not clear. Consider a person who drinks more frequently
after turning 18: it is not clear precisely when this person would update his or her perception of
own-drinking frequency. The cognitive process of choosing “1 or 2 days per week” for example,
as compared to the next response option of “2 or 3 days per month” is unclear. There may
be a lag between an actual change in underlying drinking propensity and this self-evaluation.
Conversely, this judgment may be overly inﬂuenced by recent celebratory behavior, which would
be particularly problematic for observations just above the threshold.15 For this reason, we
focus on estimates that are based on a one-month donut (i.e., we exclude observations where
the survey date is within 30 days of eighteenth birthday) when analyzing these data. In our
other analyses, we instead focus on estimates that are based on a seven-day donut. In Appendix
D, we also present estimates for a number of alternate donut sizes for each indicator. These
results show that the size of the donut has little inﬂuence on the estimates.
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics from HILDA. The sample consists of 2,359 observations
of persons living in NSW who were aged 16-19 at the time of data collection and not within 30
days of any birthday. This corresponds to the widest bandwidth we consider and the preferred
donut width. The sample includes 711 observations from the waves that include binge drinking
questions.
Since each individual in HILDA contributes up to 4 observations to a given regression (up to
2 observations for the binge drinking outcomes), we tested sensitivity of the results to clustering
standard errors on the individual instead of on age. In those results (available upon request), the
14
The proportion of days drinking is set to: zero for those who do not drink or only drink ‘rarely’; 1 for those
who drink alcohol every day; 5.5/7 for those who drink 5 or 6 days per week; 3.5/7 for those who drink 3 or 4
days per week; 1.5/7 for those who drink 1 or 2 days per week; 2.5/30 for those who drink 2 or 3 days per month.
The proportion of days binge drinking variable was constructed similarly.
15
In addition, in the ﬁrst 8 waves of HILDA data, the exact date of the “self-completion questionnaire,” which
contains the drinking questions, was not provided. For those years, we instead rely on the date of the intervieweradministered “person questionnaire.” We do not see this as a major issue. For those waves where we have exact
dates of both questionnaires, these diﬀer by less than 2 weeks in 91% of cases. Nevertheless, this measurement
error may lead to attenuation, which is reduced if the dates immediately around 18th birthday are excluded.

9

standard errors are very similar to that of the main analysis, slightly larger in some instances,
slightly smaller in others.

3.3

Driver and Motor Vehicle Accident Data

Our main results—focusing on MVAs—draw on CrashLink data and licensing data provided
by the NSW Centre for Road Safety. The crash data include one record for each driver who was
involved in each motor vehicle accident occurring on NSW roads in which at least one vehicle
was towed away or one of the occupants was injured. These data provide the date of the accident
and date of birth of the driver, and they are linked to additional information contained in the
drivers’ license database. We analyze crash rates for drivers who ﬁrst obtained a provisional
license between their seventeenth and eighteenth birthdays, between July 2000 and December
2010. The analysis is conducted on a data set that has been collapsed to the day-of-age level
where the outcome variables are rates of various types of accidents.16
License class progression presents a complication for the analysis. Since July 2000, NSW has
had a graduated license scheme: individuals can apply to progress to a second provisional (P2)
license after 12 months of holding a P1 license. This results in a small discontinuity in license
class at the MLDA threshold (Figure A3). However, P1 and P2 licenses are quite similar—the
major diﬀerence is the speed limit, which is capped at 100 km/h for P2 drivers compared with
90 km/h for P1 drivers.17 More importantly, license progression is likely to increase MVAs if
it has any eﬀect at all, again leading us to believe that our estimates provide an upper bound
for the true eﬀect of legal access to alcohol on MVAs. And given that these estimates tend to
be close to zero, we can be especially conﬁdent in inferring that—at least in our setting—legal
access to alcohol does not increase MVAs in our setting.
We present the results for all MVAs, as well as for a range of accident types that are likely to
be more serious or more suggestive of drunk driving (e.g., those in which the driver is injured,
those that occur at night). While we can (and do) show estimates for motor vehicle accidents
in which the driver died, in our setting fatal accidents are too infrequent to yield informative
estimates. Therefore, our preferred strategy for identifying serious crashes is to weight them by
16

The denominator consists of counts of relevant drivers from the drivers’ license database and the numerator
is a count of relevant crashes from the Crashlink database. Relevant drivers are those who ﬁrst obtained a
provisional license between their seventeenth and eighteenth birthdays and after June 2000. Each individual is
considered a “driver” on all dates after obtaining a ﬁrst license, through to the end of our crash data coverage
(2010). Relevant crashes are those matched to relevant driver-days.
17
From July 1, 2007, P1 drivers (but not P2 drivers) under the age of 25 are not permitted to drive a vehicle
with more than one passenger under 21 years old between 11pm and 5am.

10

predicted fatality-risk. Three factors motivate this approach:
(i) Our analysis of fatal MVAs does not have suﬃcient statistical power to be meaningful.
(ii) There is a large element of chance in whether a given accident is fatal.
(iii) Our data contain a large set of detailed crash characteristics with strong predictive power
for fatalities.
This approach is a natural extension of selecting subsets of “serious” crashes based on
a certain criterion (such as head-on crashes; crashes with an injury; night crashes; crashes
occurring at high speed) that improves power. To operationalize this approach, we estimate
fatality risk based on the predicted probability from a probit model in which fatality is a function
of a rich set of driver and crash characteristics.18 In order to estimate these probabilities with
greater precision, we expand the sample to include all 17-21-year-old drivers involved in an
accident. In addition to presenting estimates that focus on fatality-risk-weighted accidents, we
show estimates for speciﬁcations focusing on accidents with a fatality risk that exceeds speciﬁc
thresholds. Appendix B shows results from the fatality risk model. It shows the distribution
of predicted fatality risk, and compares the observed characteristics of fatality-risk-weighted
crashes to that of fatal crashes and to all (unweighted) crashes.
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics from the licensing and crash data, for relevant driver-days
as described above where the driver is aged 17 or 18 and not within 7 days of any birthday.

3.4

Hospital inpatient data

To study morbidity, we draw on administrative data from the National Hospital Morbidity
Database (NHMD), administered by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. The data
contain the universe of inpatient episodes for admissions to NSW hospitals between July 2001
and June 2010. The ﬁle includes patients’ exact age in days at admission. It also contains
ICD-10-AM clinical data, including principal diagnosis and a detailed classiﬁcation of external
causes.
18

These include driver’s gender and seatbelt usage, urbanization of crash location (6 indicators), time of crash
(2 hour intervals = 12 indicators), indicators of estimated speed travelled (in 10 km/h intervals), ‘Road User
Movement’ (RUM Code) (86 indicators), vehicle’s maneuver immediately prior to its involvement in the crash
(46 indicators), vehicle’s role in the ﬁrst impact (3 indicators), driver error factors (23 indicators) and ‘unusual’
factors (7 indicators). RUM code describes the ﬁrst impact that occurred during the crash. Two examples of
RUM codes are ‘Head on’ and ‘Reversing into object or parked vehicle’. Full details are in (provide reference).
Two examples of maneuvers are ‘Cutting back after overtaking’ and ‘Stationary in Traﬃc’. An example of a
driver error factor is ‘Controller turning right from wrong lane’. An example of an unusual factor is ‘This vehicle
skidding, sliding or aquaplaning’.

11

We consider the following categories of acute care hospital episodes:
- Alcohol intoxication or poisoning. Episodes with a primary diagnosis of a “Mental and
behavioral disorder due to use of alcohol” (ICD10 code F10) or “Toxic eﬀect of alcohol”
(ICD10 code T51).19
- Assaults. Episodes where assault is listed as an external cause of morbidity (ICD codes
X85-Y09)
- Drivers injured in Motor Vehicle Accidents (excluding motor cycle riders) (ICD codes
V30-V79; V86, with fourth character “0” or “5”)
- Motor cycle riders injured in transport accidents (ICD Codes V20-V29). These are distinguished from regular MVAs for two reasons, both related to licensing. First, approximately
half of these episodes are for “non-traﬃc” accidents, i.e., accidents which did not occur
on public roads. There is no requirement to hold a license to ride on private property and
no risk of being caught riding under the inﬂuence of alcohol on private property. Second,
until 2010, motor cycle riders could be eligible for unrestricted licenses from the age of
eighteen. The transition to an unrestricted license includes a higher blood alcohol limit
(0.05), representing a possible confounding factor in the relationship between the MLDA
and the risk of accidents.
- Other external causes. All episodes with any other listed external cause (ICD codes V01Y98). Most are accidents, self-harm, or events of undetermined intent.
Descriptive statistics from NHMD are shown in Table 1.
Like our analysis of MVAs, our analysis of hospital admissions is performed on data aggregated to the day-of-age level. However, in the case of hospital admissions, the relevant set of
individuals is the entire population (not just drivers). As such, we rescale the discontinuity
estimates to represent the number of additional episodes per 10,000 person-years that are attributable to legal access. Speciﬁcally, we multiply the counts of episodes for each day of age
by 365 x 10,000, then divide by the estimated resident population of 18-year olds in NSW at
June 2005 (ABS, 2013), and divide again by 9 (the number of years of hospital data).
19

About 84% of F10 episodes are for “acute intoxication.” A further 10% are due to a “dependency syndrome.”

12

4

Establishing the Validity of the Research Design
In this section, we consider the extent to which the potential confounders discussed in the

previous sections are empirically relevant to our analyses. We begin by considering population
characteristics using HILDA and then consider driver characteristics using our driver data.
As we alluded to above, most determinants (other than the MLDA) of health outcomes
would seem likely to vary smoothly through the 18th birthday threshold. However, 18 is also
the oﬃcial age of adulthood in Australia in relation to voting, gambling, smoking, and culturally
in relation to “coming of age,” broadly speaking. While we cannot rule out the possibility that
these changes might have independent eﬀects on health outcomes, we can investigate the extent
to which turning 18 has other major changes on youths’ daily lives by looking at whether they
live at home, whether they are enrolled in secondary school, and whether they are employed
using HILDA data. In Figure 2, we show means (in two-month bins) for these characteristics in
Panel A and estimated discontinuities across a range of bandwidths in Panel B.20 The means
reﬂect the changes we expect to see: as youths grow older they are less likely to live with their
parents, less likely to be enrolled in school, and more likely to be employed. However, these
major life changes events do not appear to be precipitated by turning 18, as these characteristics
do not change discontinuously, which lends conﬁdence to our research design.
While the results for “Enrolled in School” show no discontinuity at 18, the age pattern is
worthy of discussion. Children in NSW typically begin school in late January or early February prior to their 6th birthday. Because most youths complete 13 years of schooling without
repeating any grade, most ﬁnish school between the ages of approximately 17 years and 10
months and 18 years and 10 months. Thus, the kinks at these points in the means plot are
to be expected. The fact there are no corresponding kinks in health outcomes (shown in the
ﬁgures below) indicates that high school completion does not aﬀect the health outcomes we
consider.21 Thus, the existence of these particular kinks does not pose a threat to the validity
of our research design.
We have also conﬁrmed that gender, being born in Australia, and being a native English
speaker are smooth through the threshold (see Figure A2 in Appendix A).22
20
The discontinuity estimates in this ﬁgure are based on the one-month-donut RD approach described above
in order to be consistent with our analysis of drinking behaviors which also uses HILDA data. Estimates that
instead use a one-week donut are similar.
21
See Card et al. (2012) for a formal discussion of causal inference based on kinks driven by pre-determined
variables.
22
These ﬁndings are not trivial since turning 18 could conceivably aﬀect migration in a way that changes the

13

In Appendix Figure A3 we explore the extent to which driver characteristics might change
through the treatment threshold (while presenting means in one-day bins, which can be estimated with great precision using these data). A priori, there is little reason to believe that most
driver characteristics would change discontinuously at age 18 unless turning 18 has an eﬀect
on the probability that individuals’ hold licenses and that this eﬀect is heterogeneous across
individual characteristics. That said, license class is one characteristic that we do expect to be
discontinuous at the threshold because youths who got their ﬁrst provisional (P1) license on
their 17th birthday become eligible for a second provisional (P2) license at age 18. The data
conﬁrm this intuition as the fraction of drivers with a P2 license jumps from zero to approximately 2% across the threshold. As discussed above, if anything, this imbalance is likely to
bias our estimates of the eﬀect of legal access to alcohol on MVAs upwards, which lends greater
conﬁdence to our results which indicate that legal access to alcohol does not have detrimental
eﬀects on MVAs in NSW. In the other panels of Figure A3, we demonstrate that the fraction
of drivers who are female and the number of drivers are continuous across the threshold.23

5

Eﬀects of Legal Access to Alcohol on Drinking Behavior
Figures 3 and 4 present discontinuity estimates for various measures of drinking behaviors.

Each ﬁgure shows means plots using two-month bins (Panel A), as well as discontinuity estimates
under a large range of bandwidths, with 95% conﬁdence intervals (Panel B).
Figure 3 shows the results for three outcomes: ever drinks, drinks at least once per week
and proportion of days drinks. For each outcome, the means plots in Panel A reveal an increase
in drinking as youths grow older. More importantly, these mean plots also show discontinuities
at the age of 18 for each outcome, indicating that legal access to alcohol has signiﬁcant eﬀects
on drinking behavior in NSW. The point estimates in Panel B suggest a discontinuity in “ever
drinks” of at least 16 percentage points across a wide range of bandwidths, including 18.6
percentage points at the IK-optimal bandwidth, which incorporates 312 days in either direction
from the edges of the “donut.” For all but the smallest bandwidths, these estimates are highly
characteristics of the underlying population. It’s also worth noting that the composition of HILDA respondents
can change even if the underlying composition of the population does not, because HILDA respondents have
some discretion over when and whether to complete the questionnaire. Thus, it is theoretically possible for
heterogeneity in survey responses that interacts with turning age 18 to bias estimated eﬀects that are based on
these survey data. Nonetheless, there is no evidence that such heterogeneity exists.
23
The number of drivers declines slightly after the MLDA threshold, because drivers are only kept in the sample
for days covered by the crash database.

14

statistically signiﬁcant. The estimated discontinuity in regular drinking (at least once per week)
is similar, at around 20 percentage points under most reasonable bandwidths, including 17.9
at the IK-optimal bandwidth. The estimated discontinuity in “proportion of days drinks” is
more sensitive to bandwidth, ranging from around 3 to 7 percentage points. At the IK-optimal
bandwidth, the estimated discontinuity is 4.2 percentage points (and statistically signiﬁcant at
conventional levels).
Estimated discontinuities in binge drinking are shown in Figure 4. Only three of the eleven
HILDA waves contain binge-drinking data, so these estimates are less precise than those in
Figure 1. Nevertheless, the results provide consistent evidence of large discontinuities in binge
drinking. The means plots are strongly suggestive of discontinuities in regular binge drinking
and in the frequency of binge drinking. For each outcome, the estimates are large, insensitive
to bandwidth, and at least marginally signiﬁcant for reasonable bandwidths. The estimated
discontinuity in “binge drinks at least once per week” is on the order of 20 percentage points
for almost all bandwidths, 19.0 percentage points at the IK-optimal bandwidth. The estimated
discontinuity in “proportion of days of days binge drinking” is around 4 percentage points for
most bandwidths.
Although binge drinking data are not included in all waves, a comparison of the mean plots
in Figures 3 and 4 is revealing. In, particular, it seems that almost all 18-year-old regular
drinkers are also regular binge drinkers. This can be seen by comparing the mean plots for
regular drinking on the right of the threshold in Panel A of Figures 3 and 4. This is indicative
of Australia’s youth binge drinking culture.
The results in Figures 3 and 4 suggest that MLDA restrictions in NSW are quite eﬀective
in inﬂuencing youth drinking, especially regular drinking and regular binge drinking. The size
of the discontinuities is best compared in relative terms, which we do using the IK-optimal
bandwidth point estimates. The point estimates suggest that as youths cross the 18-year-old
threshold and gain legal access, their propensity to identify as a drinker increases by around
25%. Their propensity to identify as a regular drinker increases much more, by around 100%,
while their “proportion of days drinking” increases by around 70%. More strikingly, their
propensity to identify as a regular binge drinker increases by around 150% and the “proportion
of days binge drinking” increases by close to 100%. To put it diﬀerently, age-based prohibition
reduces the frequency of drinking and binge drinking by roughly half at the MLDA threshold.
In Section 6, we also show evidence of discontinuities in hospitalizations due to alcohol abuse.

15

Appendix E shows the results for all of these indicators again, this time by gender. These
results are suggestive of some gender heterogeneity in the eﬀects on drinking behavior. In
particular, they suggest that the MLDA has a considerably larger eﬀect on females on the “ever
drinks” indicator. However, the discontinuities are larger for males on all of the other indicators.
In particular, the IK-optimal point estimates are twice as large for males on “proportion of days
drinking” and “proportion of days binge drinking,” and more than twice as large for “regular
binge drinking.” Overall, there is evidence of large MLDA discontinuities in drinking behavior
for both genders.

6

Eﬀects of Legal Access to Alcohol on Motor Vehicle Accidents
This section presents estimated discontinuities in rates of “serious” motor vehicle crashes—

that is, crashes in which a person was injured and/or a vehicle was towed away. We present
results pooling both genders in the body of the text, and results stratiﬁed by gender in Appendix
E, just as we have for other outcomes. In NSW, males account for over 80% of drunk driving
oﬀenses, and more than 80% of crashes in which the driver was recorded to have non-zero BAC.
Nevertheless, the results are remarkably similar across gender; they show no discontinuities for
any crash types, as will be shown.
Figure 5 shows the results for males for an initial set of three outcomes. The ﬁrst of these
is the rate of all serious crashes. The means-plot shows a crash rate decreasing with age (from
left to right). At the left extremity, the crash rate exceeds 10 per 100 driver years, three times
higher than at the right extremity. This suggests that driver experience is a major factor in
the crash rate. At the same time, this is also consistent with a possible selection eﬀect—only
people who obtained their license shortly after age-eligibility are included in the left (young)
extremity of the sample, and such drivers may have higher crash rates. In any case, the crash
rate varies smoothly through the MLDA threshold. The point estimates are essentially zero
at small bandwidths where the linear speciﬁcation is valid. At the IK-optimal bandwidth, the
95% conﬁdence interval (CI) excludes eﬀects as small as 0.34 crashes per 100 driver-years, or
7% relative to the mean crash rate.
Figure 5 also shows corresponding results for crashes in which the driver was injured and
killed, respectively. The driver-injured crash rates are around one-ﬁfth that of the overall crash
rates, but show a similar pattern. They follow a smooth downward sloping shape throughout,

16

with no evidence of discontinuity at age 18. The 95% CI rules out reasonably small discontinuities in driver-injured crashes. The driver-killed rates are much more variable, because such
crashes are around 100 times less frequent than driver-injured crashes. The mean plot for fatalities (Panel C) again shows no evidence of a discontinuity, but the estimates are imprecise and
cannot rule out even large eﬀects. In Appendix C, we show results for MVA fatalities from an
alternate data set which covers a longer period (1994–2000). Even with the additional coverage,
those results are still imprecise.
For this reason, we turn in Figure 6 to fatality-risk weighted crashes. For these estimates,
we include all crashes, weighted by the predicted probability of driver-fatality, based on a rich
set of driver and crash characteristics as discussed in Section 3. The pattern again resembles
those in Figure 5: the estimated discontinuity is small and statistically insigniﬁcant for all
bandwidths, and is negative for many bandwidths. The standard errors are much smaller than
for the driver-killed estimates.
Figure 6 also considers crashes with high predicted fatality risks, i.e., those exceeding 0.05
and 0.1, respectively. Unlike the (preferred) approach of fatality-risk weighting, for this analysis
each included crash satisfying this condition is weighted equally. To give a sense of where these
crashes lie int the distribution of fatality risk, 1% of serious crashes are deemed high-fatality
risk (p > 0.05), and around 0.3% are treated as very high-fatality risk (p > 0.1). These analyses
also show no visual discontinuity at the MLDA, which is conﬁrmed by small and statistically
insigniﬁcant estimates at all bandwidths.
Because most alcohol related crashes occur at night, we repeat the analysis considering only
night crashes.24 These results are shown in Figures 7 and 8. The means plots again shows no
visible evidence of discontinuities. For the set of all night crashes, the discontinuity estimates are
precise and are close to zero at all reasonable bandwidths. The IK-optimal estimate is almost
exactly zero. For night-injury crashes, the point-estimates are small and positive but are not
close to being statistically signiﬁcant, except at large bandwidths where the linear speciﬁcation
is not valid. The estimated discontinuities for night-killed crashes are all negative, but are very
imprecise. Figure 6 shows the estimates for night-time fatality-risk-weighted crashes, and for
high-fatality-risk crashes. Once again, we see no visual evidence of discontinuities in any of
these indicators and ﬁnd no indication of RD estimates that approach statistical signiﬁcance.
In results not shown, we have considered many other (more restricted) sets of crashes (in24

This excludes around three quarters of crashes.

17

cluding weekend crashes and non-urban crashes) in similar analyses. We also tried interactions
of such crash characteristics (e.g. night time non-urban crashes). Consistently, we found no
evidence of discontinuities.
In Appendix E we show estimates by gender for all of the crash indicators discussed above.
In most categories, crash rates are higher for males than for females. However, without exception, the discontinuity estimates are not statistically signiﬁcant for either gender for any MVA
outcomes.

7

Eﬀects of Legal Access to Alcohol on Hospitalizations
This section presents discontinuity estimates for various types of inpatient episodes. In

particular, we focus inpatient episodes involving alcohol poisoning, motor vehicle accidents,
motor cycle accidents, assaults, and other external causes.25
Figure 9 shows the results for two key outcomes, providing further support for the ﬁndings
shown in earlier sections. There is a clear discontinuity in hospitalizations for alcohol intoxication or poisoning: the estimate is statistically signiﬁcant and insensitive to bandwidth, with
a magnitude of approximately 4 episodes per 10,000 person years, representing a 30% increase
as youths gain legal access to alcohol. It is possible that this estimate is at least partly caused
by underage drinkers being less likely to go to a hospital for fear of punishment. However,
the estimate is consistent with the ﬁnding from HILDA that legal access restrictions have a
substantial impact on youth binge drinking.26
In contrast, we ﬁnd no evidence of a discontinuity in hospitalizations of drivers injured in
MVAs (Figure 9). Indeed, the point estimates are negative for almost all bandwidths.27
25

We initially considered hospitalization rates overall and found evidence of a positive discontinuity across the
age-18 threshold driven by episodes in which the principal diagnosis is in the category of “Diseases of oral cavity,
salivary glands and jaws,” the majority of which are “impacted teeth.” For obvious reasons, it is highly unlikely
that legal access to alcohol is responsible for this discontinuity. Rather, it is more likely to be driven by conscious
decisions (by doctors, dentists, and/or patients) to schedule such procedures after the patient reaches adulthood
(i.e. turns 18).
26
While it would be desirable to consider hospitalizations due to other types of substance abuse (following up on
Deza (2013) who examines eﬀects on hard drug use), our hospital data do not allow for a convincing analysis along
these lines. A signiﬁcant component of episodes where the primary diagnosis related to psychoactive substance
use are “due to multiple drug use and use of other psychoactive substances.” The ICD10 guidelines state that
these codes “should also be used when the exact identity of some or even all the psychoactive substances being
used is uncertain or unknown.” For these cases, we cannot determine whether alcohol was a contributing (or even
the only) factor. Our estimates for non-alcohol substance abuse were sensitive to the treatment of such cases.
We only found signiﬁcant discontinuities when these cases were included.
27
The left extremity of the means plot shows relatively low hospitalization rates, because eligibility for a
provisional license begins at age 17. Drivers injured at age 16 were either unlicensed, or holding a learner’s
permit. For this reason, only estimates with bandwidths less than 365 days are meaningful for this indicator.

18

However, there is some suggestive evidence of a discontinuity in hospitalizations of riders
injured in motor cycle accidents (Figure 10). The magnitude of the discontinuity is around
2 episodes per 10,000 person years, an increase of about 13% across the threshold. The size
and signiﬁcance of the estimate is somewhat sensitive to bandwidth. However, it is at least
marginally signiﬁcant at bandwidths exceeding 270 days. Two other aspects of the results for
motorcycle accidents are noteworthy. First, the hospitalization rate for injuries due to riding
motorcycles is just as high as it is for injuries due to driving other motor vehicles (shown in
Figure 9) for individuals in this age range. This is despite the much smaller number of motor
cycle riders. Second, there is a relatively high rate of hospitalization for 16-year olds, suggesting
that licensing restrictions may not be a major factor in motor cycle accidents. As mentioned
previously, only half of these episodes are for accidents occurring on public roads. Thus, the
broad set of alcohol-related policies that are used to prevent drunk driving on public NSW roads
are less relevant for motor cycle accidents. In addition, for almost all of the time spanned by
the data, motorcycle riders could receive an unrestricted license at age 18.
Figure 10 also shows the results for hospitalizations caused by assault. It shows a clear
upward trend in assaults for 16- and 17-year olds. It also shows a clear discontinuity at the
MLDA threshold, which is statistically signiﬁcant and insensitive to bandwidth. At least visually, this discontinuity appears to be driven by high assault rates in the ﬁrst four months after
turning 18. If so, this discontinuity may be attributable to a process of transition, or learning
to negotiate the freedom associated with gaining legal access to alcohol. Further exploration of
this possibility would require a departure from the RD design, which we leave for future work.
Figure 10 also shows the estimates for episodes with any other external cause, i.e. all external
causes, excluding assaults and drivers/riders injured in MVAs. This encompasses a broad range
of causes, including pedestrians, pedal cycle riders and passengers injured in transport accidents,
other accidents, self-harm, and events of undetermined intent. The results show no evidence of
a discontinuity at any bandwidth. Similarly, there are no discontinuities when episodes with
each of these causes are analyzed separately (results not shown).
Appendix E shows corresponding discontinuity estimates by gender. With the exceptions of
assault and motorcycle accidents, there is little heterogeneity by gender. For hospitalizations
due to alcohol intoxication/poisoning, the discontinuity is a bit clearer for females, resulting
in signiﬁcant estimates for a larger range of bandwidths. Nevertheless, the eﬀect does not
appear to diﬀer greatly by gender. The discontinuity in assaults is much larger for males,

19

as is their baseline rate of hospitalizations due to assault. Finally, hospitalizations due to
motorcycle accidents almost exclusively involve males. Thus, the male plots look almost exactly
like the pooled plots, but with rates that are roughly twice as high. Moreover, young males are
considerably more likely to be hospitalized following a motor cycle accident than as a driver in
a motor vehicle accident.

8

Discussion and Conclusion
As discussed in the introduction, a large literature on the eﬀects of legal access to alcohol

precedes this study. While this literature documents public health costs that are broad in
scope, researchers have emphasized that the most important component of these costs is driven
by MVAs. This study’s primary contribution is in presenting evidence that suggests that legal
access to alcohol need not be accompanied by these large public health costs. We acknowledge,
of course, that there might be eﬀects that are too small to be detected during the time period
spanned by our data. However, the estimated eﬀects on MVAs are routinely close to zero, if not
negative, whether the focus is on serious accidents deﬁned broadly or narrowly, on all accidents
or nighttime accidents, on males or females, and on accidents reported in data provided by
the NSW’s Centre for Road Safety or accidents identiﬁed in the National Hospital Morbidity
Database. Expressed relative to the crash rate of 17-18 year-old drivers, we can rule out eﬀects
on “serious motor vehicle accidents” above 7% at the ﬁve percent level, eﬀects on being injured
in an accident above 14%, and fatality-risk weighted accidents above 27%. Given that the MVA
fatality rate in NSW is low (around half that of the US), these are reasonably precise zeros. We
have also argued that these estimates are likely biased upwards, primarily due to license class
progression.
Although we do not ﬁnd any evidence that legal access to alcohol aﬀects MVAs, we do ﬁnd
some evidence of public health costs associated with youths gaining legal access to alcohol: there
are signiﬁcant eﬀects on hospitalizations due to alcohol poisoning and assault victimization.
Based on the average hospital costs associated with intoxication episodes ($2,313) and assaults
($3,730), our preferred discontinuity estimates imply that a year of legal access per NSW youth
imposes additional hospital costs of $1 for intoxication and $3 for assault.28
28

Cost estimates were derived using 2009-10 National Public Cost Weight Tables. These tables show the
estimated cost of treatment for episodes in each Diagnosis Related Group (DRG). Each DRG category represents
episodes with similar conditions and similar usage of hospital resources. However, DRGs do not concord with the
classiﬁcation we have used to group episodes (ICD-10). Our calculation is based on the average cost from these

20

This study shows that there need not be a link between legal access to alcohol and MVAs,
but more work is needed to understand precisely how any such link can be broken. We view
the relative seriousness with which NSW enforces and punishes drunk driving as the leading
explanation for why our results diﬀer from what has been found in the U.S. context, but we
cannot rule out the importance of other cultural and institutional factors. Thus, we think of our
results as highlighting the potential importance of the interplay between drunk driving policies
and youth access to alcohol and view this as an important area for future research, because
optimal policy design requires that we understand the degree to which diﬀerent alcohol control
policies can substitute and complement one another.

cost weights across intoxication and assault episodes, where the patient was aged between 16 and 19, inclusive.

21

References
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2013): Australian Demographic Statistics, ABS Cat.
No. 3101.0, Canberra.
Birckmayer, J. D., and D. Hemenway (1999): “Minimum Age Drinking Laws and Youth
Suicide 19701990,” American Journal of Public Health, 89(9), 13651368.
Boes, S., and S. Stillman (2013): “Does Changing the Legal Drinking Age Inﬂuence Youth
Behaviour?,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 7522.
Card, D., D. Lee, Z. Pei, and A. Weber (2012): “Nonlinear Policy Rules and the Identiﬁcation and Estimation of Causal Eﬀects in a Generalized Regression Kink Design,” NBER
Working Paper No. 18564.
Carpenter, C. (2006): “Did Ontario’s Zero Tolerance & Graduated Licensing Law reduce
youth drunk driving?,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25(1), 183–195.
Carpenter, C., and C. Dobkin (2009): “The Eﬀect of Alcohol Access on Consumption and
Mortality: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from the Minimum Drinking Age,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1), 164–182.
(2010): “Alcohol Regulation and Crime,” NBER Working Paper No. 15828.
(2011): “The Minimum Legal Drinking Age and Public Health,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 25(2), 133156.
Carpenter, C., C. Dobkin, and C. Warman (2013): “The Mechanisms of Alcohol Control,”
Mimeo.
Carrel, S. E., M. Hoekstra, and J. E. West (2011): “Does Drinking Impair College
Performance? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Approach,” Journal of Public Economics, 95(1-2), 54–62.
Conover, E., and D. Scrimgeour (2013): “Health Consequences of Easier Access to Alcohol:
New Zealand Evidence,” Journal of Health Economics, 32, 570–585.
Crost, B. (2013): “Does the Minimum Drinking Age Reduce or Delay Traﬃc Mortality?
Evidence from a Cohort-Based Analysis,” Mimeo.
Crost, B., and S. Guerrero (2012): “The eﬀect of alcohol availability on marijuana use:
Evidence from the minimum legal drinking age,” Journal of Health Economics, 31(1), 112 –
121.
Crost, B., and D. I. Rees (2013): “The minimum legal drinking age and marijuana use:
New estimates from the NLSY97,” Journal of Health Economics, 32(2), 474 – 476.
DeAngelo, G., and B. Hansen (forthcoming): “Life and Death in the Fast Lane: Police
Enforcement and Traﬃc Fatalities,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Dee, T. S. (1999): “State Alcohol Policies, Teen Drinking and Traﬃc Fatalities,” Journal of
Public Economics, 72(2), 289315.
Deza, M. (2013): “The Eﬀects of Alcohol on the Consumption of Hard Drugs: Regression
Discontinuity Evidence from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth, 1997,” Working
Paper.

22

Eisenberg, D. (2003): “Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of Policies related to Drunk Driving,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 22(2), 249–274.
Evans, W. N., and T. S. Dee (2001): “Behavior Policies and Teen Traﬃc Safety,” American
Economic Review, 92(2), 91–96.
Fertig, A., and T. Watson (2009): “Minimum drinking age laws and infant health outcomes,” Journal of Health Economics, 28, 737–747.
Hansen, B. (2013): “Punishment and Deterrence: Evidence from Drunk Driving,” Mimeo.
Homel, R. (1988): Policing and punishing the drinking driver: A study of general and speciﬁc
deterrence. Springer-Verlag: NY.
Imbens, G., and K. Kalyanaraman (2011): “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression
Discontinuity Estimator,” The Review of Economic Studies.
Imbens, G. W., and T. Lemieux (2008): “Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to
practice,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 615–635.
Langley, J. D., A. C. Wagenaar, and D. J. Begg (1996): “An evaluation of the New
Zealand Graduated Driver Licensing System,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, 28(2), 139–
146.
Lee, D. S., and D. Card (2008): “Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice,”
Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 655–674.
Lindo, J. M., I. D. Swensen, and G. R. Waddell (2013): “Alcohol and Student Performance: Estimating the Eﬀect of Legal Access,” Journal of Health Economics, 32(1), 2232.
Lovenheim, M., and J. Slemrod (2010): “The Fatal Toll of Driving to Drink: The Eﬀect of
Minimum Legal Drinking Age Evasion on Traﬃc Fatalities,” Journal of Health Economics,
29(1), 62–77.
McCrary, J. (2008): “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
design: A density test,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 698–714.
Robert Voas, A., S. Tippetts, and J. Fell (2003): “Assessing the Eﬀectiveness of Minimum Legal Drinking Age and Zero Tolerance Laws in the United States,” Accident Analysis
& Prevention, 35(4), 579587.
Wagenaar, A. C., and T. L. Toomey (2002): “Eﬀects of Minimum Drinking Age Laws:
Review and Analyses of the Literature from 1960 to 2000,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol,
14, 206225.
Zwerling, C., and J. M. (1999): “Evaluation of the eﬀectiveness of low blood alcohol concentration laws for younger drivers,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 16(1), 76–80.

23

Table 1
Summary Statistics

Data on Drinking Behavior (HILDA)
Means of Key Variables:
Lives with parents
At School
Employed
Female
Ever drinks
Drinks regularly
Proportion of days drinks
Binge drinks regularly
Proportion of days binge drinks

0.861
0.496
0.551
0.515
0.685
0.228
0.075
0.200
0.055

Sample Size:
Number of observations
Number of observations - binge drinking

2359
711

Data on Drivers and Motor Vehicle Accidents
Number of Drivers:
All
Male
Female

733954
420797
313157

Number of relevant MVAs

37978

MVAs Per 100 Driver Years:
MVAs Involving a Vehicle Being Towed, Injury, or Death
Injuries in MVAs
Deaths in MVAs
Mortality-Risk-Weighted MVAs
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.025
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.05
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.075
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.010

5.1743
0.9751
0.0109
0.0138
0.1273
0.0523
0.0286
0.0189

Nighttime MVAs Per 100 Driver Years:
MVAs Involving a Vehicle Being Towed, Injury, or Death
Injuries in MVAs
Deaths in MVAs
Mortality-Risk-Weighted MVAs
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.025
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.05
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.075
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.010

1.3175
0.2797
0.0041
0.0059
0.0612
0.0228
0.0132
0.0087

Data on Hospitalizations
Number of relevant inpatient episodes
Inpatient Episodes Per 10,000 Person Years:
Alcohol Intoxication/Poisoning
Assault
Driver in Motor Vehicle Accident
Rider in Motor Cycle Accident
Any Other External Cause

99989
16.662
26.098
14.078
15.798
250.133

Notes: Data on drinking behavior are from are from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA)
Survey (2001–2011). Data on drivers and motor vehicle accidents are from the NSW Center for Road Safety. The sample
includes all drivers who are 17- or 18-years old ﬁrst obtaining a license after July 1, 2000 in NSW. Driver years are calculated
using individual licensing dates. Mortality risk is predicted based on a probit model for drivers age 17–21 (inclusive) with
regressors for the type of accident, general location of the accident, speed, use of seatbelt, role in ﬁrst impact, primary
cause of accident, and gender. Inpatient hospital data are from the AIHW National Hospital Morbidity Database (July
2001-June 2010).

24

Figure 1
Fatal Motor Vehicle Accidents in New South Wales and United States
Panel A: Fatality rate (per 100,000) in all motor vehicle accidents, 1970-2009

Panel B: Fatality rate (per 100,000) in alcohol related motor vehicle accidents, 1997-2009

Panel C: Share of MVA fatalities that are alcohol related, 1997-2009

Source: NSW Centre for Road Safety, Transport and the (US) National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration

25

26
Enrolled in School

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Enrolled in School

Panel A: Means

Employed

Employed

Notes: Data are from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey (2001-2011). Panel A reports means in two-month bins. Panel B reports estimates from
local linear regressions, using rectangular kernel weights and allowing the slopes to vary on each side of the threshold, for a range of diﬀerent bandwidths. The textbox within the ﬁgure
shows the optimal bandwidth selected by the procedure described in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) along with the corresponding point estimate and standard error estimate.

Lives With Parents

Lives With Parents

Figure 2
Estimated Discontinuities in Population Characteristics
Based on HILDA Survey Data

27

Panel A: Means

Drinks ≥ Once Per Week

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Drinks ≥ Once Per Week

Proportion of Days Drinking

Proportion of Days Drinking

Notes: Data are from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey (2001-2011). Panel A reports means in two-month bins. Panel B reports estimates from
local linear regressions, using rectangular kernel weights and allowing the slopes to vary on each side of the threshold, for a range of diﬀerent bandwidths. The textbox within the ﬁgure
shows the optimal bandwidth selected by the procedure described in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) along with the corresponding point estimate and standard error estimate. Drinking
frequency is based on responses to the question “do you drink alcohol?” (in surveys spanning 2001 to 2011) to which individuals can select that they never drink, rarely drink, drink 2 or 3
days per month, drink 1 or 2 days per week, drink 3 or 4 days per week, 5 or 6 days per week, or every day. The survey does not provide respondents a time frame of reference, e.g., “during
the past 30 days.” In order to mitigate this problem, we omit from the analysis observations in which a respondent is within 30 days of obtaining or having obtained legal access to alcohol,
or within 30 days of any other birthday (to account for possible celebration eﬀects). Appendix D shows results for alternative “donut” widths.

Ever Drinks

Ever Drinks

Figure 3
Estimated Discontinuities in Reported Drinking Behavior

28

Proportion of Days Binge Drinking

Panel A: Means

Proportion of Days Binge Drinking

Notes: Data are from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey. Binge drinking questions were only asked in three HILDA waves (2007, 2009 and 2011).
Binge drinking is deﬁned as ﬁve or more standard drinks on one occasion for females and seven or more standard drinks on one occasion for males. See also Figure 3 notes.

Binge Drinks ≥ Once Per Week

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Binge Drinks ≥ Once Per Week

Figure 4
Estimated Discontinuities in Reported Binge Drinking Behavior

29

Injured

Panel A: Means

Injured

Killed

Killed

Notes: Data are from the NSW Center for Road Safety (2001-2010). Panel A reports means in two-month bins. Panel B reports estimates from local linear regressions, using rectangular
kernel weights and allowing the slopes to vary on each side of the threshold, for a range of diﬀerent bandwidths. The textbox within the ﬁgure shows the optimal bandwidth selected by the
procedure described in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) along with the corresponding point estimate and standard error estimate.

Accident with Injury or Towed Vehicle

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Accident with Injury or Towed Vehicle

Figure 5
Estimated Discontinuities in Serious Motor Vehicle Accidents

30

Panel A: Means
Very High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.10)

High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.05)

Very High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.10)

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.05)

Notes: Each crash in the database was assigned a fatality-risk probability, equal to the predicted value from a probit model of fatality, using a large number of crash characteristics as
explanatory variables. The fatality risk model is described in Section 3.3 and Appendix B. See also Figure 5 notes.

Fatality Risk-Weighted Accidents

Fatality Risk-Weighted Accidents

Figure 6
Estimated Discontinuities in Motor Vehicle Accidents Weighted by Fatality Risk

31

Accident with Injury or Towed Vehicle

Notes: See Figure 5 notes

Injured

Panel A: Means

Injured

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Accident with Injury or Towed Vehicle

Figure 7
Estimated Discontinuities in Serious Motor Vehicle Accidents at Night

Killed

Killed

32

Notes: See Figure 5 notes and Figure 6 notes

Fatality-Weighted Accidents

Fatality-Weighted Accidents

Very High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.10)

High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.05)

Very High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.10)

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.05)

Panel A: Means

Figure 8
Estimated Discontinuities in Motor Vehicle Accidents at Night Weighted by Fatality Risk

33

Motor Vehicle Accident

Motor Vehicle Accident

Notes: Data are from the AIHW National Hospital Morbidity Database (July 2001-June 2010). Panel A reports means in two-month bins. Panel B reports estimates from local linear
regressions, using rectangular kernel weights and allowing the slopes to vary on each side of the threshold, for a range of diﬀerent bandwidths. The textbox within the ﬁgure shows the
optimal bandwidth selected by the procedure described in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) along with the corresponding point estimate and standard error estimate. In order to mitigate
the problem of birthday “celebration eﬀects”, we omit from the analysis observations within 7 days of any birthday. Appendix D shows results for alternative “donut” widths.

Alcohol Intoxication/Poisoning

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Alcohol Intoxication/Poisoning

Panel A: Means

Figure 9
Estimated Discontinuities in Hospitalizations for Alcohol Poisoning and Motor Vehicle Accidents

34

Notes: See Figure 9 notes

Motorcycle Accidents

Motorcycle Accidents

Assault

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Assault

Panel A: Means

Figure 10
Estimated Discontinuities in Hospitalizations for Other Causes

Other External Causes

Other External Causes

Appendix A: Additional Balance Figures
Figure A1
Number of Observations in HILDA by Age in Months relative to MLDA

Notes: Data are from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey (2001-2011). Frequency
counts are shown by age in two-month bins. The column centered around zero corresponds with observations that are not
used in our preferred “donut RD” analysis.

35

36
Born in Australia

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Born in Australia

Notes: Data are from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey (2001-2011).

Female

Female

Panel A: Means

Figure A2
Estimated Discontinuities in Population Characteristics
Based on HILDA Survey Data

English is 1st Language

English is 1st Language

37

Proportion Female

Proportion Female

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Notes: Data are from the NSW Center for Road Safety (2001-2010).

Proportion with P2 License

Proportion with P2 License

Panel A: Proportions and Counts

Figure A3
Estimated Discontinuities in Driver Characteristics
Based on Licensing Data

Number of Drivers

Number of Drivers

Appendix B: Results of Fatality Risk Model
The distribution of predicted fatality risk is highly skewed (Table B1). It is zero or close to
zero for the majority of crashes. It exceeds 1% for over 2,000 crashes, or 5.7% of crashes.
Table B2 shows key characteristics of fatality-risk weighted crashes (column 2), in comparison with all (unweighted) crashes (1), as well as the set of fatal crashes (3). As intended,
fatality-risk weighted crashes resemble fatal crashes on these characteristics. The small discrepancies between fatality-risk weighted crashes and driver-killed crashes are due to the larger
sample of crashes included in the fatality risk model. Unsurprisingly, fatal crashes are very
diﬀerent from the full set of crashes. For example, the average speed travelled is more than
twice as high in fatal crashes. The driver was travelling at high speed in less than 5% of crashes
overall, compared to 57% of fatal crashes. Likewise, fatal crashes are far more likely to not
involve seatbelt use, to occur at night and to occur in non-urban areas. Further, 93% of fatal
crashes are either head-on collisions or “oﬀ-path” crashes. In contrast, only one third of all
crashes fall into this category, with head on crashes making up just 4% of them. Finally the
driver is far more likely to be travelling on the wrong side of the road in fatal crashes.

38

Table B1
Distribution of Predicted Fatality-Risk For Relevant Crashes

Fatality-Risk

Number of Crashes

Share of Crashes

Zero
0 to 0.01%
0.01% to 0.1%
0.1% to 1%
1% to 5%
5% to 10%
10% +

4716
17250
8533
5307
1788
245
139

0.124
0.454
0.225
0.140
0.047
0.006
0.004

All relevant crashes

37978

1.000

Notes: Data are from the NSW Center for Road Safety (2001-2010). This table shows the distribution of predicted fatality
risk within the estimation sample from the main analysis. For greater precision, the fatality risk probit model was estimated
using an expanded sample including all drivers aged 17-21 years.

Table B2
Key Crash Characteristics: Fatality-Risk Weighted versus Unweighted Crashes

All crashes

Mean speed (km/h)
Fast (90 km/h+)
No seatbelt
Night
Non-urban
Head on crash
Oﬀ-path crash
All other Road User Movements
Incorrect side
Proceeding in lane
All Other Manoeuvres

Unweighted
(1)

Fatality-Risk Weighted
(2)

Driver-killed Crashes
(3)

38
0.053
0.003
0.255
0.086
0.037
0.311
0.653
0.029
0.687
0.285

87
0.562
0.081
0.429
0.379
0.286
0.579
0.135
0.266
0.628
0.107

88
0.571
0.075
0.375
0.388
0.375
0.550
0.075
0.375
0.575
0.050

Notes: Data are from the NSW Center for Road Safety (2001-2010). This table compares the observed characteristics of
fatality risk-weighted crashes to that of unweighted crashes and driver-killed crashes, respectively.

39

Appendix C: Eﬀect of MLDA on Mortality from External Causes
This appendix shows estimated discontinuities in mortality from external causes in NSW,
following the approach used throughout the paper. Data were obtained from the AIHW National
Mortality Database for deaths occurring between 1994 and 2010. Due to privacy regulations,
the data were provided as counts by age at death relative to 18th birthday, in 28-day bins, and
causes are classiﬁed in only two categories (MVA and other external). Deaths on 18th birthday
and one day either side were excluded.
The results (Figure C1) show no evidence of discontinuities in MVA fatalities or in deaths
from other external causes. The point-estimates are close to zero at all bandwidths, and the
conﬁdence intervals are reasonably tight. Using the optimal bandwidth, the 95% CIs rule out
a 25% increase in MVA fatalities and a 20% increase in all externally caused mortality.
However, we do not emphasize these results for a number of reasons. The analysis shown
in the body of the text has emphasized several nuances in studying MLDA eﬀects in NSW.
These include the role of motor vehicle licensing, including discrepancies between licensing for
motorcycles and for other motor vehicles, as well as gender diﬀerences in binge drinking and
drunk driving. Due to the paucity of mortality data in NSW (because of its relatively small
population), combined with data access restrictions due to privacy, we are unable to explore
those nuances using mortality data.
Nevertheless, these results are reassuring. They are consistent with those found using hospital data and with MVA crash data.

40

41
Other External Causes

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Other External Causes

All External Causes

All External Causes

Notes: Data are from the AIHW National Mortality Database (1994-2010). Only deaths in NSW are included. Panel A reports means in two-month bins. Panel B reports estimates from
local linear regressions, using rectangular kernel weights and allowing the slopes to vary on each side of the threshold, for a range of diﬀerent bandwidths. The textbox within the ﬁgure
shows the optimal bandwidth selected by the procedure described in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) along with the corresponding point estimate and standard error estimate. In order
to mitigate the problem of birthday “celebration eﬀects”, we omit from the analysis observations within 1 day of any birthday. Ideally, we would use a “donut” width that is consistent with
the main analysis, but we are restricted by the categories in which the frequency tabulations were provided by the data custodian.

MVAs

MVAs

Panel A: Means

Figure C1
Estimated Discontinuities in Mortality Due to External Causes

Appendix D: Sensitivity of Results to ‘Donut’ Size

42

Table D1
Sensitivity of Key Estimates to ‘Donut’ Size

Donut Size in Days from Each Birthday
Outcomes
Drinking Behavior
Ever drinks
bandwidth
Drinks regularly
bandwidth
Proportion of days drinks
bandwidth
Binge drinks regularly
bandwidth
Proportion of days binge drinks
bandwidth
Motor Vehicle Accidents
MVAs Involving a Vehicle Being Towed, Injury, or Death
bandwidth
Injuries in MVAs
bandwidth
Deaths in MVAs
bandwidth
Mortality-Risk-Weighted MVAs
bandwidth
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.05
bandwidth
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.010
bandwidth
MVAs Involving a Vehicle Being Towed, Injury, or Death
bandwidth
Injuries in MVAs
bandwidth
Deaths in MVAs
bandwidth
Mortality-Risk-Weighted MVAs
bandwidth
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.05
bandwidth
MVAs with Mortality Risk > 0.010
bandwidth
Hospitalizations
Alcohol Intoxication/Poisoning
bandwidth
Driver in Motor Vehicle Accident
bandwidth
Rider in Motor Cycle Accident
bandwidth
Assault
bandwidth
Any Other External Cause
bandwidth

1

7

14

30

0.213∗∗∗
(0.051)
302
0.226∗∗∗
(0.036)
637
0.054∗∗∗
(0.012)
449
0.186∗∗
(0.073)
444
0.033∗∗
(0.017)
392

0.165∗∗∗
(0.039)
498
0.200∗∗∗
(0.048)
377
0.045∗∗∗
(0.014)
312
0.124
(0.082)
388
0.034∗
(0.018)
368

0.150∗∗∗
(0.049)
373
0.182∗∗∗
(0.052)
344
0.040∗∗∗
(0.015)
301
0.203∗∗∗
(0.078)
438
0.037∗∗
(0.019)
359

0.186∗∗∗
(0.052)
312
0.179∗∗∗
(0.064)
270
0.041∗∗
(0.017)
284
0.190∗
(0.106)
292
0.044∗∗∗
(0.014)
670

-0.0529
(0.1823)
118
0.0003
(0.0585)
182
0.0003
(0.0055)
224
-0.0009
(0.0017)
207
-0.0102
(0.0139)
209
0.0041
(0.0077)
192
-0.1163
(0.0945)
117
0.0357
(0.0345)
156
-0.0038
(0.0035)
197
0.0005
(0.0012)
223
-0.0025
(0.0088)
225
0.0029
(0.0059)
152

-0.0625
(0.2067)
104
-0.0154
(0.0771)
128
0.0007
(0.0054)
232
0.0002
(0.0018)
239
-0.0034
(0.0143)
218
0.0057
(0.0087)
187
-0.0765
(0.0983)
95
0.0388
(0.0400)
143
-0.0014
(0.0035)
212
0.0015
(0.0011)
287
0.0007
(0.0085)
246
0.0100
(0.0080)
118

-0.0070
(0.2000)
110
-0.0415
(0.0655)
181
-0.0005
(0.0062)
193
-0.0003
(0.0022)
181
-0.0106
(0.0164)
191
0.0030
(0.0089)
172
0.0215
(0.0923)
113
0.0849∗∗∗
(0.0304)
288
-0.0028
(0.0041)
181
-0.0024
(0.0027)
85
-0.0072
(0.0145)
148
0.0009
(0.0064)
182

0.1184
(0.2702)
100
-0.0313
(0.1077)
117
0.0010
(0.0083)
152
0.0023
(0.0027)
184
-0.0038
(0.0145)
245
0.0112
(0.0094)
195
-0.0014
(0.1489)
77
0.0336
(0.0559)
127
0.0006
(0.0055)
134
-0.0017
(0.0023)
103
0.0084
(0.0084)
260
-0.0020
(0.0071)
122

5.339∗∗∗
(1.513)
305
-1.212
(1.753)
209
2.928∗∗
(1.380)
363
7.357∗∗∗
(1.899)
288
3.603
(5.894)
339

4.277∗∗∗
(1.499)
293
-0.969
(1.766)
234
2.046
(1.383)
401
7.144∗∗∗
(1.899)
308
-0.303
(5.285)
432

4.051∗∗
(1.726)
253
-2.587
(1.752)
255
3.640∗∗
(1.538)
342
6.173∗∗∗
(1.620)
458
-0.735
(4.899)
488

2.390
(2.035)
203
-4.299∗∗∗
(1.433)
431
2.924∗
(1.605)
313
0.979
(3.804)
148
-6.220
(7.677)
254

Notes: This Table considers sensitivity of the key estimates to alternate “donut” sizes. For each indicator and donut size,
it shows the estimated discontinuity, robust standard error, and the bandwidth used, selected by the procedure described
in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012).
43

Appendix E: Estimated Eﬀects on Across Gender
This appendix shows estimated eﬀects across gender for all of the outcomes considered in
the main text.

44

45

Notes: See Figure 3 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E1
Ever Drinks

Females

Females

46

Notes: See Figure 3 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E2
Drinks ≥ Once Per Week

Females

Females

47

Notes: See Figure 3 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E3
Proportion of Days Drinks

Females

Females

48

Notes: See Figure 3 notes and Figure 4 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E4
Binge Drinks ≥ Once Per Week

Females

Females

49

Notes: See Figure 3 notes and Figure 4 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E5
Proportion of Days Binge Drinks

Females

Females

50

Notes: See Figure 5 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E6
All Serious Motor Vehicle Accidents

Females

Females

51

Notes: See Figure 5 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E7
Injured in a Motor Vehicle Accident

Females

Females

52

Notes: See Figure 5 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E8
Killed in a Motor Vehicle Accident

Females

Females

53

Notes: See Figure 5 notes and Figure 6 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E9
Fatality-Risk-Weighted Motor Vehicle Accidents

Females

Females

54

Notes: See Figure 5 notes and Figure 6 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E10
High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.05)

Females

Females

55

Notes: See Figure 5 notes and Figure 6 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E11
Very High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.10)

Females

Females

56

Notes: See Figure 5 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E12
All Serious Motor Vehicle Accidents at Night

Females

Females

57

Notes: See Figure 5 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E13
Injured in a Motor Vehicle Accident at Night

Females

Females

58

Notes: See Figure 5 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E14
Killed in a Motor Vehicle Accident at Night

Females

Females

59

Notes: See Figure 5 notes and Figure 6 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E15
Fatality-Risk-Weighted Motor Vehicle Accidents at Night

Females

Females

60

Notes: See Figure 5 notes and Figure 6 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E16
High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.05) at Night

Females

Females

61

Notes: See Figure 5 notes and Figure 6 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E17
Very High Fatality Risk Accidents (> 0.10) at Night

Females

Females

62

Notes: See Figure 9 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E18
Hospitalizations for Alcohol Intoxication/Poisoning

Females

Females

63

Notes: See Figure 9 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E19
Hospitalizations for Motor Vehicle Accidents

Females

Females

64

Notes: See Figure 9 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E20
Hospitalizations for Motorcycle Accidents

Females

Females

65

Notes: See Figure 9 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E21
Hospitalizations for Assaults

Females

Females

66

Notes: See Figure 9 notes.

All

All

Males

Panel B: Discontinuity Estimates By Bandwidth (In Days)

Males

Panel A: Means

Figure E22
Hospitalizations for Other External Causes

Females

Females

