                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES GREATER INEQUALITY LEAD TO MORE HOUSEHOLD BORROWING?
                 NEW EVIDENCE FROM HOUSEHOLD DATA

                                           Olivier Coibion
                                        Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                         Marianna Kudlyak
                                          John Mondragon

                                        Working Paper 19850
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19850


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




We are grateful to Meta Brown and Donghoon Lee for helpful comments about the data, and seminar
participants at the Richmond Fed, St. Louis Fed, and CES-Ifo conference. The views expressed here
are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal
Reserve System or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated. Mondragon thanks the
Richmond Fed for their generous support while part of this paper was written. Gorodnichenko thanks
the NSF and Sloan Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, and John Mondragon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Greater Inequality Lead to More Household Borrowing? New Evidence from HouseholdData
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, and John Mondragon
NBER Working Paper No. 19850
January 2014
JEL No. D14,E21,E51,G21

                                              ABSTRACT

One suggested hypothesis for the dramatic rise in household borrowing that preceded the financial
crisis is that low-income households increased their demand for credit to finance higher consumption
expenditures in order to “keep up” with higher-income households. Using household level data on
debt accumulation during 2001-2012, we show that low-income households in high-inequality regions
accumulated less debt relative to income than their counterparts in lower-inequality regions, which
negates the hypothesis. We argue instead that these patterns are consistent with supply-side interpretations
of debt accumulation patterns during the 2000s. We present a model in which banks use applicants’
incomes, combined with local income inequality, to infer the underlying type of the applicant, so that
banks ultimately channel more credit toward lower-income applicants in low-inequality regions than
high-inequality regions. We confirm the predictions of the model using data on individual mortgage
applications in high- and low-inequality regions over this time period.


Olivier Coibion                                      Marianna Kudlyak
7600 Pitter Pat                                      701 E Byrd Str.
Austin, TX 78736                                     Floor 22, Research Department
and NBER                                             Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
ocoibion@gmail.com                                   Richmond, VA, 23219
                                                     https://sites.google.com/site/mariannakudlyak/
Yuriy Gorodnichenko                                  mkudlyak@gmail.com
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880                                 John Mondragon
University of California, Berkeley                   530 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              University of California, Berkeley
and NBER                                             Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu                           mondragon.john@gmail.com
1 Introduction

The financial crisis of 2008-09 was preceded by an exceptional rise in borrowing by U.S. households,
accounted for primarily by a rise in mortgage debt. This increasing mortgage debt was securitized and
ultimately played a key role in bringing down the financial system once housing prices began to decline
and the associated mortgage-backed securities fell sharply in value. Why did households take on so much
new debt in the years immediately preceding the financial crisis?
        There are two main views about this process. The first view is that the rise in borrowing reflected
“credit supply” factors. Proponents point to the progress in information technology (Sanchez 2009 and
Athreya, Tam and Young 2012) and rising financialization of debt (especially mortgages) as increasing the
supply of credit to households with a disproportionally larger increase of credit to low-income and high
risk households (Drozd and Serrano-Padial, 2013). Others also point to political motivations for expanding
credit supply. For example, Rajan (2010) argues that, in response to rising income inequality, credit was
made increasingly available to lower income groups to support their consumption levels in the face of
stagnant incomes.
        According to the second view (“demand for credit”), there was a rise in the demand for borrowing
on the part of U.S. households, especially low-income households. One motivation for such a rise in demand
for borrowing again stems from rising inequality in the U.S. Specifically, rising consumption on the part of
wealthy households could have generated a rise in the demand for borrowing on the part of lower-income
households in their attempts to “keep up” with their wealthier neighbors, the so-called “keeping up with the
Joneses” effect. Indeed, there is a positive correlation between income inequality in the U.S. (income share
of the top 5%) and household debt relative to GDP (Figure 1) over time. Both were stable from 1967 to
around 1980, then both measures rose gradually over the course of the 1980s as noted in Iacoviello (2008).
But while income inequality then went up sharply in the early 1990s, household debt only caught up over
the 2000s. The correlation is certainly consistent with the possibility of a causal relationship running from
inequality to household borrowing.
        In this paper, we focus specifically on the link between inequality and household borrowing. In
particular, we investigate whether borrowing patterns on the part of low-, middle- and high-income
households differed depending on the level of local income inequality (where we define “local” as ranging
from as fine a geographic level as the zip code to as aggregated a level as the state). Local inequality is,
from a household’s point of view, likely to be the most relevant metric for “keeping up with Joneses”.
Furthermore, with most of the rise in income inequality in the U.S. since the 1970s reflecting a rise in
inequality within regions rather than inequality across regions, any sensitivity of borrowing to local
inequality levels could readily have translated into aggregate effects.



                                                      2
        To assess whether borrowing patterns differed depending on local inequality levels, we study the
changes in debt to income ratios at the household level over the course of the 2000s and their relationship
with households’ relative standings in the income distribution and the amount of local income inequality.
We use unique data from the New York Federal Reserve Bank Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax (CCP)
which provides comprehensive debt measures for millions of U.S. households since 1999, including
detailed decompositions of debt by type (i.e. mortgage, auto, credit cards, etc.). Because this dataset does
not include a measure of household income, we use the relationship between household debt and income,
conditional on observable household characteristics, in the Survey of Consumer Finances to predict initial
household income in 2001. This imputation allows us to study the relationship between income and debt in
unprecedented detail. We then characterize the evolution of household debt levels, relative to initial income
levels, across income groups in areas with different levels of income inequality, which is akin to a
“difference-in-differences” approach across income groups and regional inequality levels.
        Our main finding is that high-income households in high-inequality regions accumulated more debt
relative to their incomes than did low-income households in the same regions, or equivalently that low-
income households in high-inequality regions borrowed relatively less than similar households in low-
inequality regions. This effect is precisely the opposite of what one would have expected from “keeping up
with the Joneses” driving the rise in household debt during the 2000s. We show that this result is remarkably
robust and holds up to an extensive array of robustness checks: e.g. we find these patterns within households
with low or high credit scores, within regions which experienced either high or low home price appreciation,
within households with either low or high initial debt levels, etc. We measure inequality at the zip code,
county and state and find similar results across levels of aggregation. The fact that the baseline results are
robust to controlling for a wide range of other local factors that are correlated with inequality levels suggests
that it is indeed the level of inequality that matters rather than inequality being a stand-in for other economic
channels.
        Because our data provides disaggregated information on household debt, we assess the link
between local inequality and different forms of debt: mortgage debt, auto debt, and credit card debt. We
find strong evidence that low-income households in high-inequality regions borrowed less in terms of both
mortgage and auto debt than those in low-inequality regions. A unique feature of the data is that we have
information on both credit card balances as well as credit card limits. This is particularly useful because the
latter can be interpreted as largely representing credit supply whereas the former primarily reflects the
demand for credit. We find that low-income households in high-inequality regions saw their credit limits
rise by less than those in lower inequality regions as was the case with mortgage and auto debt. At the same
time, no economically significant heterogeneity is observed in terms of credit card balances. We interpret



                                                       3
this contrast as pointing to supply side factors as being at the root of the differential debt accumulation
patterns that we observe in the data.
        To illustrate how supply-side factors can explain the differential borrowing behavior tied to
regional inequality, we present a model in which each region is composed of two types of households.
High-type households have higher income on average than low-type households and are also less likely to
(exogenously) default on debt. A continuum of banks in each region lends to these households but banks
do not observe households’ types, only their income and another signal correlated with the underlying type.
As income inequality rises, banks treat an applicant’s income as an increasingly precise signal about their
type and therefore target lending toward higher income households on average. How they do so, however,
can vary with the local banking structure. For example, if banks are perfectly competitive and can charge
different interest rates to different applicants, then higher-income applicants will on average face lower
interest rates than low-income applicants, and this difference will be increasing in the amount of local
income inequality. If instead we model the banking system as being monopolistic and forced to charge a
common interest rate to all applicants, then this bank will reject low-income applicants more frequently
than high-income applicants, and this difference will again be increasing in the amount of local inequality.
In both cases, banks will make credit more readily accessible (or cheaper) to high-income households when
local inequality is higher because the latter implies that income is a more precise signal of applicant types.
        The credit supply mechanism in the model has some testable implications. If banks use individual
incomes combined with regional inequality as a signal about individuals’ types, then we would expect to
see richer households be denied less often when applying for mortgages in high-inequality regions than in
low-inequality regions, holding other characteristics constant. Similarly, one would expect richer
households in high-inequality regions to be less likely to pay higher interest rates on a loan.
        We test these theoretical predictions using detailed mortgage application information from the
publicly available Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data (HMDA). These data track mortgage applications as
they go through the origination process and contain information on applicants (including their income, the
amount of the loan requested, their locale, and whether the loan is denied or originated). We document that
high-income households in high-inequality regions were less likely to be denied than their counterparts in
low-inequality regions, precisely as suggested by the theory. High-income households in high-inequality
regions were also less likely to be charged higher interest rates for their mortgages than equivalent households
in low-inequality regions. Thus, both theoretical predictions from the model are confirmed in the data.
        In summary, we document a systematic relationship between local inequality and differential
borrowing patterns across richer and poorer households in the U.S. that contradicts predictions based on
“keeping up with the Joneses” motives. We argue that these results can instead be explained through an
information channel: applicants’ incomes are a stronger signal of their underlying quality when local

                                                       4
inequality is high so banks are likely to channel relatively more credit to low-income applicants when the
level of local inequality is low. These results have implications for interpreting the sources of the dramatic
rise in borrowing by households during the housing boom, indicating that the source was more likely to
stem from an expansion in credit supply than credit demand.
        This paper is most closely related to recent work evaluating the strength of “keeping up with the
Joneses” forces. Most notably, Bertrand and Morse (2013) study whether rising consumption of the rich
induces the non-rich to consume more.1 Using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES), they find that,
within a state, the consumption of the rich (the top quintile of the income distribution) predicts higher
consumption for the nonrich, holding everything else constant including own income. Bertrand and Morse
interpret their estimates as supporting the view that rising income inequality in a geographic market
translates into more demand for credit by low and middle-income households (see, for example, Rajan
2010). In contrast, by focusing explicitly on the borrowing decisions of households and exploiting a finer
level of geographic variation, we document that low and middle income households living in high-
inequality regions borrowed no more, and in fact less, than similar households in low-inequality regions.
This need not be interpreted as contradicting the empirical results of Bertrand and Morse (2013), since the
differences in consumption that they document could have been financed through channels other than debt,
e.g. through increased labor force participation, longer working hours, etc. But our results indicate that
“keeping up with the Joneses” forces are unlikely to have played a primary role in accounting for the
dramatic rise in household leverage during the 2000s and therefore in laying the groundwork for the
financial crisis of 2008-2009.
        This paper therefore also relates to a broader line of research investigating the macroeconomic
consequences of income inequality, such as whether they are systematically related to financial crises.
Kumhof, Ranciere and Winant (2013), for example, argue that a rise in inequality driven by an increase in
the share of income going to those at the top of the income distribution induces the latter to save more,
lowering interest rates and inducing poorer households to borrow more, ultimately leading to more financial
fragility and a higher likelihood of a financial crisis. Bordo and Meissner (2012) find little evidence of such
a link based on aggregate data since 1920 for fourteen advanced economies, whereas Perugini, Holscher
and Collier (2013) find a positive link between income inequality and private sector indebtedness since
1970 across eighteen economies. We contribute to this literature by documenting how, within U.S. regions,
debt accumulation patterns across different segments of the population over the course of the 2000s were
systematically related to local levels of income inequality. We also provide a novel interpretation for these


1
 Prior evidence in the same spirit as Bertrand and Morse (2013) includes Neumark and Postlewaite (1998), Zizzo and
Oswald (2001), Christen and Morgan (2005), Luttmer (2005), Daly and Wilson (2006), Maurer and Meier (2008),
Charles, Hurst and Roussanov (2009), Kuhn et al. (2010), Heffetz (2011), and Guven and Sorensen (2012).

                                                        5
effects: local income inequality can be used in combination with an applicant’s income level to refine
inference about borrower types. In such a setting, higher levels of income inequality will induce banks to
reallocate credit toward higher income applicants and away from lower income applicants, thereby
potentially amplifying the implications of a more unequal income distribution for the distribution of
consumption.
        The relationship between income inequality and the allocation of credit emphasized in our paper
also relates to the literature on consumption and income inequality. Krueger and Perri (2006) and related
works argue that consumption inequality during the last decades did not rise with income inequality.2
Krueger and Perri argue that low-income households have experienced income shocks that increased
income inequality, but due to enhanced financial intermediation these households have been able to smooth
their consumption such that consumption inequality remained stable. Iacoviello (2008) replicates the trend
and cyclicality of household debt since the 1960s and also argues that increased access to credit has allowed
households to smooth increasingly volatile income processes. As income inequality increases households
use credit markets to smooth the temporary income shocks so that the aggregate level of debt increases with
inequality. In contrast, Aguiar and Bils (2012) argue that, when one corrects for measurement errors
associated with underreporting of consumption expenditures over time and across different goods,
consumption inequality has tracked income inequality closely over the last three decades. While this line
of research appeals to financial intermediation as a key link between consumption and income inequality,
it could not measure directly the quantitative importance of formal borrowing for smoothing shocks and its
relation to inequality due to data constraints. We examine this issue directly using household level data on
debt accumulation. Our results are consistent with the findings in Aguiar and Bils (2012) because if low-
income households were smoothing shocks to the extent suggested by Krueger and Perri then we would
expect low-income households to have accumulated relatively more debt in areas where inequality is higher.
        We also contribute to the vast literature on household borrowing that covers such diverse topics as
pricing of mortgages, optimal portfolios of household debt, risk scoring, and determinants of default
probabilities. Our paper is most related to studies of default determinants (e.g., Fay, Hurst, and White 2002,
Gross and Souleles 2002) and lenders’ treatment of loan applications (e.g., Tootell 1996, Munnell et al.
1996, Turner and Skidmore 1999) in the sense that we attempt to understand who obtains credit and at what
terms. However, while previous research studies these aspects for borrowers (or lenders) without relating a
given individual to the pool of borrowers, we explicitly focus on how the relative positions of borrowers in
the income distribution as well as the properties of the income distribution can affect the level of debt they



2
 Related papers are Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2010), and
Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010).

                                                      6
accumulate. Thus, in contrast to the previous literature, we examine directly the interplay between debt and
inequality, which have both been salient subjects of recent policy and academic debates.
           This paper is structured as follows. We describe our primary source of data in section 2 as well as
our imputation procedure for household income. In section 3, we consider household-level regressions
describing the differential debt accumulation patterns across income levels in regions with different levels
of income inequality. Section 4 presents a model that can explain these patterns. In section 5, we test and
confirm the additional predictions of the model using data on mortgage applications by individuals in
different inequality areas. Section 6 concludes.


2 Data
In this section, we first describe the dataset used to measure household debt accumulation over the course
of the 2000s. Second, we discuss how we impute household income based on observed patterns in the
Survey of Consumer Finances. Third, we construct local income inequality measures and describe some of
their properties.


2.1.       The New York Federal Reserve Bank Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax
We measure household debt accumulation using the New York Federal Reserve Bank Consumer Credit
Panel/Equifax (CCP) data. The CCP is a quarterly panel of individuals with detailed information on
consumer liabilities, delinquency, some demographic information, credit scores, and geographic identifiers
to the zip level.3 The core of the database constitutes a 5% random sample of all U.S. individuals with credit
files. The database also contains information on all individuals with credit files residing in the same
household as the individuals in the primary sample. The household members are added to the sample based
on the mailing address in the existing credit files. Using the households’ identifiers, we aggregate individual
records into households’ records and construct measures of households’ debt. Thus, the resulting sample is
a sample of U.S. households in which at least one member has a credit file. The data in the CCP are updated
quarterly. We use 100% of the CCP sample. Lee and van der Klaauw (2010) provide an excellent detailed
description of the database.
           The data cover all major categories of household debt including mortgages, home equity lines of
credit (HELOC), credit cards, and student loans. Because of the large sample size, the breadth of variables
observed, detailed location, and the ability to construct a quarterly household panel these data provide the
most detailed picture of household debt available.




3
    For complete details on the data set and variables construction see Appendix B.

                                                            7
2.2.     Income Rank Imputation
While the CCP provides detailed records of household debt and geographical location, it does not include
information on household income. To address this issue, we impute income in the CCP using information
from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). The SCF is a household-level survey that contains
information on debt balances and income as well as a rich set of demographic characteristics. However, the
SCF does not provide geographic identifiers in the publicly available data. We use the SCF to estimate how
household income relates to debt and demographic characteristics available in both the CCP and SCF data
sets. We then use these estimates to impute household income in the CCP data. Finally, we use the imputed
income and the estimated error terms from the SCF to impute the household’s income rank in the
household’s geographical area.
         In our analysis, we restrict the sample to households for whom the household head’s age is between
20 and 65 to minimize potential age related selection effects. The data in the CCP are updated quarterly.
We use data from the third quarter of the CCP for years 2001 - 2012. We follow Brown et al. (2011) and
choose the third quarter to maximize the match with the SCF survey (typically administered between April
and December), which we use to impute the initial income distribution as described below. For consistency,
we then use the third quarter of each subsequent year to generate annual measures of household debt.
         Table 1 contains the summary statistics from the CCP and SCF samples from the third quarter of
2001. The statistics from the SCF and CCP are similar for most categories with the exception of credit card
balances. This finding is consistent with Brown et al. (2011) reporting that overall and in the majority of
disaggregated debt categories (mortgages, auto loans and HELOCs), borrower characteristics and
environment cells, debt levels reported in the SCF and CCP are similar. Brown et al. (2011) suggest that
some of the discrepancy between the credit card balance statistics in the two datasets might come from the
way credit card balances are recorded: the CCP contains records of all credit card balances, whereas the
households in the SCF might only report the fraction of the balance they intend to roll over.4 The mortgage
balance and HELOCs in the CCP are slightly higher than in the SCF because the CCP measure includes
secondary/investment properties, while in the SCF it does not (see Brown et al. 2011). The auto debt balance
is also slightly higher in the CCP because the CCP always includes auto leases, while in the SCF
respondents usually do not report car leases as auto debt. The bankruptcy rates are very similar between the
two samples. The tables also show some differences between the delinquency statistics in the two datasets.


4
  In the CCP, the credit balance is recorded on some date during the quarter. For some individuals, this can be the date
right before they pay off most of their credit balance, and the balance might largely reflect the transaction use of the
credit cards. For other individuals, the date might be the date after they pay off the intended balance and the remaining
amount reflects the carry-over balances. In the SCF, the credit balance reported likely does not reflect the use of credit
card for transactions, but rather the debt that the household does not plan to repay in the current period. In addition,
the households in the SCF might forget older balances.

                                                            8
The SCF households probably report only severe delinquencies on large quantities of debt and do not report
delinquencies that they regard as temporary or small.5
         To impute the rank in the income distribution for a household in the CCP, we first estimate the
following relationship between the household’s gross income and observable characteristics in the 2001 SCF,
                                         log    ,                   ,                 ,   ,                                  (1)
where    ,       is the income of household , and         ,       is the vector of the household’s characteristics that
include (logs of) mortgage balance, credit card balance, credit card limit, an indicator for positive credit
card limit, the credit card utilization rate conditional on positive credit card limit, auto loan balance, HELOC
balance, student loan balance, an indicator for bankruptcy, an indicator of 60 days or more past due on any
loan, the age of the head of the household and the household size.                                .   is a function that includes
polynomials, interaction terms, and dummy variables. Appendix F provides more information on the
specification and variables. We estimate equation (1) using OLS (with the SCF sampling weights) and
eliminate outliers using Cook's distance.6 The adjusted R2 for this regression is 0.55.
         Using estimated β, we construct the expected imputed (log) income for each household                              in the
third quarter of 2001 in the CCP data:
                                               E log                    ,         ,
and the expected imputed income (in levels)
                                     E              exp E log               0.5       ,
                                                                                              ,

where        ,
                    0.3721 is the variance of        ,   estimated in equation (1).

         Having imputed households’ income in the CCP, we then estimate the household’s rank in the local
income distribution. For each household in area               we construct its income rank in 2001,                 , ,   , as the
rank of the household's expected imputed income, E log                  ,             , in the imputed income distribution for
location . We approximate the local income distribution through a simple resampling procedure. In
particular, we assume that the distribution of income residuals estimated in the SCF is the same across all
locations. Note that to the extent that this assumption is not appropriate, we will tend to bias our results
against finding any role for inequality in accounting for debt dynamics. After drawing a household from
location c in the CCP and calculating its expected income, we add a randomly drawn residual estimated on
the SCF sample to obtain the actual household income:


5
  In the SCF data, the 60DPD indicator is the indicator of whether a household has ever been delinquent on any loan
for 60 days or longer. In the CCP data, the 60DPD indicator is the indicator of whether a household is delinquent on
any loan for 60 days or longer in the current quarter.
6
  Equation (1) is estimated only for observations with positive values of income. We also restrict our analysis to the
50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, dropping the observations from Puerto Rico and U.S.-owned territories.


                                                              9
                                         log     , ,                 , ,        ̂   .
By repeating the process 50,000 times, with draws done with replacement, we approximate the local income
distribution. We then calculate each household’s percentile rank (                      , ,   ) as well as distributional
statistics. The higher the value of        , ,         , the relatively richer is household in its geographical location
c in 2001.
           We separately construct the rank of the household by the household's location at the three different
levels of aggregation: zip code, county and state. When the measure is constructed at the zip code level, we
restrict the analysis to zip codes with at least 100 households in our CCP sample. This gives us 14,529
distinct zip codes in 2001. When the measure is constructed at the county level, we restrict the analysis to
counties with at least 300 households in our CCP sample. This procedure gives us 2,303 counties in 2001,
covering over 35,000 zip codes.
           We check the quality of our imputation in a number of ways. Table 2 presents the moments of the
income distribution imputed in the CCP and the same moments calculated from the SCF. The two sets of
moments are very similar, suggesting that our imputation function is sensible. We also check the quality of
our income imputation procedure by bringing income information to the CCP data from an alternative
source. In particular, we merge the CCP data with the data from a proprietary database. This database has
detailed mortgage-level panel data that contain information on a majority of mortgages originated in the
U.S.. These data include the debt-to-income ratio associated with each mortgage at the time of origination.
We use information on the mortgage origination month, location (zip code) and balance from this
proprietary database and the same attributes from the mortgage trade-line data in the CCP to match
households in the two datasets.7 The earliest year when the debt-to-income variable is available in both the
proprietary dataset and the SCF is 2007; thus we merge the data using the first mortgages originated in
2007. Prior to the merge, we eliminate all cases of multiple mortgages with the same combination of open
month, initial balance and zip code in both datasets to ensure that the match is unique. For the sample of
matched households we then use the debt-to-income ratio from the proprietary database and the debt in the
CCP to estimate the income. For this subset of matched households we compare the income rank derived
from the proprietary data with the income rank derived from the SCF-CCP imputation. The two measures
of rank are highly and positively correlated (Spearman correlation coefficient is 0.55), confirming that our
imputation procedure provides a good measure of income. When we regress the imputed CCP measure of
income on the actual measure of income from the proprietary database, the estimate of the slope is
practically one and thus measurement errors arising from the imputation do not appear to be mean-reverting
to any significant extent.


7
    See Elul et al. (2010) for a similar merge procedure.

                                                                10
2.3.     Local Inequality Measures
Having imputed income in the CCP, we construct the local inequality measures for 2001 (                    ,    ). Our
                                                                                                     th
preferred measure of inequality is the difference between expected log income at the 90 percentile and
expected log income at the 10th percentile, i.e.,

                       ,          90        log    , ,              10        log    , ,         .
We then compare this measure to inequality measures constructed from alternative sources. At the zip code
level, we use data from the IRS on household adjusted gross income (AGI) drawn from the 2001 tax returns.
At the county level, we use the Census data on household income from 2000. Both of these sources provide
income bins and the fraction of the population within each bin. Using this information, we construct a simple
approximation to the Gini coefficient. The CCP measure constructed from imputed incomes is highly
correlated with Gini coefficients based on Census or IRS data. For example, the correlation between Gini
coefficients from the 2000 Census and 90-10 differences in the CCP data at the county level is 0.59.
         Figure 2 plots a map of U.S. inequality at the county level. Inequality is on average highest in the
southern states, as well as California and the Pacific Northwest. Midwestern states, in contrast, stand out for
having some of the lowest levels of inequality on average. The map also shows that inequality tends to be
higher in large cities than in more rural areas.
         The map, which plots inequality at the county level, masks even greater regional heterogeneity in
inequality at the zip code level. Figure 3 plots histograms of our CCP inequality measure at each level of
aggregation. Average inequality is higher at lower levels of aggregation with a mean across zip codes of 2.24
and a mean of 1.68 across states. The standard deviation of inequality is twice as high (0.15) at the zip level
compared to the state level (0.07).
         We focus on local income inequality for a number of reasons. First, this is likely to be the most
relevant metric when households compare themselves to others. Second, it avoids measurement issues
associated with comparing incomes across very different areas (e.g. $100K in New York vs. Tulsa). Third,
much of the rise in aggregate inequality in the U.S. reflects rising inequality within regions rather than
across regions.8 Finally, there is much more variation in income inequality across regions than in aggregate
inequality over time, which is necessary for identifying any potential effects on inequality on household
behavior.



8
  In Appendix C, we describe in detail a decomposition of aggregate income inequality in the U.S. from 1970 to 2000
measured using Census income data. When we measure the relative importance of differences in mean incomes across
regions (“between” inequality) versus the dispersion of incomes within regions (“within” inequality) for each Census,
we find that “between” inequality has consistently accounted for less than two percent of total inequality and that this
share has, if anything, been declining over time.

                                                          11
3 Empirical Analysis of Debt and Inequality
In this section, we investigate whether households’ borrowing patterns from 2001 to 2012 varied with local
inequality. We do so using household level regressions of debt to income changes over time as a function
of household characteristics, the household’s position in the local income distribution, and interactions of
the latter with local inequality measures. We find that while the evidence supports the notion that local
inequality affected debt accumulation patterns across income groups, the direction of the effect is opposite
to what one would expect from “keeping up with the Joneses” effects. We document the robustness of this
result along a variety of dimensions.


3.1.     Baseline Results
We are interested in estimating the role of initial local income inequality on the relationship between the
household's debt accumulation and the household's rank in the initial local income distribution. In particular,
we estimate the change in the household's debt between 2001 and year , 2002                       2012, as a function
of the household's income rank in the 2001 local income distribution, conditional on local income inequality
in 2001. The benchmark specification is

                                             ,            ,            ,          ,                   ,                      (2)
                                ,


where             is the change from year 2001 to year in the debt of household that resides in location
             ,

                                                                                                                         ,
relative to the household's (imputed expected) income in 2001 (in levels), i.e.,                          ≡                    ,
                                                                                                  ,                  ,

where       is deflated by the CPI-U and expressed in 2001 dollars.           is the fixed effect of the geographical
location that is at one level of aggregation higher than the geographic area used to construct the income
distribution and the income inequality measure.9 We use the 2001 measure of local income inequality
because it is predetermined relative to subsequent household debt accumulation decisions and it is highly
persistent over time.
         Parameters , β and         describe the relationship between the household’s debt accumulation and
local inequality. If       0, low-rank households within an area accumulate relatively more debt than the
high-rank households. If               0, then local inequality is irrelevant for household debt accumulation.
This case is shown in Panel A of Figure 4. Panel B of Figure 4 illustrates the case when                  0,        0,
0. If     0, an area with higher inequality is associated with higher debt accumulation. If                   0, this effect
weakens as household rank increases. Such a case is an example of the “keeping up with Joneses”
hypothesis. Specification (2) can be interpreted as a “difference-in-differences” approach in which we

9
  For example, in the regressions with zip code-level distribution of income and inequality, we control for county-
level fixed effects. In the regressions with county-level rank and inequality, we control for state-level fixed effects.
We do not control for the geographical fixed effects in the regressions with state-level income rank and inequality.

                                                              12
compare high- and low-ranked households across high- and low-inequality regions, with γ being the key
parameter that determines whether such differences have been important.
        We estimate equation (2) separately for each year , 2002                2012. In each year , we follow
Guerrieri, Hartley and Hurst (2013) and restrict the sample to households that reside in the same
geographical area     in 2001 and in . In each regression, we exclude the observations below the 2nd and

above the 98th percentile of the distribution of               in year . The standard errors are clustered by
                                                          ,

geographic location c.10
        Our baseline estimates of equation (2), estimated at the zip code level with county fixed effects for
years ranging from 2002 to 2012, are reported in Panel A of Table 3. Our first finding is that the coefficient
on a household’s rank in the income distribution (α) is consistently negative, with a peak absolute value in
2007. Hence, debt accumulation over the course of the early to mid-2000s was, on average, greater for
lower income households. Second, the estimated coefficient on the inequality level of the zip code is
systematically negative, again peaking in absolute value in 2007. This implies that, holding everything else
constant, households living in the more unequal areas within a county accumulated less debt over the early
to mid-2000s than did those in lower inequality areas in the same county.
        The key parameter for us is γ, which captures the interaction of household rank in the local income
distribution and local inequality. Our main finding is that γ is positive over this time period. This implies
that debt accumulation was relatively higher for (sufficiently) high-income households in high-inequality
regions than in low-inequality regions, or equivalently that lower income households in high-inequality
regions borrowed relatively less than their counterparts in lower inequality regions. This result is precisely
the opposite of what one would have expected from “keeping up with the Joneses’” effects. Panel C of
Figure 4 illustrates our results qualitatively. Households with rank to the right of the crossing accumulate
more debt on average as inequality increases. Households to the left of the crossing accumulate relatively
less debt as inequality increases.
        To give a sense of the economic magnitudes, we calculate the change in debt accumulation in
response to a one standard deviation increase in local inequality for households of several different ranks.
Figure 5 plots these calculated effects at the 80th, 50th, and 20th percentiles for each time sample. At the 80th
percentile the increase in inequality means the increase in household debt over expected income was higher
by almost nine percentage points in 2007. At the 20th percentile we estimate that households decreased debt
relative to income by a little over ten percentage points in 2007. In the same year the median household
saw a decline in debt-to-income of less than one percentage point.


10
  Each specification below is estimated using household sampling weights from year 2001. See Appendix B for details
on the construction of household sampling weights.

                                                        13
3.2.    Specifications with Additional Controls
Our baseline specification does not include any household-specific controls other than their rank in the
income distribution. To control for potentially confounding household characteristics, we consider an
expanded specification augmented to include a vector of household-specific regressors:

                                  ,          ,             ,        ,                       ,              (3)
                      ,

where      is the set of household-specific controls. The latter include the age of the head of the household,
household size, (logarithm of) the level of household’s mortgage debt, (logarithm of) the level of
household’s auto debt, (logarithm of) the level of household’s HELOC debt, (logarithm of) the level of
household’s student loan debt, an indicator for a non-zero credit card debt limit, (logarithm of) the level of
household’s credit card debt, (logarithm of) the level of household’s credit card limit, the credit card
utilization rate conditional on non-zero credit card limit, default indicators, and the average of household
members’ credit scores. All controls are from 2001, with the exception of credit scores for which we include
both 2001 values (to control for initial access to credit) as well as year t values (to control for access to
credit in subsequent years). Results from this augmented specification are presented in Panel B of Table 3.
The results for the estimated effects of rank, inequality and the interaction of the two are almost identical
to those from the parsimonious specification.
        A second concern one might have is that regional inequality is correlated with other regional
economic characteristics and that it is the latter that are most relevant for household debt accumulation
decisions. We control for this possibility in several ways. First, we include an additional vector of zip-level
control variables:

                              ,          ,            ,         ,                                ,         (4)
                  ,

where     is the set of location-specific controls. The set of location-specific controls includes the median
expected income in the zip code in 2001, the median of (log of) the household’s total debt in 2001, and the
median of (log of) the household’s mortgage debt in 2001. Results are presented in Panel C of Table 3.
Again, our baseline estimates of the effects of household rank, local inequality and their interaction are
almost unchanged. This is also illustrated graphically in Panel B of Figure 5: our estimates with both
household and regional controls suggest that increasing inequality by one standard deviation is associated
with households at the 80th percentile increasing borrowing relative to income by almost 13 percentage
points, at the 50th percentile households increase borrowing over income by 3.5 percentage points, and at
the 20th percentile households decrease borrowing over income by almost 6 percentage points. The
difference between high- and low-rank households is essentially the same as before.



                                                      14
        Another way to control for regional characteristics is to estimate our baseline specification with
fixed effects at the level of the zip code rather than the county:

                                             ,                ,        ,                   .                   (5)
                              ,

With zip code-specific fixed effects δc, we can no longer separate the effect of local inequality from other
regional characteristics, but we can still estimate the coefficient on the interaction term between the
household’s income rank and local inequality, . The results from estimating equation (5) are presented in
Panel D of Table 3: the estimate of              is again almost unchanged relative to those from our parsimonious
specification (2) or specifications augmented with household (3) and regional controls (4).
        We also check for omitted variable bias in the interaction term by adding the interaction of the
household credit risk score with local inequality to the specification in equation (3). If the measure of
income rank primarily picked up the relative importance of the household’s credit risk score, one would
expect the estimate of        to differ significantly after including this interaction. We estimated the following
modification of specification (3):

                                         ,                ,                ,       ,
                          ,


                                                      ,                    ,       ,           ,              (3’)
The estimates of    across all years (Panel A, Table 4) are robust to the inclusion of the interaction term.
        Similarly, we check whether the results are sensitive to including an interaction of the household’s
initial debt level with local inequality in specification (3):

                                         ,                ,                ,       ,
                          ,


                                                      ,                        ,       ,           ,         (3’’)
Our baseline findings are unchanged with these additional controls (Panel B of Table 4).
        Finally, we verify that our results do not hinge on the CCP measure of income inequality. We replicate
our results from Table 3 in Appendix Table A1 using the measure of inequality constructed from IRS data
and described in section 2.3 and find almost identical results. In short, the differential debt-accumulation
patterns by households of differing income levels across inequality regions are a robust feature of the data.


3.3     Subsample analysis
Our finding that debt accumulation was higher for poorer households in low-inequality regions than high-
inequality regions is robust to controlling for a wide variety of household and regional controls. One may
be concerned however that our interaction effect is capturing some other nonlinear characteristic of
household borrowing, which need not be captured by linear controls. To address this possibility, we
consider an additional set of robustness checks in which we verify that our results still obtain within subsets


                                                                  15
of the data. Specifically, we break our regions along four dimensions: geographic areas, initial debt burdens,
credit scores and house price growth.
        For geographic areas, we estimate our specification with household and regional controls (equation
(4)) separately for each of the four Census regions: Midwest, Northeast, South and West. We present the
results of the household level regressions of debt accumulation from 2001 to 2007 (the main period over
which household debt increased sharply) for each region in Panel A of Table 5, with the full set of yearly
regressions by region available in Appendix Table A2. For each region, the coefficients are of the same
sign as before and of approximately the same order of magnitude. Hence, our baseline results are confirmed
within each region of the country.
        Second, we decompose zip codes by the average level of credit scores among households in each
locale in 2001. Specifically, we group zip codes into three bins: low credit scores (below the 33rd percentile
of average credit score distribution), medium (between the 33rd and 67th percentiles) and high credit scores
(above the 67th percentile of the average credit score distribution). We then rerun our specification with
household and regional controls within each of these three credit score areas. The results for 2001-2007 are
presented in Panel B of Table 5, with the full of set of yearly regressions by credit score grouping available
in Appendix Table A3. Again, the results are qualitatively similar across credit score groups, although they
are somewhat smaller in high credit score regions.
        Third, we split zip codes according to median debt-to-income ratios in 2001. Specifically, we
construct median initial debt-to-income ratios across all households in a zip code, then split zip codes into
three groups based on these median ratios: low initial debt levels (below the 33rd percentile of the debt-to-
income distribution), medium (between the 33rd and 67th percentiles) and high debt-to-income ratios
(above the 67th percentile of the debt-to-income distribution). We then estimate our specification with
household and regional controls within each of these three subsets of zip codes. We again present results
for 2001-2007 in Panel C of Table 5, with the full set of yearly regressions by initial debt-to-income ratio
available in Appendix Table A4. We find that our qualitative result holds across zip codes of different initial
debt-to-income ratios but that the differential effects of inequality on household borrowing across income
groups were largest in regions with higher initial debt to income ratios.
        Finally, we separate zip codes by the average growth rate of home prices from 2001-2005, as in
section 2. We calculate zip code house price appreciation using data from the Core Logic index. These data
are only available for a subset of our zip codes (about 6,600) which constitutes about 70% of our original
sample. We group zip codes into three bins: low house price growth (below the 33rd percentile), medium
(between the 33rd and 67th percentiles), and high house price growth (above the 33rd percentile). We re-
estimate the specification with household and regional controls within each sub-grouping of zip codes and
present results from 2001-2007 in Panel D of Table 5, with the full set of yearly regressions by house price

                                                      16
growth in Appendix Table A5. Once again, the interaction of household rank and local inequality remains
statistically significant within each subset of the data, with the differential effects of regional inequality
being stronger in zip codes which experienced higher growth in house prices.


3.4     Results from a Nonparametric Specification
The specification in equation (2) assumes a linear relationship between debt accumulation, income and rank
and local inequality. In this section, we relax this assumption and estimate a nonparametric specification.
Specifically, we first split the sample of households into three bins according to the level of local inequality.
In particular, each location (zip code) is assigned to one of the three bins based on the location’s level of
inequality in the distribution of inequality across locations in 2001, i.e., low-inequality bin (less than the
20th percentile of the distribution of local inequality levels), mid-level inequality bin (between the 20th and
80th percentile), and high-inequality bin (above the 80th percentile). The assignment of locations to
inequality bins remains constant through 2002-2012. For the households in each bin, we run a regression
of household relative debt accumulation on a dummy for income rank below 0.2, a dummy for income rank
above 0.8, a full set of household and regional controls and the county-specific fixed effects for each year
separately. The omitted category is the dummy for income rank between 0.2 and 0.8.
        Figure 6 shows the estimated coefficients on the dummy for income rank below 0.2 and the dummy
for income rank above 0.8, relative to the dummy for the income rank between 0.2 and 0.8. The differences
across inequality regions for high-ranked households (i.e. those above the 80th percentile) are small
throughout the time sample. In contrast, low-ranked households display much larger differences in debt
accumulation patterns across low- and high-inequality regions, with differences in debt accumulation
reaching nearly 20 percent of initial income levels by 2008. Hence, the link between inequality and debt
accumulation was relatively more important for low-income households than for high-income households.


3.5     Results with County- and State-Level Income Distribution and Inequality Measures
Previous work on inequality and consumption has been done using measures of inequality at the state level
(see Bertrand and Morse, 2013) and most discussion of inequality and debt has focused on measures of
inequality at the national level, as in Figure 1. We explore how our results vary as we increase the level of
geographic aggregation for inequality by estimating equation (4) using the income distribution at the county
and state level. We construct the area income distribution using the same resampling procedure we used for
zip codes and now we compute a household’s percentile rank within the larger area (e.g. county) income
distribution and inequality statistics of that distribution. We keep all household and regional-level controls
that we used before except now we include state fixed effects for county-level regressions and no fixed
effects for state-level regressions.

                                                       17
         Panels A and B of Table 6 report the results with county- and state-level income distribution and
inequality measures, respectively. At the county level, we find very similar results to our zip code regressions
once we consider that the standard deviation of inequality is smaller at the county level. Similarly, we also
find very similar estimates of the interaction term when inequality is measured at the state level, although
there is some loss of precision in our estimates due to the aggregation. Also noteworthy is that the estimate of
β is positive at the state level, implying that households on average accumulated relatively more debt in states
with higher levels of inequality. This is similar to the result obtained by Bertrand and Morse (2013) that typical
households consumed more in states where consumption of the rich was higher.


3.6.     Decomposition by Form of Debt
We now consider debt accumulation patterns along different dimensions of debt: mortgages, auto loans and
credit cards. For each, we reproduce our household-level regressions with household and regional controls
and county fixed effects and report yearly results in Table 7. Panel A documents that the results for
mortgages are almost identical to those found for total debt. Because mortgage debt on average accounts
for two-thirds of total debt, it is likely the primary driver of total debt patterns described above. Panel B
documents that very similar qualitative results obtain for auto loans: both α and β are estimated to be
negative while the interaction term γ is positive. However, the interaction effects are significantly smaller
for auto loans than for mortgages, even if we adjust them for the relative magnitudes of each form of debt
(i.e. convert to growth rates). For example, the peak interaction effect on auto loans is about 0.09, which
when adjusted by the average ratio of auto debt to mortgage debt (mortgage debt is almost eight times as
large as auto debt on average) becomes 0.71 or one-third of the mortgage interaction effect. Thus, even
though auto loans display the same qualitative patterns, the mapping from local inequality to differential
borrowing patterns across households is quantitatively weaker for auto loans than for mortgages.
         Panels C and D report equivalent results for credit card balances and credit card limits. The
distinction between credit card balances and limits is useful because the former can be interpreted as
reflecting the demand for credit on the part of households while the latter largely reflects credit
availability.11 Strikingly, we find very different results for the two measures. With credit card limits, we
recover the same qualitative features as in our baseline estimates for total debt, α and β are both estimated
to be systematically negative while the interaction term γ is positive. With credit card limits being
approximately half of mortgage debt on average, the estimated peak level of γ of around 0.5 is
approximately half as large as the peak interaction effect estimated for mortgages in terms of implied growth
rates of each form of debt. In contrast, we find no consistent or economically significant relationship

11
  This distinction is somewhat offset by the fact that households can endogenously raise their credit limits by applying
for more credit cards or requesting higher limits from their current credit card providers.

                                                          18
between local inequality and the credit card balances of households across different income groups: both β
and γ are estimated to be very small (in some years becoming statistically insignificant) and the sign of γ
unstable across years. Thus, to the extent that we can interpret credit card balances and limits as reflecting
credit demand and supply, respectively, these results suggest that the differential borrowing patterns of
lower and higher income households across regions of different inequality reflect differential credit supply
conditions, not differential credit demand as would be the case under “keeping up with the Joneses”.
         In section 4, we propose one channel through which credit supply can vary with local inequality in
a way that can account for these patterns, namely if banks use an applicant’s income in combination with
local inequality to make inferences about the applicant’s underlying type. This interpretation of the data
would be consistent not just with the difference in our findings for credit card limits and credit card
balances, but also with the quantitative differences in the size of estimated effects of inequality across other
forms of debt. Mortgages, for example, represent much larger loan amounts than other forms of debt and it
is relatively difficult for financial institutions to recover the home or office associated with the loan in case
of default. Auto loans, on the other hand, are much smaller in size and banks face fewer hurdles to
repossessing a car. Hence, the incentive of financial institutions to devote resources toward identifying
applicants’ underlying credit-worthiness should be much lower for auto loans than mortgages, leading to
weaker utilization of the information provided by local income inequality as found in Table 7. While credit
card debt is of the same order of magnitude on average as auto debt in the CCP, credit card debt is unsecured
so that financial institutions bear more risk than they do with automobiles. One would therefore expect
stronger incentives to utilize available information in extracting credit risk for credit cards than autos, which
is again consistent with what we observe in the data.



4. Model
In this section, we develop a stylized model in which banks use local inequality to extract information about
applicant types and which results in borrowing patterns similar to those we find in the CCP data. We show
how local inequality affects bank lending decisions under perfect competition and monopoly.
         Suppose there are two types of households: High (H) and Low (L). To simplify algebra, we assume
that High type households never default on debt while Low type households default with probability             and
that the share of High type households is 0.5.12 The income for each type ∈          ,       is given by
     where          are constants and     ~     0,   . Hence,    ~       ,     and       ~       ,    . Denote the

pdfs for each distribution with     and       . The average income in this economy is                      .

12
  We document in Appendix E that high-income households are indeed less likely to default than low-income
households.

                                                       19
           We also assume banks observe , another signal about the quality of borrowers that can incorporate
other information about borrowers and is not observed by the econometrician, to capture the idea that loan
officers have more information than econometricians. Similar to the income signal,                              where
   are constants and       ~            0,         . Denote the pdfs for each distribution with        and     . To simplify
algebra, we assume without loss of generality that income                    and signal   are independent.
           Banks do not observe household types directly but they observe applicants’ incomes and signal .13
They can then infer the probability of a given type conditional on observed income. Specifically, using
Bayes law, the posterior probability of being High type for a household with signals                     and     is given by

                          Pr      | ,

                                                                                                                        (6)

where Φ          ≡            /              and           ≡           /          are the likelihood ratios. Given our
assumptions, we have Φ            0 and              0, that is, High type households are monotonically more likely to
be observed as income          or signal increase. Since there are only two types, it follows that
                                        Pr | ,             1     Pr    | ,                    .                         (7)
                | ,                | ,                     | ,                      | ,
Clearly,                 0,                    0,                     0, and                 0.

           Banks potentially have two margins to determine which borrowers obtain loans: 1) price of loans;
2) loan denial probability. While in reality banks are likely to use both margins, we consider polar cases to
illustrate the workings of each margin separately. For the price margin, we will assume that banks can price
discriminate borrowers perfectly, banks compete in all population segments, and banks can freely obtain
resources at rate      (“perfect competition”). For the loan denial probability, we assume that there is only
one bank serving the market but this bank is threatened by entry of other banks if this bank makes a profit
(“monopoly”).


4.1 Perfect Competition
With perfect competition and free entry in each lending segment, banks can have only one interest rate for
a borrower of a given quality. Since there is a continuum of borrower quality, there is also a continuum of




13
   Obviously, banks observe many other characteristics of households. We abstract from this additional information
available to banks to simplify derivations. One may interpret this approach as partialling out these other characteristics.
Typically, one of the important indicators of individual’s risk is individual’s credit score. In the analysis in section 3,
we show that the household’s income rank has explanatory power for the household’s debt even after we control for
the credit score.

                                                                 20
markets where each market is indexed by borrower quality. Consider a set of households with income
and signal       . Given by the zero profit condition, the interest rate is set to
                                        ∗
                                                1                  Pr | ,                       Pr   | ,                   ⟹
                               ∗                                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                                                                         ,                      (8)
                                                             | ,                   | ,

Note that households with other levels of                                  and              pay the same interest rate as long as Φ
Φ             . That is, each lending segment is characterized by a pair of signals

                                            ∗
                                                                                           Φ                  1            ∗
                                                                   ,   :                                                       .
                                                                                   Φ                      1
          ∗
where         is a sufficient statistic for the quality of borrowers. Because the quality of borrowers is the same in
    ∗                                  ∗                                                                      ∗
        , every borrower in                 obtains a loan at the interest rate                                   . Borrowers of a worse quality are offered
loans at higher interest rates while borrowers of better quality can obtain a loan with a lower interest rate.
                          ∗                 ∗
         Clearly,              0 and                        0 so that households with high income                              and strong signal pay lower

rates because banks believe that these applicants are more likely to be of the High type. To see the tradeoff
                                            ∗                                          #
between        and , one can fix                        ,        at level                  and find the required signal                 to allow a household to
                     #
borrow at rate           given that this household has income :
                                                                                                       #
                                                             ∗
                                                                                                      #                                                         (9)
                                                                                                                                                ∗
where          is the inverse function of . Given that                                           0 and Φ′            0, it follows that               0.

         Although we (unlike loan officers) do not observe signal                                                   in the data, we can still calculate the
interest rate paid on average by households with income , which is observed by the econometrician:
                                                    ∗                          ∗
                                                                                       ,                                                                       (10)
                                                                                                                               ∗    ,
                 ∗
Given that           ,    is differentiable and otherwise well behaved as well as                                                            0, we have that
                                                    ∗                      ∗       ,
                                                                                                                               0.                              (11)

Hence, the model predicts that the interest rate decreases in household income.
         One can then consider a thought experiment of raising the income inequality in this economy
without changing the mean level of income. Specifically, we increase the distance between                                                             and       but
the average income            is held constant. Because income levels are now a stronger signal of an applicant’s
type, banks put a higher weight on signal , hence the slope of the tradeoff becomes steeper as it takes a
larger change in signal            to justify lending at a given interest rate (see Panel A of Figure 7). This will lead
to higher borrowing on the part of low-income households in low-inequality regions than in high-inequality
regions because, in the former, banks are less sure about the underlying type of the applicant based on
income and therefore are more willing to lend to households of different incomes. In other words,

                                                                                           21
     ∗              ∗
                                when             where “equal” and “unequal” denote the level of inequality,
                                                                           ∗                ∗
captured by mean-preserving changes in                  and       , and                                      when       . Panel B
of Figure 7 illustrates this point. In short, banks charge lower interest rates to high-income households than
to low-income households and the difference in the interest rates across income groups rises as the
difference between these groups widens.14
             In another thought experiment, we study the effects of an increase in the supply of credit. Since
perfect competition prices each borrower type fairly, we can only increase the supply of credit by reducing
                                                                                                             ∗
the cost of funds rate        . Equation (9) shows that a decrease in                  shifts schedule           down and hence
all borrowers enjoy a lower cost of credit.
             A combination of a positive credit supply shock (                 decreases) and an increase in inequality (
         increases) can reconcile how all types of households increased their borrowing on average over the
course of the mid 2000s with the cross-sectional variation in debt-accumulation patterns across income
groups at different levels of local inequality documented in section 3. The supply shock by itself can explain
the former while the increased inequality by itself can explain only the latter.


4.2 Monopoly
In practice, regulatory or informational constraints limit the ability of banks to charge different prices to
different borrowers and therefore they often can charge only one rate or a limited number of rates for a given
type of loan. To keep exposition simple, suppose that i) the market has only one bank and it is threatened by
entry of other banks, ii) regulators impose a minimum quality of borrowers who may obtain loans (e.g., to
qualify for Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae guarantees), and iii) the bank can charge only one rate .
                                                              ∗
             To model assumption ii), we know that                 ,   can be used as a sufficient statistic for the quality
                                                                                                   ∗
of a borrower. The bank makes a profit on borrowers with                          ,    such that         ,          and losses on
                                        ∗
borrowers with          ,   such that       ,            . We will denote the cutoff interest rate                  that meets the
regulation requirements. With this cutoff rate, the threat of entry sets                   at the level that yields zero profits
as implied by assumption i).

                            , : ∗   ,
                                            1           Pr | ,            Pr     | ,

                                                , : ∗    ,




14
   Note that the value at which a household does not experience a change in the interest rate is equal to the average
income . This value is insensitive to the level of inequality because by construction the average income is held
constant and at the average income the likelihood ratios are equal to 1 and therefore the posterior probability is equal
to 1/2. This value, however, can move in more complex models and alternative parameterizations.

                                                                  22
where        ≡                        and         ≡                         . Using the insight of equation (9), we can

find the threshold level of signal such that a bank will lend to a household with income :

                                                                                                                  (12)

As before, we have               0. The set of households who obtain a loan is:

                                                                Φ               1
                                              ,   :
                                                           Φ                1
        The probability that a household with income                is denied a loan is

                            Pr               |            Pr

                                                      |
Since            0, it follows that                             0: the probability of loan denial decreases in income.

        Now we repeat the thought experiment with rising inequality. Similar to the perfect competition
case, it takes a larger increment in signal to compensate for a given decrease in income                 because income
is a more informative signal. As a result, if the quality of lending standard                is held constant, some low-
income households may be denied a loan more often (see Panel C of Figure 7). Panel D of Figure 7 shows
how the denial probability changes with rising inequality. The probability of denial increases for households
with         and decreases for households with                 .
        In contrast to the perfect competition case, the monopoly case has two ways to model an increase
in the supply of credit. First, one can continue to model it as a reduction in the cost of funds rate          . Second,
one can model it as an increase in       , i.e., relaxing lending standards to cover high-risk borrowers. In the
                                                                                                     ∗
first case, a decrease in    lowers    and thus makes credit cheaper for households with                     . However,
                                                                    ∗
it does not affect the interest rate for households with                   as these continue to receive no loans (they
do not meet lending requirements). In the second case, an increase in               raises     because a wider coverage
now includes high risk households and losses made on these high-risk households have to be compensated
by larger profit margins on low-risk households. Thus, while credit is now available to a broader spectrum
of households, the cost of borrowing increases for relatively high-income borrowers. On the other hand, the
probability of obtaining a loan increases for all households as schedule                  shifts down. Hence, although
high-income households pay a higher price for credit, they are denied loans less frequently.
        Our model can therefore potentially account for why lower-income households accumulated
relatively less debt in high-inequality regions than did similar households in low-inequality regions during
the 2000s: if banks in higher-inequality regions placed more weight on applicants’ incomes as a signal of
their underlying creditworthiness and therefore channeled more funds toward higher-income applicants
than did banks in lower-inequality regions. Under perfect competition, this differential access to funds is

                                                               23
predicted to happen through higher interest rates being offered to low-income applicants than high-income
applicants whereas under monopoly banking, our model predicts that banks will reject low-income
applicants more frequently than high-income applicants. Because banking in the U.S. lies in between these
two extremes, we expect both margins to be present in the data, a prediction to which we now turn.


5 Results from the Mortgage Application Data
Our model suggests that variation in inequality across regions should be reflected in lending decisions of
banks if regional inequality can be used to make inferences about applicants’ default probabilities. In this
section, we use information on mortgage applications from the publicly available Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act database (HMDA), 2001 – 2011, to test these implications.
        The HMDA data are compiled from reports filed by mortgage lenders. The HMDA was passed by
Congress in 1975 and began requiring lenders to submit data reports in 1989. The initial intention of the act
according to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2012) was to monitor the provision of credit in urban
neighborhoods. Later requirements to submit data reports were intended to monitor discriminatory lending
practices. Dell’Ariccia, Igan, and Leaven (2012) find that HMDA covers between 77% and 95% of all
mortgage originations from 2000 to 2006. Reporting criteria differ between depository and nondepository
institutions and across years. Depository institutions have typically been required to report if they satisfy an
asset threshold, make at least one home mortgage, are federally regulated or insured, and have a branch in a
metropolitan area. Nondepository institutions were required to report if the share of home mortgages exceeded
a threshold of all loan originations, the lender operated in an MSA, and met an asset threshold. In 2004 the
share threshold was supplemented with a level of home mortgage originations to increase the coverage of the
market. Lenders who file reports include detailed information on every mortgage application received by the
lender during a calendar year. All years of the data contain the size of the loan, income on the application,
location of the property down to the census tract, demographics of the applicants, a lender identifier, and the
action taken on the loan. Since 2004 the data include additional information including a censored picture of
interest rates and the loan’s lien status. We use a 15% random sample of all HMDA records.
        While the data are very detailed in many respects there are some limitations. First, the data do not
identify “piggyback” loans, i.e. loans with subordinate liens used to finance a larger first-lien loan. These
secondary loans can be used to lower financing costs and to avoid requirements that a loan being sold to
Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac be accompanied by private mortgage insurance if a traditional loan would not
meet certain standards. The HMDA does not require lenders to report piggyback loans if they are issued as
HELOCs and some piggyback loans might be issued by a lender not covered by HMDA. But some piggyback
loans are included in the dataset and, given that these loans are not identified as such, a researcher might infer
a much lower loan to value ratio than the actual loan to value on the property. Since we are not able to identify

                                                       24
piggyback loans reliably and these loans are relatively small, we drop all applications where the loan-to-
income (LTI) ratio is less than one. Second, we conduct the HMDA analysis at the county level rather than
the zip code level. Although the data are available at the census tract, we aggregate to the county in order to
use measures of inequality consistent with the CCP analysis. Finally, in contrast to the CCP database, the
HMDA data set does not track applicants over time and hence we do not have a panel of applicants/borrowers.
         We focus on supply-side variables in line with the theoretical predictions of the model. First, we
assess whether the probability of a loan being rejected is invariant to the applicant’s income rank interacted
with regional inequality. Second, we consider whether the probability of the loan being “high-interest”
(conditional on a loan application being approved) varies with inequality and the applicant’s rank. 15 Both of
these can be interpreted as directly capturing credit supply factors, namely whether banks use local inequality
to make inferences about applicants’ underlying types when one conditions on other observable characteristics
of the applicant such as the loan-to-income ratio in the application. If banks use an applicant’s position in the
income distribution to help make inferences about their underlying default risk, as suggested by the model,
then one would expect banks to reject otherwise similar applications by high-income applicants less frequently
in high-inequality regions than in low-inequality regions, or equivalently to reject otherwise similar
applications by low-income applicants more frequently in high-inequality regions than in low-inequality
regions. By the same logic, we should observe low-income applicants being charged higher interest rates on
their loans more frequently in high-inequality regions than in low-inequality regions.
         We test these predictions in a framework very similar to that used in the CCP data. For a given
outcome, we estimate the following regression16
                                                         ∗                ,                                ,          (6)
where             is the percentile rank of applicant i’s income within the pool of applicants in area c in year
t.17 The inequality measure and the income distribution are defined at the county level. The explanatory
variables in vector        include indicators for whether or not the loan is for an owner-occupied property,
several race categories and gender, as well as interactions of the applicant’s income rank with the share of
applicants in the county who are nonwhite.18 We also control for the loan-to-income ratio in the application.
While we estimate these models with county fixed effects               , the results are very similar if we use state



15
   The HMDA reporting guidelines require lenders to report the spread between the Treasury yield and the mortgage
interest rate if the spread is greater than three percentage points for first-lien loans or five percentage points for
subordinate-lien loan.
16
   Our baseline specification includes a county fixed effect because the county-level controls are not as detailed as
those we can construct in the CCP data.
17
   The results we present are also robust to using a measure of an applicant’s rank relative to the distribution of income
across all households in the county.
18
   We include the share of non-whites as an additional control because previous studies suggested that banks may treat
differentially areas with predominantly non-white population. See Turner and Skidmore (1996) for a review.

                                                             25
fixed effects (Appendix Table A6). We restrict the analysis to loans for home purchases, applications where
the loan-to-income ratio is at most eight and not less than one, loans where the reporter was explicitly
making the origination decision, and where the loan did not fail because of incompleteness or because it
was not pre-approved. Notice that we retain in the sample loans that are not denied but also not originated.
Excluding these does not change our results. As before, we are interested in the sign of the interaction term
between income rank and inequality, . All standard errors are clustered at the county level. The regressions
are estimated separately for each year, 2001 – 2011. We use the log of the 90/10 income ratio derived from
the income imputed in the CCP data in 2001 as the measure of inequality, but the results are essentially the
same using the Gini coefficient derived from the Census data.
        We present the results for the probability of an application being rejected by a bank in Panel A of
Table 8 and results for the probability of a loan being high-interest, conditional on origination, in Panel B
of Table 8. For the probability of being rejected, the key finding is that estimated γ is consistently negative:
applications from high-ranked households in high-inequality regions are less likely to be rejected than those
from high-ranked households in low-inequality regions. This result is consistent with the theoretical
predictions of the model in which banks use an applicant’s position in the local income distribution, along
with the dispersion of that distribution, to make inferences about default risk. Using our 2007 estimates,
our results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in inequality will decrease the probability of denial
of a household in the 80th percentile rank relative to the 20th percentile rank by approximately 2.3 percentage
points. This is comparable in magnitude to the association between rank and the probability of denial.
Similar results obtain with the probability of the loan being high-interest (this variable is not available
before 2004): high-rank applicants are less likely to face higher rate loans in high-inequality regions than
in low-inequality regions. Again, this is precisely the type of price-discrimination predicted by the model.
Doing the same calculation as above with the 2007 estimate we find that high-rank households will see the
probability that they pay a high interest loan decline by 0.7 percentage point relative to low-rank household.
        We can also consider whether the size of the mortgage (intensive margin) varies across inequality
regions and ranks within the income distribution by using the loan to income ratios associated with each
originated mortgage. We use the same controls as with rejection probabilities (with the exception of LTI
ratios) and county fixed effects. The results for each year are presented in Panel C of Table 8. Unlike with
mortgage rejection rates and interest rate premia, we find little evidence that loan-to-income ratios in
originated loans vary across households in different inequality regions. The estimates of are almost always
insignificantly different from zero, with 2004 and 2007 being the only exceptions. To the extent that
requested loans reflect demand for credit by households, we again find little evidence that demand-side
factors related to local inequality levels mattered for the debt-accumulation decisions of households.
However, the HMDA dataset does not allow us to establish if households have multiple loans or reliably

                                                      26
link piggyback loans to standard loans. Thus, while our results point mainly toward channels operating
through credit supply— namely through the banks’ use of a household’s income rank combined with the
amount of income inequality in that region to make inferences about applicants’ credit worthiness—more
work needs to be done to better understand the intensive margin.


6 Conclusions
Using household level measures of debt over the course of 2001 - 2012, we document a systematic link
between local levels of income inequality and the debt-accumulation decisions of households of different
income levels. Specifically, we find that low-income households in low-inequality regions accumulated
more debt during the mid-2000s than did low-income households in high-inequality regions, with reverse
(albeit smaller) effects operating for high-income households. While these results point to an economic
channel linking economic inequality and borrowing by households of different income groups, they are
inconsistent with “keeping up with the Joneses” being a significant force behind the great leveraging of
households over this period.
        Instead, we argue that causality is likely to run from the banking system to households. We develop
a model where income inequality is informative for evaluating credit risk. In the model, this channel leads
to relatively more credit being allocated to low-income applicants when local inequality is low rather than
high, since higher levels of inequality imply that applicant incomes are stronger signals of credit-
worthiness. Consistent with this view, we document that lower-income mortgage applicants in high-
inequality regions are rejected more frequently and pay higher mortgage rates than similar applicants in
low-inequality regions. While it is possible that income inequality implicitly captures other factors that are
not included in the model or data, our findings suggest that the causality between inequality and debt is
running through the credit supply channel.
        Our results support the notion that the growth in household borrowing during the mid-2000s was
driven in large part by credit supply expansions targeted toward lower-income households. This is because
we find no evidence for credit-demand forces such as “keeping up with Joneses” effects in the data and
instead argue that causal links running from inequality to debt accumulation would point toward less
relative debt accumulation by low-income households during periods of rising inequality, the opposite of
what occurred in the U.S. during this time period.
        However, to the extent that this expansion in the supply of credit to lower income households is
unlikely to continue (for example if it reflected a one-time securitization of household debt), our results
suggest that a continuation of recent trends toward rising inequality is likely to reduce access to credit for
lower-income households. Because limited access to credit restricts households’ ability to smooth their
consumption and to engage in long-term investments (e.g. sending children to college, retraining for

                                                     27
different careers), such differential access to credit could ultimately have negative longer term
consequences. To the extent that many of these activities likely have positive societal externalities not
captured in our model, such a development could have important policy implications.


References
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising
        the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90(2), pp: 300–23.
Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils. 2012. “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality,” University
        of Rochester, mimeo.
Aiyagari, S. R. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncartic Risk and Saving.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109,
        659-684.
Athreya, Kartik, Xuan Tam, and Eric Young. 2012. "A Quantitative Theory of Information and Unsecured
        Credit," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 4 (3): 153-183.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Adair Morse. 2013. “Trickle-Down Consumption,” NBER Working Paper No.
        18883.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,”
        American Economi Review, 98, 1887–1921.
Bordo, Michael D. andChristopher M. Meissner, 2012. “Does Inequality Lead to a Financial Crisis?” NBER
        Working Paper 17896.
Brown, Meta, Andrew Haughwout, Donghoon Lee, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2011. "Do We Know
        What We Owe? A Comparison of Borrower- and Lender-Reported Consumer Debt." Federal
        Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report no. 523.
Charles, Kerwin K., Erik Hurst, and Nikolai Roussanov, 2009. “Conspicuous Consumption and Race,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), 42-67.
Christen, Markus and Ruskin M. Morgan, 2005. “Keeping Up with the Joneses: Analyzing the Effect of
        Income Inequality on Consumer Borrowing,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 3, 145-173.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2012. “Supervision and Examination Manual”
Daly, Mary C. and Daniel J. Wilson, 2006. “Keeping Up with the Joneses and Staying Ahead of the Smiths:
        Evidence from Suicide Data,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco WP 2006-12.
Dell’Ariccia , Giovanni, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven. 2012. “Credit Booms and Lending Standards:
        Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Market,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 44
        (2-3): 367–384.
Drozd, Lukasz A., and Ricardo Serrano-Padial. 2013. “Modeling the Credit Card Revolution: The Role of
        Debt Collection and Informal Bankruptcy,” FRB of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 13-12.
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas S. Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, and Robert Hunt. 2010.
        "What "Triggers" Mortgage Default?" The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
        forthcoming. (FRB Philadelphia Working Paper 10-13).
Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J. White. 1998. “The Bankruptcy Decision: Does Stigma Matter?,”
        University of Michigan Working Paper No. 98-01.
Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J. White, 2002. "The Household Bankruptcy Decision," American
        Economic Review 92(3), 706-718.
Goldin Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz, 2007. “Long-Run Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure: Narrowing,
        Widening, Polarizing.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Vol. 2, 135-165.
Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2002. "An Empirical Analysis of Personal Bankruptcy and
        Delinquency," Review of Financial Studies 15(1), 319-347.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Daniel Hartley, and Erik Hurst, 2013. “Endogenous Gentrification and Housing Price
        Dynamics,” forthcoming in Journal of Public Economics.



                                                    28
Guven, Cahit and Bent E. Sorensen, 2012. “Subjective Well-Being: Keeping Up with the Joneses. Real or
        Perceived?” Social Indicators Research 109, 439-469.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Gianluca Violante, 2010. “Unequal We Stand: An Empirical
        Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967-2006,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
        13, 15-51.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2004. “The Macroeconomic Impli-
        cations of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy, 118(4),
        681-722
Heffetz, Ori, 2011. “A Test of Conspicuous Consumption: Visibility and Income Elasticities,” Review of
        Economics and Statistics 93(4) 1101-1117.
Huggett, Mark. 1993. “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent incomplete –Insurance Economics.”
        Journal of Economics Dynamics and Control 17 (Septemeber-November): 953-69.
Iacoviello, Matteo, 2008. “Household Debt and Income Inequality: 1963-2003,” Journal of Money, Credit
        and Banking 40(5), 929-965.
Kennickell, Arthur B. 1991 “Imputation of the 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances," Proceedings of the
        Section on Survey Research Methods, 1990 Joint Statistical Meetings, Atlanta, GA.
Kennickell, Arthur B., 1998, “Multiple imputation in the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Working paper,
        Federal Reserve Board, available at: http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/method.html.
Kopczuk, Wojciech and Saez, Emmanuel. 2004. “Top Wealth Shares in the United States, 1916–2000:
        Evidence from Estate Tax Returns.” National Tax Journal, 57(2), pp. 445–87.
Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality?
        Evidence and Theory," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 73(1): 163-193.
Kuhn, Peter, Peter Kooreman, Adriaan R. Soetevent, and Arie Kapteyn, 2010. “The Effects of Lottery
        Prizes on Winners and their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode Lottery,” IZA
        Discussion Paper 4950.
Lee, Donghoon, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2010. "An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit
        Panel." Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report no. 4799.
Luttmer, Erzo F. P., 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being,” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 120(3), 963-1002.
Maurer, Jurgen and Andre Meier, 2008. “Smooth It Like the Joneses? Estimating Peer-Group Effects in
        Intertemporal Consumption Choice,” The Economic Journal 118, 454-476.
Munnell, Alicia H., Geoffrey M. B. Tootell, Lynn E. Browne, and James McEneaney, 1996. "Mortgage
        Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data," American Economic Review 86(1), 25-53.
Neumark, David and Andrew Postlewaite, 1998. “Relative Income Concerns and the Rise in Married
        Women’s Employment,” Journal of Public Economics 70, 157-183.
Perugini, Cristiano, Jens Holscher, and Simon Collie, 2013. “Inequality, Credit Expansion and Financial
        Crises,” Munich Personal RePec Archive Paper 51336.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States: 1913-1998.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118 (1), pp: 1–39.
Rajan, Raghuram G., 2010. Fault Lines: How Hidden Fault Lines Still Threaten the World Economy,
        Princeton University Press, Princeton N.J.
Sanchez, Juan M., 2009. "The IT Revolution and the Unsecured Credit Market," FRB Richmond Working
        paper no. 09-4.
Tootell, Geoffrey M. B., 1996. "Redlining in Boston: Do Mortgage Lenders Discriminate against
        Neighborhoods?," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(4), 1049-1079.
Turner, Margery Austin, and Felicity Skidmore, 1999. Mortgage Lending Discrimination: A Review of
        Existing Evidence. The Urban Institute, Washington D.C.
Zizzo, Daniel J. and Andrew J. Oswald, 2001. “Are People Willing to Pay to Reduce Others’ Income,”
        Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 63/64 39-65.



                                                  29
                                                                        FIGURE 1: INEQUALITY AND DEBT IN THE U.S.



                                                         90                        Income Share of                                       22
                           Household Debt to GDP Ratio                             Top 5% (right axis)
                                                                                                                                         21
                                                         80




                                                                                                                                              Income Share of Top 5%
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                         70
                                                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                          Household Debt to
                                                         60
                                                                                                          GDP Ratio (left axis)
                                                                                                                                         18
                                                         50
                                                                                                                                         17

                                                         40                                                                              16

                                                         30                                                                              15
                                                              1967   1972   1977   1982   1987     1992   1997   2002   2007      2012

Note: The figure plots the income share of the top 5% of U.S. households (source: IRS) and the ratio of household
(and non-profit) total liabilities relative to GDP (source: Federal Reserve).


                                                                       FIGURE 2: INEQUALITY ACROSS U.S. COUNTIES




   1.5081176 - 1.7359808
   1.4748088 - 1.5081176
   1.4433647 - 1.4748088
   1.4067343 - 1.4433647
   1.3558859 - 1.4067343
   1.0951489 - 1.3558859
   No data




Note: The figure plots inequality in 2001 at the county level. Inequality is measured as the difference in log expected
incomes at the 90th and 10th percentiles computed from the CCP. Darker counties are more unequal with each bin
representing a quintile of the distribution across counties.




                                                                                              30
                            FIGURE 3: CROSS-SECTIONAL INEQUALITY IN THE U.S.

                                               Distribution of inequality by zip code




                                      3
                                      2
                            Density
                                      1
                                      0




                                          .8    1          1.2            1.4      1.6   1.8
                                                       inequality (CCP): p90-p10



                                               Distribution of inequality by county
                                      6
                                      4
                            Density
                                      2
                                      0




                                          .8    1          1.2            1.4      1.6   1.8
                                                       inequality (CCP): p90-p10



                                                Distribution of inequality by state
                                      8
                                      6
                            Density
                              4       2
                                      0




                                          .8    1          1.2            1.4      1.6   1.8
                                                       inequality (CCP): p90-p10



Note: The figures plot the regional distribution of inequality, measured using differences in expected log income
between the 90th and 10th percentiles as computed from the CCP, at three levels of aggregation: zip code, county and
state level.

                                                              31
                  FIGURE 4: DEBT ACCUMULATION, INCOME RANK AND LOCAL INEQUALITY

                   A)          ,       ,                                B)         ,       ,




                                       C)           ,       ,      ,| |      | |




Note: The figure plots qualitative predictions for various theories of how borrowing and inequality interact. Panel A
shows a case where the local inequality is irrelevant for borrowing. Panel B demonstrates a special case of “keeping up
with Joneses” when the debt accumulation of the richest household does not depend on the local inequality. Panel C
shows the case where increased inequality (         ) allows high-income households to borrow more. See section 3.1 in
the text for details.




                                                          32
    FIGURE 5: THE ESTIMATED EFFECT OF ONE SD INCREASE IN INEQUALITY ON DEBT ACCUMULATION

                                                            ∗           ∗

                                        Panel A: Parsimonious Specification




                                  Panel B: Specification with Full Set of Controls




Note: These figures plot the calculated effects of a one standard deviation increase in inequality using estimated
coefficients on rank, inequality, and the interaction of rank and inequality from the baseline specification (Table 3: Panel
A) and the specification with full controls (Table 3: Panel C).




                                                            33
                    FIGURE 6. DEBT ACCUMULATION BY LOW AND HIGH-RANK HOUSEHOLDS

       .3
       .2
       .1
       0
       −.1
       −.2                 AND LOCAL INEQUALITY, NONPARAMETRIC SPECIFICATION




             2002   2003      2004      2005       2006      2007      2008       2009      2010      2011       2012

                                 Low Rank, Low Inequality                   High Rank, Low Inequality
                                 Low Rank, Mid Inequality                   High Rank, Mid Inequality
                                 Low Rank, High Inequality                  High Rank, High Inequality



Note: The figure shows the estimated coefficients on the income rank dummies from the nonparametric regressions of
the relative household debt accumulation between 2001 and year . Each regression contains a dummy for income rank
below 0.2, a dummy for income rank above 0.8, and a full set of controls described in equation (3) and the county-specific
fixed effects. The omitted category is the dummy for income rank between 0.2 and 0.8. The regressions are estimated by
year. In each year, the regression is estimated separately for each of the three categories: low-inequality locations (below
the 20th percentile of the inequality distribution across zip codes in 2001), mid-level inequality locations (between the
20th and 80th percentiles), and high-inequality locations (above the 80th percentile). Each location (zip code) is assigned
to one of the three categories in 2001 and the assignment remains constant through 2002-2012. The standard errors are
clustered by zip code. The dotted lines show the 95%-confidence interval.




                                                             34
                         FIGURE 7. THEORETICAL EFFECTS OF A CHANGE IN INEQUALITY ON PROVISION OF CREDIT

                                        Bank Sorting and Inequality under Perfect Competition
                                  Panel A                                                                         Panel B
                                                                                                    R0
                                                    equal                                          1−d                        equal
                                                    unequal                                                                   unequal
                                                    av. income ȳ                                                             av. income ȳ
s*(y)




                                                                                                     R (y)
                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                   R0
                                  income y                                                                    Income y



                                        Bank Sorting and Inequality under Monopoly Banking
                                  Panel C                                                                         Panel D

                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                            equal
                                                                                                   0.9                      unequal
                                                                                                                            av. income ȳ
                                                                                                   0.8

              S+ equal                                                                             0.7
                                                                             Pr(loan denied | y)




                                                                                                   0.6
 signal s




                                                                                                   0.5

                                                                                                   0.4

                                                                                                   0.3

                                     S+ unequal                                                    0.2

                                                                                                   0.1

                                                                                                    0
                                 income y                                                                    Income y


            Note: Panel A shows the tradeoff ∗       for baseline income distribution (“equal”) and more unequal income distribution
            (“unequal”). Panel B plots the interest rate for each income level and for different levels of income inequality. In Panels
            A and B banks can price discriminate perfectly. Panel C plots sets of households with signals and who obtain loans
            for two “equal” and “unequal” income distributions. Shaded regions indicate combinations of signals that yield an
            approved loan. Panel D plots loan deny probability as a function of income. In Panels C and D, the bank changes the
            same rate for all applicants.




                                                                        35
                                             TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS
                                                                                        Percentiles
                                  Mean         St. Dev.
  Category                                                        10           25           50           75           90
                              Panel A: FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel/ Equifax, Q3 2001
  Age of head of
  household                          42.6         11.0                28           34           42          51           58
  Household size                       3.0          1.7                1            2            3           4            5
  Housing debt                     56,423       99,938                 0            0       12,351      83,255      156,082
  Mortgage                         54,658       97,202                 0            0        8,267      81,163      153,000
  HELOC                             1,765       12,565                 0            0            0           0            0
  Auto loans                        6,876       11,543                 0            0            0      10,805       21,376
  Credit card limit                30,459       36,452             1,609        6,127       19,320      42,288       73,009
  Credit card balance               8,884       14,812               261        1,120        3,923      10,881       22,893
  Student loan                      1,639        7,849                 0            0            0           0        2,723
  Consumer financing                  929        5,861                 0            0            0         178        2,033
  Other debt                        4,044       22,158                 0            0            0           0       10,410
  Total debt                       78,794      112,167             1,368        9,437       42,311     111,335      193,395
  Bankruptcy rate                    0.12         0.32              0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00         1.00
  Delinquency rate                   0.30         0.46              0.00         0.00         0.00        1.00         1.00
  Credit card utilization
  rate                                0.41         0.35             0.02         0.09         0.31         0.71         0.99
                                        Panel B: Survey of Consumer Finances, 2001
   Age of head of
   household                           43.3        11.3                 28          35           43          52            59
   Household size                        2.8         1.4                 1            2           2           4             5
   Housing debt                      60,783     119,310                  0            0      29,000      90,000      150,000
   Mortgage debt                     57,643      90,243                  0            0     27,000       88,000      147,000
   HELOC                              3,140      73,981                  0            0           0           0             0
   Auto loans                         5,182       8,280                  0            0           0       8,700       18,000
   Credit card limit                 19,290      43,636             1,400       4,500        10,000      22,000       42,000
   Credit card balance                2,586       5,459                  0            0         500       3,000        7,200
   Student loan                       2,271       9,786                  0            0           0           0        5,000
   Consumer financing
   Other debt
   Total debt                        70,822     121,163                 30      6,140       40,000      101,000      164,800
   Bankruptcy rate                     0.10        0.30               0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00          1.00
   Delinquency rate                    0.05        0.21               0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00          0.00
   Credit card utilization
   rate                                0.27        0.34               0.00        0.00         0.08        0.47          0.93
Note: The sample is restricted to the households with 20-65 year old head of household. The statistics are calculated using
sampling weights. Housing debt is the sum of Mortgage and HELOC. The credit card limit is the maximum of the
originally recorded credit card limit in the CCP and the credit card balance. The credit card utilization rate is calculated
using this credit card limit. The table shows the statistics from the sample restricted to observations with nonzero credit
card limit. The delinquency rate is a share of households with at least one member with an account that is 60 day past due
or more. The number of observations in Panel A is 7,710,406. The number of observations in Panel B is 14,356.




                                                            36
                   TABLE 2: INCOME STATISTICS FROM SCF (ACTUAL) AND CCP (IMPUTED)
                                                                                Percentiles
                                       Mean      St. dev.
                                                                  10       25       50        75       90
           Ln(Y), actual in SCF          10.62        0.91          9.47     10.09 10.67 11.20          11.62
           Ln(Y), imputed in CCP         10.72        0.98          9.54     10.10 10.70 11.28          11.88
Note: The sample is restricted to households with the 20-65 y.o. head of household and positive gross income. The sample
in the SCF is further restricted to remove outliers. See text for more details.




                                                            37
                               TABLE 3: BASELINE RESULTS ON HOUSEHOLD DEBT ACCUMULATION

      2002         2003        2004        2005          2006        2007        2008        2009        2010        2011           2012

                                                     Panel A: Parsimonious Specification
α    -1.23***    -2.04***     -2.86***    -3.32***     -3.81***    -3.98***    -3.85***    -3.74***    -3.38***    -3.02***     -2.66***
     (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.05)
β    -0.39***    -0.59***     -0.96***    -1.04***     -1.15***    -1.10***    -0.98***    -0.93***    -0.75***    -0.58***     -0.38***
     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)
γ     0.63***     1.07***      1.58***     1.80***      2.05***     2.09***     1.95***     1.87***     1.62***     1.37***      1.10***
     (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)

N    5,925,610   5,449,695   4,837,540   4,387,387     4,050,160   3,792,576   3,581,989   3,438,004   3,295,854   3,178,324   3,069,446
R2     0.012       0.017       0.025       0.030         0.038       0.041       0.043       0.042       0.039       0.038       0.037

                                             Panel B: Specification with Household Controls
α    -1.09***    -1.87***     -2.69***    -3.12***     -3.62***    -3.80***    -3.72***    -3.66***    -3.29***    -2.90***     -2.51***
     (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.05)
β    -0.41***    -0.56***     -0.83***    -0.94***     -1.07***    -1.12***    -1.09***    -1.10***    -1.01***    -0.92***     -0.79***
     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.02)
γ     0.56***     0.93***      1.37***     1.59***      1.85***     1.95***     1.91***     1.89***     1.73***     1.53***      1.33***
     (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)

N    5,760,568   5,287,149   4,684,857   4,244,767     3,920,565   3,668,685   3,468,033   3,326,869   3,185,764   3,069,465   2,964,013
R2     0.047       0.057       0.062       0.069         0.074       0.080       0.088       0.091       0.097       0.107       0.119

                                      Panel C: Specification with Household and Zip-Level Controls
α    -1.08***    -1.86***     -2.67***    -3.09***     -3.59***    -3.77***    -3.68***    -3.62***    -3.26***    -2.87***     -2.49***
     (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.05)
β    -0.31***    -0.44***     -0.62***    -0.68***     -0.76***    -0.79***    -0.76***    -0.76***    -0.69***    -0.61***     -0.53***
     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.02)
γ     0.57***     0.94***      1.40***     1.63***      1.91***     2.02***     1.98***     1.97***     1.81***     1.61***      1.40***
     (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)

N    5,760,568   5,287,149   4,684,857   4,244,767     3,920,565   3,668,685   3,468,033   3,326,869   3,185,764   3,069,465   2,964,013
R2     0.048       0.058       0.064       0.071         0.076       0.082       0.090       0.093       0.098       0.109       0.120

                                           Panel D: Specification with Zip-Level Fixed Effects
α    -1.08***    -1.86***     -2.66***    -3.09***     -3.56***    -3.76***    -3.68***    -3.61***    -3.25***    -2.85***     -2.47***
     (0.10)      (0.15)       (0.24)      (0.30)       (0.38)      (0.43)      (0.42)      (0.40)      (0.38)      (0.32)       (0.27)
γ     0.57***     0.94***      1.39***     1.63***      1.90***     2.00***     1.97***     1.96***     1.79***     1.59***      1.38***
     (0.07)      (0.10)       (0.17)      (0.21)       (0.27)      (0.31)      (0.30)      (0.28)      (0.26)      (0.22)       (0.18)

N    5,760,568   5,287,149   4,684,857   4,244,767     3,920,565   3,668,685   3,468,033   3,326,869   3,185,764   3,069,465   2,964,013
R2     0.052       0.061       0.068       0.076         0.082       0.088       0.096       0.099       0.105       0.115       0.126


     Note: The table presents estimates of specifications (2), (3), (4) and (5) in Panels A through D respectively. Coefficient α
     corresponds to the partial correlation of household income rank and debt accumulation between 2001 and the year
     indicated in each column (relative to household’s 2001 income). Coefficient β corresponds to the partial correlation of
     local inequality and household debt accumulation. Coefficient γ is for the interaction of household income and local
     inequality. Each regression is run at the household level. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
     indicated by ***, **, and * respectively. In Panels A-C, the standard errors are clustered by zip code; in Panel D, standard
     errors are clustered by state. See sections 3.1 and 3.2 in the text for details.




                                                                   38
                                    TABLE 4: INTERACTIONS OF RANK WITH CREDIT SCORES AND INITIAL DEBT LEVELS

        2002            2003           2004            2005            2006            2007           2008            2009             2010        2011          2012

                                                   Panel A: Include Interaction of Household Credit Score and Local Inequality
α     -1.054***      -1.690***      -2.500***       -2.867***      -3.299***        -3.465***      -3.440***      -3.351***          -3.049***   -2.678***    -2.354***
      (0.0267)       (0.0394)       (0.0525)        (0.0643)       (0.0766)         (0.0834)       (0.0838)       (0.0842)           (0.0792)    (0.0741)     (0.0690)
β     -1.011***      -1.876***      -2.526***       -3.136***      -3.841***        -4.087***      -3.962***      -3.909***          -3.593***   -3.212***    -2.879***
      (0.0287)       (0.0417)       (0.0550)        (0.0691)       (0.0885)         (0.102)        (0.106)        (0.109)            (0.103)     (0.0979)     (0.0926)
γ      0.542***       0.802***       1.250***        1.441***       1.658***         1.758***       1.761***       1.729***           1.607***    1.425***     1.260***
      (0.0195)       (0.0289)       (0.0388)        (0.0475)       (0.0570)         (0.0621)       (0.0624)       (0.0625)           (0.0589)    (0.0551)     (0.0511)
φ     -0.745***      -1.925***      -2.730***       -3.744***      -4.911***        -5.286***      -4.914***      -4.600***          -4.234***   -3.845***    -3.523***
      (0.0494)       (0.0718)       (0.0931)        (0.116)        (0.146)          (0.168)        (0.173)        (0.178)            (0.167)     (0.157)      (0.149)
σ      0.864***       1.816***       2.388***        3.065***       3.831***         4.095***       3.947***       3.908***           3.577***    3.205***     2.874***
      (0.0351)       (0.0514)       (0.0666)        (0.0831)       (0.105)          (0.122)        (0.126)        (0.129)            (0.121)     (0.114)      (0.108)

N     3,971,367      3,621,115       3,182,620      2,862,799       2,631,983       2,453,874       2,314,493       2,215,144        2,116,638   2,036,909     1,964,385
R2      0.049          0.058           0.063          0.070           0.074           0.080           0.089           0.091            0.096       0.106         0.117

                                                 Panel B: Include Interaction of Initial Household Debt Level and Local Inequality
α     -0.516***      -1.171***      -2.017***       -2.422***       -2.970***         -3.069***     -2.916***       -2.814***        -2.316***   -1.848***    -1.309***
      (0.0275)       (0.0387)       (0.0489)        (0.0605)        (0.0732)          (0.0814)      (0.0849)        (0.0857)         (0.0802)    (0.0769)     (0.0710)
β     -0.312***      -0.452***      -0.670***       -0.758***       -0.878***         -0.910***     -0.881***       -0.857***        -0.770***   -0.659***    -0.556***
      (0.0118)       (0.0170)       (0.0224)        (0.0273)        (0.0329)          (0.0357)      (0.0370)        (0.0374)         (0.0365)    (0.0348)     (0.0328)
γ      0.233***       0.530***       0.987***        1.203***        1.481***          1.529***      1.460***        1.433***         1.221***    1.014***     0.744***
      (0.0200)       (0.0282)       (0.0359)        (0.0443)        (0.0540)          (0.0600)      (0.0627)        (0.0631)         (0.0591)    (0.0564)     (0.0520)
φ     -2.97***       -3.79***       -4.09***        -4.47***        -4.59***          -5.00***      -5.37***        -5.49***         -6.05***    -6.21***     -6.876***
      (0.089)        (0.115)        (0.125)         (0.147)         (0.167)           (0.200)       (0.214)         (0.213)          (0.199)     (0.214)      (0.195)
σ      1.67***        2.15***        2.49***         2.81***         3.05***           3.38***       3.54***         3.55***          3.67***     3.53***      3.71***
      (0.063)        (0.0824)       (0.891)         (0.105)         (0.122)           (0.147)       (0.158)         (0.153)          (0.144)     (0.152)      (0.140)

N     3,989,837      3,643,849       3,203,783      2,882,349       2,650,275       2,470,570       2,329,399       2,228,828        2,128,927   2,047,809     1,974,388
R2      0.053          0.061           0.064          0.070           0.074           0.079           0.088           0.091            0.098       0.109         0.124

Note: The table presents estimates of specification (3’) and (3’’) in section 3.2. Coefficient α corresponds to the partial correlation of household income rank and
debt accumulation between 2001 and the year indicated in each column (relative to household’s 2001 income). Coefficient β corresponds to the partial correlation
of local inequality and household debt accumulation. Coefficient γ is for the interaction of household income and local inequality. Coefficient φ represent the effects
of each additional variable (household credit score in Panel A and initial household debt level in Panel B) while σ captures the interaction of this household variable
with local inequality. Each regression is run at the household level. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and * respectively.
The standard errors are clustered by zip code. In Panel B, coefficients φ and σ and the respective standard errors are multiplied by 10^6.




                                                                                     39
                    TABLE 5: HOUSEHOLD DEBT ACCUMULATION ALONG SUBSETS OF DATA

                                                 α                 β             γ                    N           R2

                              Midwest          -2.619***         -0.385***     1.222***            873,543       0.096
                                               (0.110)           (0.054)      (0.084)
                              Northeast        -3.765***         -0.832***    2.141***             739,380       0.071
 Grouping Zip Codes by                         (0.120)           (0.055)      (0.092)
    Census Region             South            -4.059***         -0.811***    2.145***            1,329,937      0.094
                                               (0.108)           (0.0457)     (0.077)
                              West             -6.078***         -1.558***    3.507***             725,825       0.056
                                               (0.176)           (0.072)      (0.125)

                              Low              -4.489***         -1.178***    2.483***            1,005,563      0.092
                                               (0.124)           (0.044)      (0.088)
 Grouping Zip Codes by        Middle           -4.202***         -0.934***    2.251***            1,185,270      0.095
 Average Credit Ratings                        (0.098)           (0.044)      (0.072)
                              High             -2.289***         -0.321***    1.214***            1,477,852      0.092
                                               (0.074)           (0.035)      (0.056)

                              Low              -2.189***         -0.380***    1.002***             960,459       0.070
                                               (0.171)           (0.066)      (0.117)
 Grouping Zip Codes by                                                                            1,244,084      0.081
                              Middle           -3.101***         -0.606***    1.508***
  Initial Average Debt-
                                               (0.127)           (0.053)      (0.092)
    to-Income Ratios
                              High             -3.754***         -0.783***    1.988***            1,464,142      0.090
                                               (0.108)           (0.050)      (0.086)

                              Low              -3.084***         -0.548***    1.536***             836,682       0.102
                                               (0.117)           (0.055)      (0.088)
 Grouping Zip Codes by                                                                             819,222       0.076
                              Middle           -4.320***         -0.981***    2.456***
  House Price Growth
                                               (0.138)           (0.063)      (0.104)
     (2001-2005)                                                                                   797,970       0.057
                              High             -5.561***         -1.346***    3.139***
                                               (0.163)           (0.068)      (0.117)


Note: The table presents estimates of specification (4) in the text using household debt accumulation from 2001 to 2007.
Panel A presents separate estimates for households located in each of four Census regions. Panel B presents estimates for
households in zip codes with low, medium, or high initial average credit ratings. Panel C presents estimates for households
in zip codes with low, medium, or high initial average debt-to-income ratios. Panel D decomposes zip codes by growth
of house prices between 2001 and 2005. See section 3.3 in the text for details. Coefficient α corresponds to the partial
correlation of household income rank and debt accumulation between 2001 and the year indicated in each column (relative
to household’s 2001 income). Coefficient β corresponds to the partial correlation of local inequality and household debt
accumulation. Coefficient γ is for the interaction of household income and local inequality. Each regression is run at the
household level. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and * respectively. The
standard errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                            40
                                        TABLE 6: MEASURING INEQUALITY AT DIFFERENT LEVELS OF AGGREGATION
                    2002         2003         2004         2005           2006           2007      2008          2009        2010        2011        2012

                                                                     Panel A: Inequality at the County Level
          α       -1.174***    -2.073***    -3.108***    -3.949***     -4.756***    -5.179***    -5.055***     -4.996***   -4.560***   -4.176***   -3.631***
                  (0.0865)     (0.134)      (0.252)      (0.321)       (0.417)      (0.475)      (0.493)       (0.475)     (0.452)     (0.445)     (0.382)
          β       -0.241***    -0.310***    -0.456***    -0.548***     -0.570***    -0.578**     -0.519**      -0.501**    -0.475**    -0.467**    -0.426**
                  (0.0423)     (0.0671)     (0.118)      (0.156)       (0.202)      (0.232)      (0.237)       (0.227)     (0.209)     (0.200)     (0.174)
          γ        0.583***     0.986***     1.531***     1.993***      2.413***     2.626***     2.545***      2.534***    2.343***    2.170***    1.861***
                  (0.0606)     (0.0943)     (0.175)      (0.224)       (0.293)      (0.334)      (0.344)       (0.330)     (0.314)     (0.309)     (0.264)

          N       6,640,570    6,257,495    5,782,494    5,435,548      5,172,907   4,966,746    4,793,457     4,661,838   4,531,493   4,421,495   4,319,303
          R2        0.048        0.060        0.070        0.079          0.086       0.091        0.098         0.100       0.105       0.115       0.125

                                                                      Panel B: Inequality at the State Level
          α       -0.926**     -1.710***    -2.852**     -4.036***     -5.283***    -5.651***    -5.592***     -5.545***   -4.969***   -4.482***   -3.795***
                  (0.359)      (0.543)      (1.114)      (1.412)       (1.667)      (1.697)      (1.612)       (1.525)     (1.476)     (1.391)     (1.224)
          β        0.0490       0.0832       0.254        0.478         0.839**      1.317***     1.472***      1.386***    1.193**     1.001**     0.863*
                  (0.114)      (0.163)      (0.259)      (0.324)       (0.394)      (0.458)      (0.469)       (0.483)     (0.479)     (0.468)     (0.447)
          γ        0.393        0.695*       1.280*       1.937**       2.616**      2.765**      2.711**       2.708**     2.409**     2.170**     1.770**
                  (0.242)      (0.367)      (0.754)      (0.954)       (1.125)      (1.144)      (1.080)       (1.019)     (0.988)     (0.929)     (0.815)

          N       7,015,125    6,704,094    6,344,116    6,088,596      5,893,406   5,737,576    5,600,035     5,490,380   5,383,103   5,293,822   5,209,929
          R2        0.049        0.062        0.071        0.082          0.088       0.092        0.099         0.100       0.108       0.119       0.130




Note: The table presents estimates of specification (4) while measuring inequality at different levels of aggregation: county level in Panel A and state level in Panel
B. Coefficient α corresponds to the partial correlation of household income rank and debt accumulation between 2001 and the year indicated in each column
(relative to household’s 2001 income). Coefficient β corresponds to the partial correlation of local inequality and household debt accumulation. Coefficient γ is for
the interaction of household income and local inequality. Each regression is run at the household level. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are
indicated by ***, **, and * respectively. See section 3.4 in the text for details.




                                                                                    41
                                             TABLE 7: RESULTS BY FORM OF DEBT

       2002        2003         2004       2005          2006        2007        2008        2009        2010        2011        2012

                                                 Panel A: Mortgage Debt Accumulation
α    0.926***     -1.618***   -2.393***   -2.748***     -3.304***   -3.560***   -3.461***   -3.361***   3.089***    -2.778***   -2.468***
     (0.017)      (0.024)     (0.034)     (0.040)       (0.048)     (0.053)     (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.050)     (0.047)     (0.044)
β    -0.304***    -0.447***   -0.632***   -0.693***     -0.813***   -0.865***   -0.828***   -0.811***   -0.756***   -0.669***   -0.606***
     (0.008)      (0.011)     (0.015)     (0.017)       (0.021)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.020)
γ    0.568***     0.948***    1.393***    1.606***      1.936***    2.087***    2.021***    1.970***    1.823***    1.634***    1.462***
     (0.012)      (0.017)     (0.025)     (0.029)       (0.035)     (0.039)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.036)     (0.035)     (0.032)

N     5,759,852   5,286,511   4,684,155   4,244,067     3,919,926   3,667,964   3,467,395   3,326,197   3,185,052   3,068,773   2,963,305
R2      0.052       0.063       0.068       0.078         0.082       0.087       0.096       0.099       0.109       0.122       0.138

                                                      Panel B: Auto Debt Accumulation
α    -0.118***    -0.189***   -0.227***   -0.236***     -0.222***   -0.191***   -0.151***   -0.110***   -0.072***   -0.068***   -0.078***
     (0.00315)    (0.00433)   (0.00518)   (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
β    -0.042***    -0.054***   -0.060***   -0.058***     -0.052***   -0.044***   -0.033***   -0.024***   -0.014***   -0.015***   -0.016***
     (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)
γ    0.060***     0.076***    0.087***    0.087***      0.078***    0.061***    0.042***    0.023***    0.009**     0.010***    0.017***
     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)

N     5,761,261   5,287,505   4,684,632   4,244,481     3,920,470   3,668,662   3,468,178   3,327,099   3,185,871   3,069,547   2,964,371
R2      0.084       0.110       0.123       0.134         0.145       0.158       0.183       0.201       0.221       0.228       0.226

                                             Panel C: Credit Card Balance Accumulation
α    -0.012***    0.005       0.030***    0.038***      0.048***    0.035***    0.030***    0.034***    0.045***    0.053***    0.061***
     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.005)
β    0.003**      0.005***    0.008***    0.013***      0.014***    0.009***    0.005*      0.006**     0.002       -0.000      0.000
     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)
γ    -0.005***    -0.007***   -0.013***   -0.018***     -0.017***   -0.010**    -0.003      -0.004      0.009**     0.016***    0.015***
     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.040)     (0.004)

N     5,237,870   4,732,987   4,180,218   3,803,373     3,512,251   3,293,491   3,111,432   2,946,652   2,798,243   2,699,679   2,602,130
R2      0.084       0.119       0.144       0.154         0.167       0.161       0.159       0.164       0.202       0.232       0.251

                                                        Panel D: Credit Card Limits
α    -0.291***    -0.422***   -0.502***   -0.730***     -0.766***   -0.888***   -0.911***   -0.844***   -0.743***   -0.711***   -0.698***
     (0.006)      (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.013)       (0.014)     (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)
β    -0.063***    -0.097***   -0.132***   -0.166***     -0.180***   -0.208***   -0.203***   -0.237***   -0.241***   -0.228***   -0.214***
     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)
γ    0.112***     0.189***    0.255***    0.313***      0.356***    0.393***    0.390***    0.471***    0.476***    0.478***    0.462***
     (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)

N     5,761,018   5,287,685   4,685,051   4,245,070     3,920,739   3,669,099   3,468,561   3,327,102   3,185,934   3,069,635   2,964,353
R2      0.042       0.069       0.102       0.127         0.131       0.139       0.143       0.165       0.204       0.227       0.237




     Note: The table presents estimates of specification (4) for different forms of household debt: mortgage debt in Panel A,
     auto debt in Panel B, credit card balances in Panel C and credit card limits in Panel D. Coefficient α corresponds to the
     partial correlation of household income rank and debt accumulation between 2001 and the year indicated in each column
     (relative to household’s 2001 income). Coefficient β corresponds to the partial correlation of local inequality and
     household debt accumulation. Coefficient γ is for the interaction of household income and local inequality. Each
     regression is run at the household level. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are indicated by ***, **,
     and * respectively. See section 3.6 in the text for details.




                                                                    42
                                                 TABLE 8: MORTGAGE APPLICATIONS AND LOCAL INEQUALITY

              2001          2002          2003          2004          2005          2006          2007           2008          2009          2010          2011

                                                      Panel A: Probability of Mortgage Application Being Rejected
             0.287**      0.240**       0.222***      0.223***    0.195***      0.228***    0.169***     0.165***            0.116**       0.209***       0.265***
            (0.124)      (0.101)       (0.079)       (0.052)     (0.053)       (0.056)     (0.051)      (0.058)             (0.048)       (0.054)        (0.060)
      γ    -0.441***     -0.355***     -0.314***     -0.331*** -0.320*** -0.320*** -0.256*** -0.253***                      -0.185***     -0.293***      -0.356***
            (0.092)      (0.075)       (0.058)       (0.038)     (0.039)       (0.041)     (0.037)      (0.042)             (0.035)       (0.040)        (0.044)

      N     644,680       647,685       722,326       790,699       890,889        798,332       577,110       395,574       371,967       382,851       359,100
      R2     0.126         0.099         0.070         0.063         0.058          0.058         0.060         0.052         0.044         0.057         0.073

                                             Panel B: Probability of Mortgage Being High-Interest (conditional on approval)
                                                     0.112***      0.095       0.081        0.103**       0.069*       0.012               0.063**        0.077**
                                                    (0.041)       (0.058)     (0.063)      (0.045)       (0.042)      (0.026)             (0.026)        (0.036)
      γ                                             -0.187*** -0.219*** -0.204*** -0.196*** -0.161*** -0.073***                           -0.107***      -0.132***
                                                    (0.030)       (0.042)     (0.045)      (0.033)       (0.030)      (0.019)             (0.019)        (0.027)

      N                                               598,307       644,987        567,623       415,484       287,400       283,357       286,764       268,874
      R2                                               0.113         0.175          0.141         0.085         0.072         0.057         0.094         0.092

                                          Panel C: Loan-to-Income Ratios of Mortgage Applications (conditional on approval)
           -0.661***     -0.698***     -0.823*** -0.872*** -0.614*** -0.623*** -0.785*** -0.704*** -0.702***                              -0.790***      -0.720***
            (0.099)      (0.096)       (0.092)      (0.072)     (0.068)      (0.061)     (0.062)      (0.077)       (0.077)               (0.080)        (0.082)
      γ      0.041        0.039         0.108        0.156*** -0.017         -0.005       0.101**      0.055         0.004                 0.068          0.046
            (0.073)      (0.071)       (0.068)      (0.051)     (0.049)      (0.044)     (0.044)      (0.056)       (0.055)               (0.058)        (0.059)

      N     501,296       513,101       565,412       598,307       644,987        567,623       415,484       287,400       283,357       286,764       268,874
      R2     0.327         0.349         0.368         0.354         0.338          0.352         0.376         0.382         0.405         0.413         0.393


Note: The table presents estimates of specification (6) for different dependent variables as indicated in each panel. Coefficient α corresponds to the partial correlation
of applicant’s income rank and the dependent variable in the year indicated by each column. Coefficient γ corresponds to the interaction of local inequality and
applicant’s income rank. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and * respectively. See section 5 in the text for details.




                                                                                   43
   APPENDIX
NOT FOR PUBLICATION




        44
                             APPENDIX A: ADDITIONAL TABLES AND FIGURES
                          APPENDIX TABLE A1: ROBUSTNESS TO USING IRS MEASURE OF INEQUALITY
       2002        2003         2004          2005         2006        2007        2008         2009        2010        2011        2012

                                                        Panel A: Parsimonious Specification
α    -0.890***   -1.515***    -2.088***     -2.460***    -2.826***   -2.934***   -2.871***    -2.861***   -2.692***   -2.464***   -2.250***
     (0.0194)    (0.0293)     (0.0390)      (0.0484)     (0.0583)    (0.0641)    (0.0640)     (0.0638)    (0.0606)    (0.0558)    (0.0521)
β    -0.760***   -1.181***    -1.826***     -2.048***    -2.307***   -2.291***   -2.054***    -1.933***   -1.601***   -1.258***   -0.929***
     (0.0253)    (0.0380)     (0.0551)      (0.0672)     (0.0829)    (0.0896)    (0.0897)     (0.0895)    (0.0827)    (0.0747)    (0.0690)
γ     1.222***    2.216***     3.224***      3.742***     4.241***    4.208***    3.924***     3.892***    3.538***    3.049***    2.539***
     (0.0438)    (0.0659)     (0.0875)      (0.109)      (0.131)     (0.144)     (0.144)      (0.144)     (0.137)     (0.127)     (0.118)

N    5,924,527   5,448,830    4,837,105     4,387,141    4,049,988   3,792,440   3,581,901    3,437,924   3,295,790   3,178,262   3,069,406
R2     0.012       0.016        0.023         0.029        0.037       0.041       0.043        0.041       0.038       0.038       0.037

                                          Panel B: Specification with Household and Regional Controls
α    -0.760***   -1.415***    -2.038***     -2.398***    -2.811***   -2.901***   -2.824***    -2.809***   -2.536***   -2.201***   -1.920***
     (0.0210)    (0.0309)     (0.0429)      (0.0533)     (0.0639)    (0.0701)    (0.0700)     (0.0700)    (0.0673)    (0.0620)    (0.0571)
β    -0.600***   -0.934***    -1.339***     -1.517***    -1.717***   -1.708***   -1.609***    -1.597***   -1.466***   -1.255***   -1.108***
     (0.0271)    (0.0394)     (0.0554)      (0.0687)     (0.0846)    (0.0934)    (0.0940)     (0.0949)    (0.0907)    (0.0843)    (0.0791)
γ     1.064***    1.951***     2.961***      3.561***     4.225***    4.353***    4.253***     4.337***    4.016***    3.524***    3.077***
     (0.0475)    (0.0698)     (0.0976)      (0.121)      (0.146)     (0.160)     (0.160)      (0.160)     (0.154)     (0.142)     (0.131)

N    5,759,501   5,286,304    4,684,443     4,244,552    3,920,426   3,668,580   3,467,968    3,326,809   3,185,721   3,069,425   2,963,983
R2     0.048       0.057        0.063         0.070        0.076       0.081       0.089        0.092       0.098       0.108       0.120




       Note: The table reproduces the results in Table 3 of the text using the IRS measure of inequality rather than the CCP
       measure. See section 3.2 in the text for details.




                                                                     45
                                    APPENDIX TABLE A2: ROBUSTNESS TO GEOGRAPHIC REGION
       2002         2003         2004        2005         2006            2007           2008        2009        2010        2011        2012

                                                                    Panel A: Midwest
α    -0.887***    -1.550***    -2.137***   -2.241***    -2.598***       -2.619***      -2.507***   -2.531***   -2.211***   -1.923***   -1.635***
      (0.0416)     (0.0552)     (0.0730)    (0.0906)      (0.105)         (0.110)        (0.110)     (0.110)     (0.104)    (0.0993)    (0.0922)
β    -0.252***    -0.330***    -0.435***   -0.367***    -0.384***       -0.385***      -0.327***   -0.353***   -0.322***   -0.264***   -0.237***
      (0.0198)     (0.0266)     (0.0353)    (0.0422)     (0.0509)        (0.0542)       (0.0553)    (0.0540)    (0.0506)    (0.0483)    (0.0456)
γ     0.450***     0.747***     1.043***    1.047***     1.233***        1.222***       1.167***    1.226***    1.092***    0.960***    0.802***
      (0.0313)     (0.0413)     (0.0554)    (0.0688)     (0.0796)        (0.0844)       (0.0850)    (0.0834)    (0.0788)    (0.0751)    (0.0698)

N    1,310,459    1,214,540    1,089,234    994,179     926,258         873,543        829,532     799,413     767,757     742,214     717,954
R2     0.055        0.064        0.072       0.082       0.089           0.096          0.108       0.111       0.122       0.137       0.153

                                                                  Panel B: Northeast
α    -0.883***    -1.603***    -2.422***   -2.904***    -3.481***       -3.765***      -3.725***   -3.610***   -3.411***   -3.005***   -2.708***
      (0.0372)     (0.0523)     (0.0717)    (0.0886)      (0.107)         (0.120)        (0.122)     (0.122)     (0.113)     (0.109)     (0.101)
β    -0.236***    -0.365***    -0.587***   -0.669***    -0.777***       -0.832***      -0.819***   -0.803***   -0.820***   -0.731***   -0.696***
      (0.0169)     (0.0244)     (0.0338)    (0.0413)     (0.0494)        (0.0548)       (0.0568)    (0.0565)    (0.0538)    (0.0514)    (0.0489)
γ     0.473***     0.826***     1.329***    1.619***     1.950***        2.141***       2.132***    2.074***    2.012***    1.797***    1.640***
      (0.0281)     (0.0395)     (0.0551)    (0.0677)     (0.0823)        (0.0920)       (0.0946)    (0.0940)    (0.0876)    (0.0848)    (0.0783)

N    1,105,516    1,025,502     919,783     843,686     785,904         739,380        702,128     674,140     645,604     623,447     602,832
R2     0.044        0.051        0.055       0.062       0.066           0.071          0.077       0.080       0.084       0.093       0.102

                                                                     Panel C: South
α    -1.242***    -2.187***    -3.026***   -3.560***    -3.939***       -4.059***      -3.962***   -3.905***   -3.390***   -3.071***   -2.639***
      (0.0378)     (0.0547)     (0.0695)    (0.0847)     (0.0993)         (0.108)        (0.108)     (0.110)     (0.108)     (0.103)    (0.0992)
β    -0.364***    -0.541***    -0.716***   -0.802***    -0.847***       -0.811***      -0.764***   -0.779***   -0.648***   -0.605***   -0.500***
      (0.0157)     (0.0227)     (0.0289)    (0.0353)     (0.0419)        (0.0457)       (0.0462)    (0.0472)    (0.0462)    (0.0450)    (0.0431)
γ     0.668***     1.148***     1.613***    1.919***     2.092***        2.145***       2.113***    2.129***    1.869***    1.746***    1.509***
      (0.0266)     (0.0385)     (0.0491)    (0.0598)     (0.0704)        (0.0766)       (0.0761)    (0.0776)    (0.0765)    (0.0725)    (0.0700)

N    2,104,747    1,931,826    1,709,240   1,547,622   1,425,285       1,329,937       1,253,811   1,202,853   1,152,915   1,109,302   1,071,093
R2     0.056        0.068        0.076       0.085       0.089           0.094           0.103       0.107       0.115       0.128       0.141

                                                                     Panel D: West
α    -1.644***    -2.848***    -4.113***   -4.832***    -5.695***       -6.078***      -5.941***   -5.899***   -5.584***   -4.794***   -4.232***
      (0.0546)     (0.0801)      (0.105)     (0.131)      (0.162)         (0.176)        (0.174)     (0.178)     (0.165)     (0.158)     (0.149)
β    -0.499***    -0.769***    -1.076***   -1.267***    -1.468***       -1.558***      -1.529***   -1.521***   -1.479***   -1.254***   -1.092***
      (0.0228)     (0.0329)     (0.0437)    (0.0534)     (0.0658)        (0.0719)       (0.0706)    (0.0742)    (0.0711)    (0.0671)    (0.0613)
γ     0.928***     1.573***     2.310***    2.738***     3.255***        3.507***       3.418***    3.400***    3.274***    2.789***    2.455***
      (0.0382)     (0.0567)     (0.0746)    (0.0932)      (0.116)         (0.125)        (0.123)     (0.127)     (0.117)     (0.113)     (0.105)

N    1,239,846    1,115,281     966,600     859,280     783,118         725,825        682,562     650,463     619,488     594,502     572,134
R2     0.039        0.047        0.048       0.051       0.053           0.056          0.061       0.062       0.065       0.071       0.083


          Note: The table replicates the results in Panel A of Table 5 in the main text for each year in our sample.




                                                                         46
                             APPENDIX TABLE A3: ROBUSTNESS TO AVERAGE LOCAL CREDIT RATINGS
       2002        2003         2004          2005           2006           2007         2008         2009        2010        2011        2012

                                                          Panel A: Low Average Credit Ratings

α    -0.676***   -1.496***    -2.324***    -3.087***       -3.960***     -4.489***    -4.488***     -4.474***   -4.067***   -3.590***   -3.190***
      (0.0372)    (0.0524)     (0.0704)     (0.0886)        (0.110)       (0.124)       (0.128)      (0.129)     (0.125)      (0.118)    (0.113)

β    -0.257***   -0.463***    -0.693***    -0.861***       -1.075***     -1.178***    -1.175***     -1.204***   -1.118***   -1.003***   -0.897***
      (0.0125)    (0.0180)     (0.0248)     (0.0310)        (0.0395)      (0.0443)     (0.0461)      (0.0471)    (0.0464)    (0.0445)    (0.0426)
γ     0.343***   0.786***     1.228***     1.686***        2.170***      2.483***      2.500***     2.540***    2.375***     2.136***   1.923***
      (0.0260)    (0.0367)     (0.0494)     (0.0625)        (0.0778)      (0.0875)     (0.0909)      (0.0915)    (0.0890)    (0.0837)    (0.0802)


N    1,818,129   1,653,710    1,424,164    1,243,808       1,110,832     1,005,563     922,130      869,345     816,880     768,349     729,247
R2     0.058       0.074        0.077        0.087           0.090         0.092        0.098        0.100       0.110       0.125       0.141

                                                     Panel B: Medium Average Local Credit Ratings

α    -1.226***   -2.123***    -3.045***    -3.519***       -4.070***     -4.202***    -4.289***     -4.198***   -3.778***   -3.383***   -2.912***
      (0.0349)    (0.0507)     (0.0655)     (0.0777)        (0.0909)      (0.0984)      (0.101)      (0.103)     (0.0979)    (0.0929)    (0.0893)

β    -0.394***   -0.534***    -0.750***    -0.822***       -0.906***     -0.934***    -0.943***     -0.927***   -0.853***   -0.760***   -0.640***
      (0.0155)    (0.0224)     (0.0294)     (0.0348)        (0.0405)      (0.0443)     (0.0460)      (0.0470)    (0.0449)    (0.0429)    (0.0408)
γ     0.664***   1.085***     1.615***     1.870***        2.176***      2.251***      2.340***     2.307***    2.111***     1.922***   1.665***
      (0.0253)    (0.0368)     (0.0479)     (0.0567)        (0.0669)      (0.0724)     (0.0744)      (0.0756)    (0.0717)    (0.0679)    (0.0655)


N    1,909,604   1,731,554    1,517,591    1,372,556       1,265,579     1,185,270    1,121,699     1,075,653   1,029,665   993,281     959,535
R2     0.052       0.062        0.074        0.084           0.091         0.095        0.104         0.105       0.110      0.120       0.130

                                                       Panel C: High Average Local Credit Ratings

α    -1.055***   -1.451***    -1.983***    -2.083***       -2.226***     -2.289***    -2.180***     -2.137***   -2.011***   -1.848***   -1.685***
      (0.0309)    (0.0427)     (0.0537)     (0.0614)        (0.0679)      (0.0736)     (0.0725)      (0.0749)    (0.0722)    (0.0693)    (0.0668)
β    -0.283***   -0.279***    -0.368***    -0.340***       -0.326***     -0.321***    -0.290***     -0.279***   -0.266***   -0.251***   -0.226***
      (0.0142)    (0.0199)     (0.0252)     (0.0287)        (0.0323)      (0.0349)     (0.0347)      (0.0357)    (0.0345)    (0.0329)    (0.0316)
γ     0.587***   0.701***     1.053***     1.094***        1.173***      1.214***      1.143***     1.119***    1.036***     0.940***   0.805***
      (0.0231)    (0.0320)     (0.0404)     (0.0460)        (0.0511)      (0.0557)     (0.0548)      (0.0561)    (0.0541)    (0.0520)    (0.0501)


N    2,032,835   1,901,885    1,743,102    1,628,403       1,544,154     1,477,852    1,424,204     1,381,871   1,339,219   1,307,835   1,275,231
R2     0.057       0.066        0.080        0.085           0.089         0.092        0.102         0.105       0.108       0.116       0.125


         Note: The table replicates the results in Panel B of Table 5 in the main text for each year in our sample.




                                                                       47
                       APPENDIX TABLE A4: ROBUSTNESS TO AVERAGE INITIAL DEBT-TO-INCOME RATIOS
       2002        2003         2004         2005           2006          2007          2008             2009     2010        2011        2012


                                                    Panel A: Low Average Initial Debt-to-Income Ratio

α    -0.681***   -1.128***    -1.696***    -1.843***      -2.132***     -2.189***    -2.097***     -2.142***    -1.790***   -1.674***   -1.421***
      (0.0484)    (0.0684)     (0.0988)     (0.123)        (0.151)       (0.171)      (0.169)       (0.166)      (0.159)     (0.155)     (0.141)

β    -0.181***   -0.230***    -0.350***    -0.346***      -0.366***     -0.380***    -0.351***     -0.390***    -0.327***   -0.316***   -0.284***
      (0.0182)    (0.0262)     (0.0378)     (0.0479)       (0.0585)      (0.0661)     (0.0663)      (0.0661)     (0.0640)    (0.0616)    (0.0599)
γ    0.346***    0.513***     0.820***     0.869***       0.981***      1.002***     0.949***      1.023***     0.881***    0.874***    0.744***
      (0.0332)    (0.0469)     (0.0671)     (0.0837)        (0.103)       (0.117)      (0.115)       (0.113)      (0.109)     (0.107)    (0.0961)

N    1,550,820   1,419,702    1,246,854    1,124,143      1,033,758      960,459      900,996       861,336     821,234     786,886     756,966
R2     0.046       0.055        0.057        0.064          0.066         0.070        0.078         0.083       0.094       0.110       0.126

                                                Panel B: Medium Average Initial Debt-to-Income Ratio

α    -0.864***   -1.353***    -2.150***    -2.556***      -2.929***     -3.101***    -3.040***     -2.928***    -2.623***   -2.196***   -1.829***
      (0.0376)    (0.0540)     (0.0766)     (0.0924)       (0.115)       (0.127)      (0.127)       (0.129)      (0.119)     (0.112)     (0.105)

β    -0.212***   -0.252***    -0.425***    -0.490***      -0.554***     -0.606***    -0.565***     -0.543***    -0.504***   -0.413***   -0.340***
      (0.0161)    (0.0226)     (0.0320)     (0.0385)       (0.0482)      (0.0533)     (0.0528)      (0.0548)     (0.0506)    (0.0484)    (0.0453)
γ    0.423***    0.585***     1.020***     1.234***       1.419***      1.508***     1.497***      1.454***     1.342***    1.142***    0.942***
      (0.0269)    (0.0386)     (0.0549)     (0.0664)       (0.0830)      (0.0917)     (0.0915)      (0.0927)     (0.0861)    (0.0808)    (0.0756)

N    1,942,792   1,785,659    1,581,595    1,436,540      1,326,941     1,244,084     1,176,586    1,129,839    1,083,324   1,044,333   1,009,370
R2     0.048       0.059        0.061        0.070          0.075         0.081         0.091        0.095        0.103       0.116       0.129

                                                    Panel C: High Average Initial Debt-to-Income Ratio

α    -1.212***   -1.964***    -2.748***    -3.115***      -3.616***     -3.754***    -3.653***     -3.622***    -3.227***   -2.849***   -2.492***
      (0.0349)    (0.0507)     (0.0697)     (0.0848)       (0.101)       (0.108)      (0.109)       (0.107)      (0.103)     (0.0954)    (0.0886)

β    -0.367***   -0.495***    -0.632***    -0.684***      -0.765***     -0.783***    -0.757***     -0.758***    -0.669***   -0.596***   -0.532***
      (0.0161)    (0.0235)     (0.0320)     (0.0389)       (0.0470)      (0.0502)     (0.0518)      (0.0512)     (0.0504)    (0.0472)    (0.0428)
γ    0.647***    0.980***     1.416***     1.617***       1.901***      1.988***     1.939***      1.947***     1.732***    1.528***    1.331***
      (0.0272)    (0.0398)     (0.0551)     (0.0670)       (0.0803)      (0.0855)     (0.0865)      (0.0851)     (0.0815)    (0.0755)    (0.0697)

N    2,266,956   2,081,788    1,856,408    1,684,084      1,559,866     1,464,142     1,390,451    1,335,694    1,281,206   1,238,246   1,197,677
R2     0.053       0.062        0.068        0.076          0.082         0.090         0.100        0.101        0.105       0.112       0.121


          Note: The table replicates the results in Panel C of Table 5 in the main text for each year in our sample.




                                                                          48
                      APPENDIX TABLE A5: ROBUSTNESS TO AVERAGE HOUSE PRICE GROWTH (2001-2005)
       2002        2003         2004         2005           2006         2007         2008           2009        2010        2011        2012

                                                        Panel A: Low Average House Price Growth
α    -1.222***   -2.145***    -2.751***    -3.007***     -3.117***     -3.084***    -3.488***      -3.912***   -3.337***   -2.793***   -2.283***
     (0.0453)    (0.0640)     (0.0839)     (0.0963)      (0.108)       (0.117)      (0.126)        (0.138)     (0.127)     (0.119)     (0.110)
β    -0.366***   -0.540***    -0.632***    -0.628***     -0.561***     -0.548***    -0.658***      -0.808***   -0.670***   -0.524***   -0.440***
     (0.0202)    (0.0285)     (0.0373)     (0.0430)      (0.0496)      (0.0549)     (0.0603)       (0.0672)    (0.0593)    (0.0565)    (0.0545)
γ     0.667***    1.157***     1.458***     1.578***      1.577***      1.536***     1.851***       2.163***    1.832***    1.529***    1.228***
     (0.0331)    (0.0470)     (0.0617)     (0.0708)      (0.0806)      (0.0884)     (0.0954)       (0.104)     (0.0948)    (0.0886)    (0.0822)

N    1,291,855   1,189,375    1,050,610     957,101        889,277      836,682      782,313        733,016     697,421     672,838     658,547
R2     0.055       0.067        0.081        0.093          0.098        0.102        0.110          0.108       0.116       0.126       0.140

                                                       Panel B: Medium Average House Price Growth
α    -1.198***   -1.918***    -2.828***    -3.174***      -4.026***    -4.330***    -3.964***     -3.643***    -3.464***   -3.116***   -2.833***
     (0.0417)    (0.0634)     (0.0818)     (0.101)        (0.125)      (0.138)      (0.142)       (0.139)      (0.132)     (0.127)     (0.117)
β    -0.373***   -0.481***    -0.660***    -0.670***      -0.880***    -0.981***    -0.816***     -0.691***    -0.760***   -0.649***   -0.639***
     (0.0204)    (0.0298)     (0.0386)     (0.0460)       (0.0584)     (0.0632)     (0.0656)      (0.0645)     (0.0629)    (0.0608)    (0.0552)
γ     0.675***    1.014***     1.549***     1.728***       2.277***     2.462***     2.179***      1.967***     1.931***    1.752***    1.637***
     (0.0307)    (0.0468)     (0.0616)     (0.0761)       (0.0949)     (0.104)      (0.105)       (0.103)      (0.0981)    (0.0942)    (0.0863)

N    1,313,788   1,194,060    1,059,157     970,151        897,573      819,222      754,658        729,503     701,465     673,369     654,435
R2     0.051       0.061        0.061        0.065          0.069        0.076        0.091          0.096       0.101       0.111       0.120

                                                        Panel C: High Average House Price Growth
α    -1.287***   -2.193***    -3.399***    -4.486***     -5.332***     -5.561***     -5.057***     -4.616***   -4.144***   -3.710***   -3.325***
     (0.0449)    (0.0665)     (0.0911)     (0.124)       (0.153)       (0.163)       (0.153)       (0.145)     (0.137)     (0.128)     (0.121)
β    -0.378***   -0.547***    -0.848***    -1.125***     -1.335***     -1.346***     -1.252***     -1.112***   -1.008***   -0.896***   -0.776***
     (0.0196)    (0.0291)     (0.0395)     (0.0526)      (0.0636)      (0.0677)      (0.0651)      (0.0625)    (0.0618)    (0.0575)    (0.0541)
γ     0.690***    1.124***     1.834***     2.509***      2.982***      3.139***      2.861***      2.625***    2.385***    2.167***    1.932***
     (0.0323)    (0.0477)     (0.0657)     (0.0887)      (0.109)       (0.117)       (0.111)       (0.106)     (0.100)     (0.0932)    (0.0880)

N    1,365,724   1,237,680    1,072,853     935,547        845,133      797,970      777,522        752,625     717,752     690,702     651,403
R2     0.043       0.048        0.048        0.051          0.052        0.057        0.065          0.071       0.074       0.083       0.093


          Note: The table replicates the results in Panel D of Table 5 in the main text for each year in our sample.




                                                                        49
                 APPENDIX TABLE A6: MORTGAGE APPLICATIONS AND LOCAL INEQUALITY WITH STATE FE

      2001        2002        2003         2004        2005         2006         2007        2008         2009        2010        2011

                                          Panel A: Probability of Mortgage Application Being Rejected
      0.297**      0.241**    0.229***    0.242***     0.219***    0.244***     0.177***      0.152**      0.115**   0.203***     0.260***
     (0.130)      (0.104)     (0.083)     (0.054)      (0.055)     (0.057)      (0.052)      (0.059)      (0.048)    (0.054)     (0.060)

β    0.446***     0.374***    0.342***    0.374***     0.358***    0.351***     0.314***     0.306***     0.223***   0.260***     0.286***
     (0.054)      (0.040)     (0.028)     (0.026)      (0.029)     (0.028)      (0.025)      (0.027)      (0.026)    (0.029)     (0.032)

γ    -0.463***   -0.364***   -0.327***   -0.356***    -0.346***    -0.339***   -0.270***    -0.251***    -0.191***   -0.296***   -0.362***
      (0.096)     (0.077)     (0.062)     (0.039)      (0.040)      (0.041)     (0.038)      (0.043)      (0.035)     (0.040)    (0.045)

N    644680       647685      722326      790699       890889      798332       577110       395574       371967     382851      359100
R2    0.090        0.071       0.050       0.048        0.045       0.046        0.046        0.035        0.027      0.035       0.044

                                 Panel B: Probability of Mortgage Being High-Interest (conditional on approval)
                                          0.132***      0.140**     0.119*       0.105**      0.065        0.007      0.055**     0.062*
                                          (0.042)      (0.059)     (0.062)      (0.046)      (0.041)      (0.026)    (0.026)     (0.036)

β                                         0.241***     0.284***    0.270***     0.208***     0.169***     0.075***   0.114***     0.120***
                                          (0.026)      (0.036)     (0.038)      (0.027)      (0.026)      (0.015)    (0.014)     (0.020)

γ                                        -0.208***    -0.262***    -0.244***   -0.205***    -0.165***    -0.073***   -0.104***   -0.122***
                                          (0.031)      (0.042)      (0.045)     (0.033)      (0.030)      (0.019)     (0.019)    (0.026)

N                                         598307       644987      567623       415484       287400       283357     286764      268874
R2                                         0.099        0.160       0.123        0.064        0.047        0.028      0.042       0.043

                               Panel C: Loan-to-Income Ratios of Mortgage Applications (conditional on approval)
     -0.696***   -0.733***   -0.853***   -0.924***    -0.664***    -0.655***   -0.797***    -0.697***    -0.728***   -0.802***   -0.731***
      (0.099)     (0.096)     (0.096)     (0.075)      (0.073)      (0.067)     (0.068)      (0.078)      (0.080)     (0.083)    (0.083)

β    -0.219***   -0.231***   -0.265***   -0.304***    -0.223***    -0.218***   -0.240***    -0.167***     -0.114**   -0.138***   -0.092**
      (0.050)     (0.051)     (0.053)     (0.051)      (0.046)      (0.041)     (0.043)      (0.052)      (0.050)     (0.048)    (0.047)

γ     0.069        0.070       0.138*     0.207***      0.032       0.029        0.118**      0.056        0.025      0.077       0.053
     (0.073)      (0.070)     (0.070)     (0.053)      (0.052)     (0.048)      (0.048)      (0.057)      (0.057)    (0.060)     (0.060)

N    501296       513101      565412      598307       644987      567623       415484       287400       283357     286764      268874
R2    0.289        0.310       0.327       0.318        0.308       0.322        0.344        0.344        0.365      0.376       0.357



      Note: The table replicates the results in Table 8 using state fixed effects rather than county fixed effects. Standard errors
      clustered at the county level.




                                                                   50
                    APPENDIX B: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON CCP DATA
The Equifax FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel is a longitudinal database with detailed information on consumer
debt and credit. The core of the database constitutes a 5% random sample of all U.S. individuals with credit
(i.e., the primary sample). The database also contains information on all individuals with credit files residing
in the same household as the individuals in the primary sample. The household members are added to the
sample based on the mailing address in the existing credit files. Thus, the resulting sample is a sample of U.S.
households in which at least one member has a credit file.

The individual records in the CCP contain information on the mortgage debt, credit card debt and credit card
limits, home equity lines of credit, student loans, auto loans, bankruptcy and delinquencies. The data include
residential location on the census block level and the birth year of individuals. The data in the CCP are updated
quarterly. We use 100% of the CCP sample.

The unit of the analysis in the paper is a household. The CCP is primarily an individual-level dataset; however,
it contains two identifiers that allow us to construct the household records in each period and then link the
household records from period to period. In each quarter, a unique identifier is given for all individuals who
reside in the same household as an individual in the primary sample. We use this identifier to aggregate the
individual level information to construct the household level credit variables.

The household identifier identifies household members only in one period. We then use the second identifier
in the CCP data, an individual identifier that remains constant from period to period, to link household records
from one quarter to another. To construct the longitudinal household record, we proceed as follows. Let i
denote the identification number of a household in 2001. To identify the continuation of household i in year t,
t > 2001, we first determine what members of household i are present in year t using individual identifiers.
Then we determine the identification number of the household to which these members belong in year t. If
there is a unique household to which these members belong in year t and the new household does not have any
members from any other household in year 2001, we identify this new household as a continuation record for
household i. While the primary sample of individuals in the CCP is a random sample of all U.S. households
with credit reports; the resulting sample of the households is not random. Following, Lee and van der Klaauw
(2010) we define the sampling weights as the inverse of the probability to be included in the sample,
      , where N is the number of individuals in the household who are in the primary sample.
  .
For each individual, the data contain a record of her debt by detailed category as well as a record of the balances
on the joint or cosigned accounts. In aggregating the debt on the household level, we use a correction to avoid
double counting of the balances on joint accounts. This choice follows Brown, Haughwout, Lee and van der
Klaauw (2011). In particular, while aggregating, we discount the total debt of the household members by 50%
of the total debt on joint accounts of the household members. The exact formula that we use is
                                                                   ,              ,
                                        ,    max ∑        ,   .5       ,   , .5       ,   .
                                                                                              ,
Where     ,   is the total debt in category j of member i in household h and                      ,   is the debt in joint accounts. The
second input to the maximum function addresses the situation that arises with so-called “thin” credit records,
or records with at most two credit report-worthy debts. The individuals with thin records are not included in
the primary sample, but they are included in the additional sample. These individuals might have records on
joint accounts that are missed on individual accounts. We thank Donghoon Lee for this suggestion.


                                                        51
Variable Descriptions

Here we provide a short description of the variables used in the CCP analysis. For a detailed description of the
CCP dataset please see Lee and van der Klaauw (2010).

Age: We follow Brown, Haughwout, Lee, and van der Klaauw (2011) and define age as the median age of
adult members of the house.

Auto debts: These are any loans taken out explicitly for the purchase of a car including loans from banks and
those from automobile financing institutions.

Bankruptcy: An indicator in the CCP taken from public records that detail whether or not an individual has
filed for bankruptcy.

Credit Card Balance: The sum of reported balances across bank cards as well as retail cards. These cards
reflect revolving accounts at banks, credit unions, credit card companies, and others. Importantly, the CCP
does not distinguish between balances rolled over billing periods (and so potentially subject to interest charges)
and cards where the balance is paid every month.

Credit Card Limits: We take the maximum of reported limits and balances across all bank and retail cards to
ensure that reported utilization is not greater than one.

Credit Card Utilization Rate: This is the ratio of the credit card balance and credit card limit.

Delinquency: Indicator for whether or not a household is at least 60 days delinquent on any of its accounts in
the current quarter.

HELOC Debt: The sum of home equity lines of credit, or home equity revolving accounts. We use the
classification of HELOCs vs. installment loans provided by the CCP data.

Mortgage Debt: The sum of all mortgage installment loans.

Riskscore: A variable constructed by Equifax and similar to FICO. A higher number is interpreted as a lower
default risk. We construct the household riskscore by taking the average of individual riskscores within the
household.

Size: Household size sums the number of distinct social security numbers that can be linked by household
identifiers in a specific time period. We restrict the household size to at most 10.

Student Loans: These include loans financing education from private and public institutions.

Total debt: Constructed as the sum of mortgage debt balance, credit card balances, auto debts, balance on
home equity lines of credit, and student loans.




                                                       52
          APPENDIX C: DECOMPOSING U.S. INEQUALITY SINCE 1970
The decomposition is constructed using the following IPUMS samples: 1970, 1980, and 1990 1% metro
samples and the 2000 1% unweighted sample. Within each of these samples we use the metro area geographies
defined by IPUMS in the following way:
         “Metropolitan areas are counties or combinations of counties centering on a substantial urban area.
         METAREA identifies the metropolitan area where the household was enumerated, if that metropolitan
         area was large enough to meet confidentiality requirements.”
We restrict the sample to the set of metro areas that can be identified in each year to get 117 metro areas
containing roughly 60% of the entire sample within each year. We also restrict the sample to households
where the respondent’s age is between 25 and 65 and the respondent is the head of the household or the spouse
of the head of the household. These restrictions are not important for the results.
         To calculate income we use family total income. While not exactly the same as household income it
is available for all years whereas household income is not available in 1970. We estimate the following model
of log family income on each year of the sample:
                                              log
         Estimating this function gives estimates of the variance of the fixed effects and the variance of the
residuals for each year. We then calculate the share of variance explained by variance of the fixed effects as:




                     APPENDIX FIGURE C1: DECOMPOSING AGGREGATE U.S. INEQUALITY




Note: The left-hand figure plots the ratio of “between” variance of mean incomes to the total variance of incomes. The
right-hand figure plots the standard deviation of log income across all households.




                                                         53
        APPENDIX 3: TIME VARIATION IN LOCAL INEQUALITY RATES
To get a sense of how inequality within counties has varied across time we computed Gini coefficients at the
county level using 1970 and 2000 Census aggregates available from ICPSR. To compute the Gini coefficient
we follow the same procedure outlined in the Appendix and reproduced below. Because the number of bins
used to compute the coefficient is not the same in both years (1970 has fewer bins) the levels of the Gini
coefficients are not directly comparable. Using the Census data we match 3,122 counties.
        Let        be a discrete probability function where   1, … , and          . Then the Gini coefficient
G is defined as
                                                   ∑
                                              1

where       ∑                and      0.
         We approximate the discrete probability function with the share of a location’s population within each
bin reported by the Census. For all bins but the last we assume all the mass is distributed at the midpoint of
the bin. For the very last bin we add the last increment to the lower boundary. For example, if the last bin is
incomes of $200,000 and up and the bin before was $150,000 to $199,999 we assign the last bin to have the
value $250,000. This assumption limits the impact the very top bin will have on the coefficient, but should
provides a reasonable approximation of inequality at low levels of aggregation.
         The figure reported below shows a high degree of correlation between inequality in 1970 and inequality
in 2000. The R-squared is 0.26 and the Spearman correlation is 0.52, suggesting inequality is quite persistent.

                        APPENDIX FIGURE C3: PERSISTENCE OF LOCAL INEQUALITY




                   Note: The figure plots Gini coefficients for income inequality in U.S counties in
                   1970 versus 2000.




                                                        54
           APPENDIX D: SUMMARY STATISTICS FROM HMDA DATA
Table 1 in this appendix provides summary statistics from the 15% HMDA samples. We report the fraction of
applications denied, originated, for owner-occupied properties, high interest, the race of the primary applicant,
and the regulator of the lender. When using the HMDA data it is important to recognize that changes in reporting
requirements from 2003 to 2004 had significant effects on the coverage of the mortgage market and so statistics
we calculate. This can be seen clearly when comparing the change in racial composition of applicants from 2003
to 2004. While some of this might reflect real shifts in the provision of credit to non-white groups it also reflects
the increased coverage of rural areas and smaller, non-bank lenders. This can also be seen by the large increase
in applications filed at lenders regulated by HUD. While mortgage company activity was almost certainly
increasing over this period many lenders were simply not reporting in the HMDA data.
          The health of the mortgage market can be traced out by changes in the sample size. The number of
applications reported peaked in 2007 and then declined steadily until 2011. Interestingly, the fraction of loans
with high interest rates has also declined sharply, probably reflecting fewer loans with junior liens.
          Notice that the mean applicant income reported in the HMDA data is substantially higher than the
average household income reported in the SCF data and the imputed CCP data. However, average income is
comparable to the average income of homeowners as reported in the 2007 SCF, which is about $99,500.
          Table 2 provides some sample correlations from 2007, most of which are qualitatively similar to other
years. Owner-occupied applications are less likely to be denied while applications with high LTI ratios are more
likely to be denied. Applicants applying to HUD-regulated lenders are more likely to be denied, which could
reflect the stress of mortgage companies in this period or an increased likelihood that the applicant is subprime.
Applicants to HUD lenders tend to have smaller incomes and higher LTI ratios.




                                                         55
                           APPENDIX TABLE D1: SUMMARY STATISTICS FROM HMDA
              2001      2002       2003      2004       2005      2006       2007      2008      2009      2010     2011



 Denied         0.15      0.13      0.13       0.15      0.16      0.18       0.18      0.17       0.14     0.15     0.15
 Originated     0.78      0.79      0.78       0.76      0.72      0.71       0.72      0.73       0.76     0.75     0.75
 OOC            0.94      0.93      0.92       0.90      0.88      0.90       0.91      0.92       0.94     0.94     0.93
 LTI            2.31      2.43      2.58       2.65      2.67      2.63       2.72      2.72       2.81     2.79     2.70
     sd         0.88      0.94      1.03       1.08      1.08      1.04       1.11      1.10       1.12     1.12     1.10
 Loan         140.16    154.40    168.24     193.11    212.85    223.00     226.41    207.03     198.34   203.31   200.69
     sd        96.03    104.30    111.90     147.30    165.15    173.16     180.86    155.68     141.21   148.88   151.88
 Income        64.84     68.46     70.72      78.13     85.41     91.21      91.01     84.15      78.02    80.84    82.38
     sd        47.46     49.75     50.95      63.29     70.48     76.46      81.55     73.44      65.42    68.73    71.28
 High Int                                      0.08      0.16      0.16       0.08      0.06       0.04     0.02     0.03
 White          0.89      0.88      0.88       0.74      0.71      0.69       0.73      0.76       0.76     0.76     0.77
 Black          0.08      0.07      0.08       0.08      0.10      0.11       0.10      0.08       0.07     0.07     0.07
 OCC            0.28      0.27      0.26       0.23      0.20      0.23       0.32      0.32       0.29     0.31     0.06
 FRS            0.11      0.18      0.18       0.15      0.16      0.16       0.17      0.09       0.09     0.08     0.04
 FDIC           0.09      0.08      0.07       0.07      0.06      0.06       0.06      0.09       0.11     0.11     0.09
 OTS            0.11      0.10      0.09       0.08      0.09      0.08       0.10      0.08       0.06     0.05     0.00
 NCUA           0.02      0.02      0.02       0.02      0.02      0.02       0.03      0.05       0.04     0.04     0.04
 HUD            0.39      0.36      0.38       0.45      0.47      0.45       0.33      0.36       0.40     0.41     0.43


 N            644680   647685     722326    790699     890889    798332     577110    395574    371967    382851   359100
Note: The table provides sample means for all variables and standard deviations for continuous variables for all years of
the HMDA data under the sample restrictions identified in the text. Denied gives the probability that an application was
formally denied while originated gives the probability a loan was approved and the funds disbursed to the borrower. OOC
indicates that the application is for an owner-occupied home. LTI is the loan-to-income ratio on the application
constructed from the application’s stated loan and income. High Int indicates if a loan was ultimately originated as a high
interest loan. While and black both refer to the race of the primary applicant. OCC indicates a loan filed at a lender
regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Similarly, FRS indicates a lender regulated by the Federal
Reserve System, OTS regulated by the Office of Thrift Supervision, NCUA the National Credit Union Administration,
and HUD the Department of Housing and Urban Development.




                                                            56
                            APPENDIX TABLE D2: SAMPLE CORRELATIONS FROM 2007 HMDA

                Denied       Originated      OOC           LTI           Loan          Inc          White         Black
 Denied         1.000
 Originated    -0.762***       1.000
 OOC           -0.0192***      0.021***      1.000
 LTI            0.053***      -0.060***      0.200***      1.000
 Loan           0.001         -0.020***    -0.0308***      0.208***      1.000
 Inc           -0.028***       0.014***     -0.169***     -0.238***      0.815***      1.000
 White         -0.145***       0.146***    -0.0105***     -0.116***     -0.033***      0.034***      1.000
 Black          0.116***      -0.113***      0.007***      0.050***     -0.053***     -0.074***     -0.545***      1.000
 OCC           -0.066***       0.120***     -0.005***     -0.012***      0.056***      0.063***      0.006***     -0.025***
 FRS            0.051***      -0.070***     -0.002        -0.022***     -0.023***     -0.011***      0.001         0.004**
 FDIC          -0.044***       0.045***     -0.031***     -0.031***     -0.060***     -0.041***      0.078***     -0.037***
 OTS            0.0547***     -0.009***     -0.022***     -0.003*        0.081***      0.070***     -0.027***      0.006***
 NCUA          -0.025***       0.008***      0.029***     -0.004**      -0.042***     -0.040***      0.039***     -0.020***
 HUD            0.022***      -0.084***      0.026***      0.048***     -0.042***     -0.062***     -0.044***      0.044***
 N             577110
Note: The table provides correlations for all years of the HMDA data under the sample restrictions identified in the text.
Denied gives the probability that an application was formally denied while originated gives the probability a loan was
approved and the funds disbursed to the borrower. OOC indicates that the application is for an owner-occupied home.
LTI is the loan-to-income ratio on the application constructed from the application’s stated loan and income. High Int
indicates if a loan was ultimately originated as a high interest loan. White and black both refer to the race of the primary
applicant. OCC indicates a loan filed at a lender regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Similarly,
FRS indicates a lender regulated by the Federal Reserve System, OTS regulated by the Office of Thrift Supervision,
NCUA the National Credit Union Administration, and HUD the Department of Housing and Urban Development.




                                                            57
                                APPENDIX E: INCOME AND DEFAULT
We use the CCP data to verify our assumption about probability of default conditional on income. In particular,
we estimate a linear probability model of the probability of default as a function of household income.
         The dependent variable takes value 1 if any member of the household in year t is 60-day past due or
longer on any account (mortgage, auto loan, credit card, etc.). The explanatory variable of interest is the (log
of the) household income in year 2001 (using the expected imputed income). We first estimate a parsimonious
specification with only the income measure. We then estimate a specification with the measure of income and
the full set of household and regional controls. These household-level controls are the following variables
measured at 2001: dummies for age of the head of household and for the size of the household; amount of
mortgage, auto loan, credit card balance, credit card limit, HELOC, student loan; dummies for bankruptcy and
60 DPD or longer, and risk score. The regional-level controls are the following zip code-level variables
measured in 2001: income inequality, median of total household debt, median of household mortgage, house
price growth between 2001 and year t, the ratio of the median house price to the median income, and the county
level fixed effects. In the estimation, the standard errors are clustered by zip code. We use a linear probability
model since the mean of the dependent variable is in the range 0.25-0.30. The equation is estimated for each
year from 2002 to 2012 for the sample of the households use in the benchmark regression of our analysis (i.e.,
the households that do not change location between year 2001 and year t).
         We report results in Appendix Table E1. We find that higher income households and households with
higher income ranks have lower probability of default.




                                                       58
                                                            Appendix Table E1. Income and default.

            2002         2003         2004           2005           2006          2007           2008          2009         2010         2011         2012
                                                                          Panel A: No Controls
rank     -0.325***     -0.279***    -0.289***      -0.261***      -0.247***     -0.224***     -0.212***     -0.194***     -0.186***    -0.181***    -0.187***
         (0.00178)     (0.00179)    (0.00180)      (0.00173)      (0.00170)     (0.00169)     (0.00167)     (0.00168)     (0.00169)    (0.00169)    (0.00172)

N        6,172,512     5,676,766    5,039,109      4,570,211      4,218,948     3,950,618     3,731,267     3,581,280     3,433,201    3,310,773    3,197,351
R2         0.022         0.017        0.018          0.015          0.013         0.011         0.010         0.008         0.008        0.007        0.008
                                                                      Panel B: County Fixed Effects
rank     -0.324***     -0.278***    -0.288***      -0.261***      -0.247***     -0.224***     -0.213***     -0.196***     -0.188***    -0.184***    -0.190***
         (0.00179)     (0.00180)    (0.00182)      (0.00174)      (0.00169)     (0.00167)     (0.00165)     (0.00165)     (0.00165)    (0.00165)    (0.00168)

N        6,172,512     5,676,766    5,039,109      4,570,211      4,218,948     3,950,618     3,731,267     3,581,280     3,433,201    3,310,773    3,197,351
R2         0.052         0.046        0.050          0.047          0.045         0.040         0.037         0.034         0.033        0.032        0.033
                                                  Panel C: Household-specific Characteristics and County Fixed Effects
rank     -0.0303***   -0.0374***    -0.0398***    -0.0448***    -0.0470*** -0.0448*** -0.0348*** -0.0261***               -0.0235***   -0.0189***   -0.0120***
          (0.00152)    (0.00171)     (0.00189)     (0.00202)     (0.00213)     (0.00223)       (0.00233)    (0.00245)      (0.00250)    (0.00244)    (0.00253)

N        4,195,007     3,836,566    3,380,052      3,047,381      2,803,886     2,619,591     2,470,908     2,367,350     2,265,545    2,182,951    2,105,700
R2         0.460         0.359        0.326          0.274          0.244         0.213         0.187         0.177         0.171        0.161        0.159
                                                                      Panel D: No Controls
ln(y)     -0.159***    -0.144***     -0.152***     -0.143***      -0.139***      -0.129***     -0.122***    -0.113***     -0.109***    -0.106***    -0.109***
         (0.000625)   (0.000626)    (0.000644)    (0.000638)     (0.000636)     (0.000639)    (0.000647)    (0.000665)    (0.000684)   (0.000691)   (0.000711)

N        6,172,512     5,676,766    5,039,109      4,570,211      4,218,948     3,950,618     3,731,267     3,581,280     3,433,201    3,310,773    3,197,351
R2         0.040         0.033        0.036          0.033          0.031         0.027         0.025         0.020         0.019        0.018        0.019
                                                                 Panel E: County Fixed Effects
ln(y)     -0.145***    -0.129***     -0.135***     -0.126***      -0.121***     -0.113***      -0.109***    -0.101***     -0.0980***   -0.0958***   -0.0993***
         (0.000669)   (0.000667)    (0.000681)    (0.000660)     (0.000647)    (0.000638)     (0.000635)    (0.000647)    (0.000647)   (0.000646)   (0.000657)

N        6,172,512     5,676,766    5,039,109      4,570,211      4,218,948     3,950,618     3,731,267     3,581,280     3,433,201    3,310,773    3,197,351
R2         0.062         0.055        0.059          0.056          0.054         0.049         0.045         0.041         0.040        0.038        0.039
                                               Panel F: Household-specific Characteristics and County Fixed Effects
ln(y)     -0.010***    -0.012***     -0.013***      -0.016***     -0.017***      -0.015***      -0.012***     -0.009***   -0.008***    -0.006***    -0.004***
         (0.000606)   (0.000683)    (0.000752)     (0.000811)    (0.000857)     (0.000904)     (0.000949)    (0.000995)   (0.00102)    (0.000994)   (0.00103)

N        4,195,007     3,836,566    3,380,052      3,047,381      2,803,886     2,619,591     2,470,908     2,367,350     2,265,545    2,182,951    2,105,700
R2         0.460         0.359        0.326          0.274          0.244         0.213         0.187         0.177         0.171        0.161        0.159

Notes: The table reports estimated coefficients on income rank (Panels A-C) and log income (Panels D-F) in the linear regression where the dependent variable is
a dummy variable equal to one if a household defaults in a given year and zero otherwise. Standard errors (clustered by zip code) are reported in parentheses.
***,**,*denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.

                                                                                 59
                                APPENDIX F: IMPUTATION OF INCOME
In the first step of our work, we estimate the relationship between income and observables in the SCF and then
use this relationship to impute income in the CCP. In this appendix, we describe how variables are constructed
and what specification is estimated.
         In the table below, we describe how variables are constructed in CCP and SCF. We use only variables
which are available in both CCP and SCF. While there are some differences in the definitions across datasets, we
made every effort to make it as comparable as possible.


                          Variable                          SCF             Counterpart in CCP
                  Auto loans                      X2218 + X2318 + X2418 + Auto loan bank and auto
                                                  X7169 + X2424 + X2507 + loan finance balance
                                                  X2607
                  Bankruptcy flag                 X6772                    Chapter 7 or Chapter 13
                                                                           bankruptcy flag
                  Credit Card Limit19             X414                     Bank card + retail card
                                                                           high credit
                  Credit Card Balance             X413 + X427+ X421 + X424 Bank card + retail card
                                                  + X430                   balance
                  Delinquency flag                X3005                    A flag if any account is
                                                                           60 DPD or more
                  HELOC Balance                   X1108 + X1119 + X1130 + Home equity revolving
                                                  X1136                    balance
                  Income                          X5729                    None
                  Mortgage Debt                   X805 + X905 + X1005 + First mortgage balance
                                                  X1715 + X1815 + X1915 + +       home       equity
                                                  X2006 + X2016            installment balance
                  Student Loans                   X7824 + X7847 +          Student loans balance
                                                  X7870 + X7924 +
                                                  X7947 + X7970


        We also use household size and head of household age. The CCP does not include racial identifiers so we
do not use these. In our imputation, we use all of the SCF replicates, which are discussed in detail by Kennickel
(1998). Because the SCF intentionally oversamples wealthy households, we apply the SCF-computed weights
X42001. Note that we take the natural log of one plus the level for all continuous variables to make the distribution
of these variables more well-behaved and to avoid dropping observations with zero values. We also restrict the
sample to households where the head’s age was between 20 and 65. We dropped outliers using Cook’s distance.
           As discussed in the text, our regression has the general form
                                            log    ,                 ,     ,   .
In choosing the specific form of f, we aimed to capture as much of joint distribution of the observables and income
as we could with a flexible assumption. Terms were added if it was found that they were meaningful predictors of
log income. The function f was composed of


19
     We code responses of “no limit” in the SCF as 1,000,000.

                                                                60
           1.   Third-order Chebychev polynomials of mortgage, auto, and credit card limits,
           2.   Credit card, HELOC, and student loan balances,
           3.   Nine age bins in five year intervals,
           4.   Interactions of all age bins with each type of debt balance,
           5.   Household size and interactions of household size with debt balances and age bins,
           6.   Indicators for bankruptcy and delinquency and interactions of these indicators with other indicators,
           7.   Indicators for positive credit card limit and interactions of this variable with various variables,
           8.   Interactions of household size, age, and debt levels.
Table 2 shows that using data from 2001 the aggregate income statistics computed directly from the SCF match
those we impute in the CCP very closely.




                                                        61
