                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INTERNATIONAL LIQUIDITY AND EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS

                                           Xavier Gabaix
                                          Matteo Maggiori

                                        Working Paper 19854
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19854


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014


We thank our editors Andrei Shleifer, Pol Antràs, Elhanan Helpman and referees, and Ariel Burstein,
John Campbell, Nicolas Coeurdacier, Alessandro Dovis, Bernard Dumas, Emmanuel Farhi, Luca
Fornaro,Kenneth Froot, Nicolae Garleanu, Gita Gopinath, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Oleg Itskhoki,
AndrewKarolyi, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Anton Korinek, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Guido Lorenzoni, Brent
Neiman,Maurice Obstfeld, Stavros Panageas, Anna Pavlova, Fabrizio Perri, Hélène Rey, Kenneth
Rogoff,Lucio Sarno, Hyun Song Shin, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Adrien Verdelhan, and seminar
participantsat NBER (EFG, IFM, ME, IPM, IAP, MWAB, MATS), Princeton University, Harvard
University,MIT, Stanford SITE, UC Berkeley, University of Chicago Booth, Northwestern University,
Yale University,Wharton, LBS, LSE, Yale Cowles Conference on General Equilibrium, University
of Minnesota, MinneapolisFed, University of Maryland, Johns Hopkins University, University of
Michigan, UT Austin, UNC,Macro Financial Modeling Meeting, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum,
EEIF, Chicago/NYU JuniorConference in International Macroeconomics and Finance, PSE, INSEAD,
IMF, Federal Reserve Board,ECB, Bank of Japan, Cornell University, AEA annual meeting, SED,
and NYU. We thank Miguelde Faria e Castro and Jerome Williams for excellent research assistance.
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the NSF (0820517,1424690), the Dauphine-
Amundi Foundation, and the NYU CGEB. Maggiori thanks the International Economics Section,
Department of Economics, Princeton University for hospitality during part of the research process
for this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Xavier Gabaix and Matteo Maggiori. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics
Xavier Gabaix and Matteo Maggiori
NBER Working Paper No. 19854
January 2014, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E2,E42,E44,F31,F32,F41,F42,G11,G15,G20

                                             ABSTRACT

We provide a theory of the determination of exchange rates based on capital flows in imperfect financial
markets. Capital flows drive exchange rates by altering the balance sheets of financiers that bear the
risks resulting from international imbalances in the demand for financial assets. Such alterations to
their balance sheets cause financiers to change their required compensation for holding currency risk,
thus impacting both the level and volatility of exchange rates. Our theory of exchange rate determination
in imperfect financial markets not only helps rationalize the empirical disconnect between exchange
rates and traditional macroeconomic fundamentals, but also has real consequences for output and risk
sharing. Exchange rates are sensitive to imbalances in financial markets and seldom perform the shock
absorption role that is central to traditional theoretical macroeconomic analysis. Our framework is
flexible; it accommodates a number of important modeling features within an imperfect financial market
model, such as non-tradables, production, money, sticky prices or wages, various forms of international
pricing-to-market, and unemployment.


Xavier Gabaix
New York University
Finance Department
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu

Matteo Maggiori
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer building
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA, 02138
and NBER
maggiori@fas.harvard.edu
                                               I    I NTRODUCTION

We provide a theory of exchange rate determination based on capital flows in imperfect financial

markets. In our model, exchange rates are governed by financial forces because global shifts in the

demand and supply of assets result in large scale capital flows that are intermediated by the global

financial system. The demand and supply of assets in different currencies and the willingness of the

financial system to absorb the resulting imbalances are first order determinants of exchange rates.

Despite extensive debates on these financial forces and their implications for exchange rates, there

are very few tractable frameworks to provide a unified analysis of such phenomena.

     Active risk taking in currency markets is highly concentrated in few large financial players.1

These institutions range from the (former) proprietary desks and investment management arms of

global investment banks such as Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan, to macro and currency hedge funds

such as Soros Fund Management, to active investment managers and pension funds such as PIMCO

and BlackRock. While there are certainly significant differences across these intermediaries, we stress

their common characteristic of being active investors that profit from medium-term imbalances in

international financial markets, often by bearing the risks (taking the other side) resulting from im-

balances in currency demand due to both trade and financial flows. They also share the characteristic

of being subject to financial constraints that limit their ability to take positions, based on their risk-

bearing capacities and existing balance sheet risks.

     Our model captures this element of reality by placing financiers at the core of exchange rate de-

termination. In our model, financiers absorb a portion of the currency risk originated by imbalanced

global capital flows. Alterations to the size and composition of financiers’ balance sheets induce

them to differentially price currency risk, thus affecting both the level and the volatility of exchange

rates. Our theory of exchange rate determination in imperfect financial markets differs from conven-

tional open macroeconomic model by introducing financial forces, such as portfolio flows, financiers’

balance sheets and risk-bearing capacity, as first order determinants of exchange rates.
   1 Detailed data on risk taking in this international and opaque over-the-counter market are relatively scarce, particularly

since a number of players, such as hedge funds, have low reporting requirements. It is precisely this nature of the market
that favors specialization and concentration. Transaction volume data, however, also portray a highly concentrated market.
The top 10 banks accounted for 80% of all flows in 2014, with the top two banks (Citigroup and Deutsche Bank) accounting
for 32% of all flows (Euromoney (2014)). Not only are these institutions large players in currency markets, currency risk also
accounts for a large fraction of their overall respective risk taking. Regulatory filings reveal that currency risk accounted
for 26% to 35% of total (Stressed) Value at Risk at Deutsche Bank in 2013 and between 17% and 23% at Citigroup in the
same period (Deutsche Bank (2013); Citigroup (2013)).



                                                              1
    A number of stylized facts have emerged from the empirical analysis of international financial

markets: the failure of the uncovered interest parity condition (UIP) and the associated profitable

carry trade, the presence of large-scale global (gross) capital flows putting appreciation pressure on

the currencies of inflow-recipient countries, the disconnect of exchange rates from macro fundamen-

tals, the vulnerability of external-debtor countries’ currencies to global financial shocks, and the im-

pact of large scale currency interventions by governments. At the same time the global financial crisis

has highlighted the importance of financial frictions not only for outcomes in financial markets but

also for real outcomes such as output and risk sharing. The main purpose of this paper is to provide

a tractable framework to both jointly analyze these issues (some classic, some new) and to provide a

number of new insights.

    Financiers actively trade currencies but have limited risk-bearing capacity: in equilibrium, a

global imbalance that requires financiers to be long a currency generates an increase in the expected

return of this currency. This has to occur to provide incentives to financiers to use part of their limited

risk-bearing capacity to absorb the imbalance. All else equal, the currency has to depreciate today

and be expected to appreciate in the future in order for financiers to earn compensation for their risk

taking. This is the central exchange rate determination mechanism in the model.

    Based on this framework, we analyze the importance of capital flows, i.e. demand for foreign-

currency-denominated assets, in directly determining exchange rates. Whenever they are not matched

globally, these global flows generate an imbalance and, via the constraints of the financiers, a direct

effect on both the level and dynamics of the exchange rate. Consequently, countries that have re-

cently received capital inflows tend to have risky currencies that depreciate if financiers’ risk-bearing

capacity is disrupted. Since these countries have borrowed from financiers, their currencies in equi-

librium have high expected returns in order to incentivize financiers to lend. A financial disruption,

by reducing financiers’ risk-bearing capacity, generates an immediate currency depreciation and an

expectation of further future currency appreciation in order to increase financiers’ incentive to sustain

the imbalance.

    The model accounts for the failure of the UIP and provides a financial view of the carry trade

whereby the trade performs poorly whenever adverse shocks to the financial system occur. UIP is

violated because the financiers’ limited risk-bearing capacity induces them to demand a currency

risk premium. In this world the carry trade is profitable because, given an interest rate differential,



                                                    2
financiers’ limited risk-bearing capacity precludes them from taking enough risk to completely ex-

ploit the profitability of the trade. Similarly, financial disruptions generate a need to increase the

expected returns of the carry trade: this is achieved with an immediate loss in the carry trade and an

expectation of its recovery going forward.

    The exchange rate is disconnected from traditional macroeconomic fundamentals such as im-

ports, exports, consumption and output in as much as these same fundamentals correspond to dif-

ferent equilibrium exchange rates depending on financiers’ balance sheets and risk-bearing capacity.

Financiers both act as shock absorbers, by using their risk bearing capacity to accommodate flows

that result from fundamental shocks, and are themselves the source of financial shocks that distort

exchange rates.

    The financial determination of exchange rates in imperfect financial markets has real conse-

quences for output and risk sharing. To more fully analyze these consequences, we extend the basic

model by introducing a simple model of production under both flexible and sticky prices. For ex-

ample, in the presence of goods’ prices that are sticky in the producers’ currencies, a capital inflow

or financial shock that produces an overly appreciated exchange rate causes a fall in demand for the

inflow-receiving country’s exports and a corresponding fall in output. This perverse effect of capital

flows transmits frictions from financial markets to the real economy.

    In our model, currency intervention by the government is effective because, as a capital flow,

it alters the balance sheet of constrained financiers. The potency of the intervention relies entirely

on the frictions; there would be no effect from the intervention absent financial imperfections. We

show that a commonly-adopted policy combination of currency intervention and capital controls

can be understood in our model as capital controls exacerbating financial imperfections, thus further

segmenting the currency market and increasing the potency of currency intervention. We show that

if a country has an overly appreciated currency and its output is demand-driven, i.e. output would

increase via an increase in exports if the currency were to depreciate, then a currency intervention

increases output at the cost of distorting consumption risk-sharing intertemporally.

    Throughout the paper we stress tractability and make simplifying functional assumptions that

make our model a convenient specification. We believe that the simple modeling we provide offers

a number of insights with pencil-and-paper analysis. Of course, we also appreciate the need for

optimization and general equilibrium, both of which are present in our set-up. However, we leave



                                                  3
for the appendix and, in large part, to future research to provide deeper contracting foundations for

the frictions that we study and to assess in a large-scale model their quantitative implications.

    This paper is related to three broad streams of literature: early literature on portfolio balance, lit-

erature on portfolio demand in complete or incomplete markets, and literature on frictions and asset

demand. Our paper is inspired by a number of ideas in the early literature on portfolio balance mod-

els by Kouri (1976) and Driskill and McCafferty (1980a).2 A number of prominent economists have

lamented that this earlier research effort “had its high watermark and to a large extent a terminus

in Branson and Henderson (1985) handbook chapter” (see Obstfeld (2004)) and is “now largely and

unjustly forgotten” (see Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005)). The literature that followed this earlier

modeling effort has either focused on UIP-based analysis (Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995)) or mostly fo-

cused on currency risk premia in complete markets (Lucas, 1982; Backus, Kehoe and Kydland, 1992;

Backus and Smith, 1993; Dumas, 1992; Verdelhan, 2010; Colacito and Croce, 2011; Hassan, 2013).3

Pavlova and Rigobon (2007) analyze a real model with complete markets where countries’ represen-

tative agents have logarithmic preferences affected by taste shocks similar to those considered in this

paper.4 A smaller literature has analyzed the importance of incomplete markets (for recent examples:

Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002); Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008); Pavlova and Rigobon (2012)).

    The most closely related stream of the literature is the small set of papers that focused on ex-

change rate modeling in the presence of frictions. One important set of papers by Jeanne and Rose

(2002); Evans and Lyons (2002); Hau and Rey (2006); Bruno and Shin (2014) studies frictions in finan-

cial markets in the absence of a real side of the economy with production, imports, and exports. One

other important set of papers has a very different focus: informational frictions, infrequent portfo-

lio rebalancing, or frictions in access to domestic money/funding market. Evans and Lyons (2012)

focuses on how disaggregate order flows from customers might convey information about the econ-

omy fundamentals to exchange rate market makers who observe the consolidated flow. Bacchetta

and Van Wincoop (2010) studies the implications of agents that infrequently rebalance their portfo-

lio in an OLG setting. Alvarez, Atkeson and Kehoe (2002, 2009) and Maggiori (2014) are models of

exchange rates where the frictions, a form of market segmentation, are only present in the domestic
   2 An active early literature also includes: Allen and Kenen (1983); Henderson and Rogoff (1982); Dornbusch and Fischer

(1980); Calvo and Rodriguez (1977); Branson, Halttunen and Masson (1979); Tobin and de Macedo (1979); Diebold and
Pauly (1988); Driskill and McCafferty (1980b); de Macedo and Lempinen (2013). De Grauwe (1982) considers the role of the
banking sector in generating portfolio demands.
   3 Among others see also: Farhi and Gabaix (2014); Martin (2011), and Stathopoulos (2012).
   4 Similar preferences are also used in Pavlova and Rigobon (2008, 2010).




                                                           4
money market or funding market.



                                             II   B ASIC G AMMA M ODEL

Let us start with a minimalistic model of financial determination of exchange rates in imperfect fi-

nancial markets. This simple real model carries most of the economic intuition and core modeling

that we will then extend to more general set-ups.

     Time is discrete and there are two periods: t = 0, 1. There are two countries, the USA and Japan,

each populated by a continuum of households. Households produce, trade (internationally) in a

market for goods, and invest with financiers in risk-free bonds in their domestic currency.5 Financiers

intermediate the capital flows resulting from households’ investment decisions. The basic structure

of the model is displayed in Figure I.

                                           Figure I: Basic Structure of the Model

                       US	  HOUSEHOLDS	                 TRADE	  IN	  GOODS	     JAPANESE	  HOUSEHOLDS	  




                                                          FINANCIERS	  

                             PROFITS	                                                        PROFITS	  



  The players and structure of the flows in the goods and financial markets in the Basic Gamma Model.




     Intermediation is not perfect because of the limited commitment of the financiers. The limited-

commitment friction induces a downward sloping demand curve for risk taking by financiers. As a

result, capital flows from households move financiers up and down their demand curve. Equilibrium

is achieved by a relative price, in this case the exchange rate, adjusting so that international financial

markets clear given the demand and supply of capital denominated in different currencies. In this

sense, exchange rates are financially determined in an imperfect capital market.

     We now describe each of the model’s actors, their optimization problems, and analyze the result-

ing equilibrium.
   5 In the absence of a nominal side to the model, which we add in Section IV, we intentionally abuse the word “currency"

to mean a claim to the numéraire of the economy, and “exchange rate" to mean the real exchange rate. Similarly we abuse
the words “Dollar or Yen denominated" to mean values expressed in units of non-tradable goods in each economy.


                                                                    5
II.A    Households

Households in the US derive utility from the consumption of goods according to:


(1)                                                  θ0 ln C0 + βE [θ1 ln C1 ] ,


where C is a consumption basket defined as:

                                                                                        1
(2)                                            Ct ≡ [(CNT,t )χt (CH,t ) at (CF,t )ιt ] θt ,


where CNT,t is the US consumption of its non-tradable goods, CH,t is the US consumption of its

domestic tradable goods, and CF,t is the US consumption of Japanese tradable goods. We use the

notation {χt , at , ι t } for non-negative, potentially stochastic, preference parameters and we define

θt ≡ χt + at + ι t . The non-tradable good is the numéraire in each economy and, consequently, its

price equals 1 in domestic currency (p NT = 1).

      Households can trade both tradable goods in a frictionless goods market across countries, but

can only trade non-tradable goods within their domestic country. Financial markets are incomplete

and each country trades a risk-free domestic currency bond. The assumption that each country only

trades in its own currency bonds is made here for simplicity and to emphasize the currency mismatch

that the financiers have to absorb; we relax the assumption in later sections. Risk-free here refers to

paying one unit of non-tradable goods in all states of the world and is therefore akin to “nominally

risk free".

      US households’ optimization problem is:


(3)                       max                 θ0 ln C0 + βE [θ1 ln C1 ] ,
                  (CNT,t ,CH,t ,CF,t )t=0,1

                  subject to          (2),
                              1                                          1
(4)               and        ∑ R−t (YNT,t + p H,t YH,t ) = ∑ R−t (CNT,t + p H,t CH,t + pF,t CF,t ) .
                            t =0                                        t =0


      US households maximize the utility by choosing their consumption and savings in dollar bonds

subject to the state-by-state dynamic budget constraint. The households’ optimization problem can

be divided into two separate problems. The first is a static problem, whereby households decide,

given their total consumption expenditure for the period, how to allocate resources to the consump-


                                                                    6
tion of various goods. The second is a dynamic problem, whereby households decide intertemporally

how much to save and consume.

          The static utility maximization problem takes the form:


(5)               max            χt ln CNT,t + at ln CH,t + ι t ln CF,t + λt (CEt − CNT,t − p H,t CH,t − p F,t CF,t ) ,
             CNT,t ,CH,t ,CF,t



where CEt is aggregate consumption expenditure, which is taken as exogenous in this static opti-

mization problem and later endogenized in the dynamic optimization problem, λt is the associated

Lagrange multiplier, p H,t is the Dollar price in the US of US tradables, and p F,t is the Dollar price
                                                                                       χt                   ιt
in the US of Japanese tradables. First-order conditions imply:                        CNT,t   = λt , and   CF,t   = λt p F,t . We
assume that non-tradable goods are produced by an endowment process that for simplicity follows

YNT,t = χt , unless otherwise stated. This simplifying assumption, combined with the market clear-

ing condition for non-tradables YNT,t = CNT,t , implies that in equilibrium λt = 1 in all states. The

assumption, while stark, makes the analysis of the basic model most tractable by neutralizing vari-

ations in household marginal utility that are not at the core of our paper. The neutralization occurs

because variation in household marginal utility is stabilized by a proportionate increase in the con-

sumption of the non-tradable good.6 With this assumption in hand, the Dollar value of US imports

is:

                                                            p F,t CF,t = ι t ,

          Japanese households derive utility from consumption according to: θ0∗ ln C0∗ + β∗ E [θ1∗ ln C1∗ ],

where starred variables denote Japanese quantities and prices. By analogy with the US case, the
                                               ∗                    1
                                                   ∗ )ξ t (C ∗ ) a∗t θt∗ , where θ ∗ ≡ χ∗ + a∗ + ξ . The
Japanese consumption basket is: Ct∗ ≡ (CNT,t
                                       ∗
                                             )χt (CH,t      F,t                   t     t    t    t

Japanese static utility maximization problem, reported for brevity in the online appendix, together
                     ∗
with the assumption YNT,t = χ∗t , leads to a Yen value of US exports to Japan, p∗H,t CH,t
                                                                                      ∗ = ξ , that is
                                                                                           t

entirely analogous to the import expression derived above.

          The exchange rate et is defined as the quantity of dollars bought by 1 yen, i.e. the strength of the

Yen. Consequently, an increase in e represents a Dollar depreciation.7 The Dollar value of US exports
      6
      We stress that the assumption is one of convenience, and not necessary for the economics of the paper. Online appendix
A.4 provides more general results that do not impose this assumption.
   7 In this real model, the exchange rate is related to the relative price of non-tradable goods. Online appendix A.1.D

provides a detailed discussion of different exchange rate concepts in this economy including the nominal and CPI-based
real exchange rate.



                                                                    7
                                                                                 ∗ −p C
is: et ξ t . US net exports, expressed in dollars, are given by: NXt = et p∗H,t CH,t F,t F,t = ξ t et − ι t .
                                                                                                             8


We collect these results in the Lemma below.

Lemma 1. (Net Exports) Expressed in dollars, US exports to Japan are ξ t et ; US imports from Japan are ι t ; so

that US net exports are NXt = ξ t et − ι t .

      Note that this result is independent of the pricing procedure (e.g. price stickiness under either

producer or local currency pricing). Under producer currency pricing (PCP) and in the absence of

trade costs, the US Dollar price of Japanese tradables is p H /e, while under local currency pricing

(LCP) the price is simply p∗H .

      It follows that under financial autarky, i.e. if trade has to be balanced period by period, the

equilibrium exchange rate is: et =             ιt
                                               ξt .   In financial autarky, the Dollar depreciates (↑ e) whenever US

demand for Japanese goods increases (↑ ι) or whenever Japanese demand for US goods falls (↓ ξ).

This has to occur because there is no mechanism, in this case, to absorb the excess demand/supply

of dollars versus yen that a non-zero trade balance would generate.

The optimization problem (3) for the intertemporal consumption-saving decision leads to a standard

optimality condition (Euler equation):

                                                       0
                                           "                    #
                                                      U1,C
                                                                                    
                                                                           χ1 /CNT,1
(6)                                1 = E βR            0
                                                           NT
                                                                    = E βR             = βR,
                                                      U0,C NT
                                                                           χ0 /CNT,0

       0
where Ut,C    is the marginal utility at time t over the consumption of non-tradables. Given our
           NT

simplifying assumption that CNT,t = χt , the above Euler equation implies that R = 1/β. An entirely

similar derivation yields: R∗ = 1/β∗ . It might appear surprising that in a model with risk averse

agents the equilibrium interest rate equals the rate of time preference. Of course, this occurs here

because the marginal utility of non-tradable consumption, in which the bonds are denominated, is

constant in equilibrium given the assumption CNT,t = χt ; so that the precautionary and intertemporal

consumption smoothing desires simplify to be exactly zero.

      We stress that the aim of our simplifying assumptions is to create a real structure of the basic

economy that captures the main forces (demand and supply of goods), while making the real side of

the economy as simple as possible. This will allow us to analytically flesh out the crucial forces of

the paper in the financial markets in the next sections without carrying around a burdensome real
  8 Note   that we chose the notation so that imports are denoted by ι t and exports by ξ t .


                                                                      8
structure. Should the reader be curious as to the robustness of our model to relaxing some of the

assumptions made so far, the quick answer is that it is quite robust.9


II.B      Financiers

Suppose that global financial markets are imbalanced, such that there is an excess supply of dollars

versus yen resulting from, for example, trade or portfolio flows. Who will be willing to absorb such

an imbalance by providing Japan those yen, and holding those dollars? We posit that the resulting

imbalances are absorbed, at some premium, by global financiers.

      We assume that there is a unit mass of global financial firms, each managed by a financier. Agents

from the two countries are selected at random to run the financial firms for a single period.10 Fi-

nanciers start their jobs with no capital of their own and can trade bonds denominated in both cur-
                                                                                   q
rencies. Therefore, their balance sheet consists of q0 dollars and − e00 yen, where q0 is the Dollar value
                                                                           q
of Dollar-denominated bonds the financier is long of and − e00 the corresponding value in Yen of Yen-

denominated bonds. At the end of (each) period, financiers pay their profits and losses out to the

households.11

      We assume that each financier maximizes the expected value of her firm:

                                                           
                                                          e1
(7)                                       V0 = E β R − R∗       q0 = Ω0 q0 .
                                                          e0

      This valuation of currency trading corresponds to that of the household if they were allowed to

trade optimally in foreign currency. Indeed, if US households were allowed to trade optimally Yen

bonds as well as Dollar bonds we would recover the standard Euler equation:

                      0
                 "                              #
                     U1,C
                                                                                                     
                                         ∗ e1             χ /C                   ∗ e1                  ∗ e1
          0=E β       0
                          NT
                                   R−R               = E β 1 NT,1          R−R               = E β R−R         ,
                     U0,C NT
                                          e0              χ0 /CNT,0               e0                     e0

where the last equality follows from the assumption that CNT,t = χt and the result that βR = 1 de-
   9 We make such robustness explicit in the online appendix.
  10 Inthis set-up, being a financier is an occupation for agents in the two countries rather than an entirely separate class of
agents. The selection process is governed by a memoryless Poisson distribution. Of course, there are no selection issues in
the one period basic economy considered here, but we proceed to describe a more general set-up that will also be used in
the model extensions.
  11 An interesting literature also stresses the importance of global financial frictions for the international transmission of

shocks, but does not study exchange rates: Kollmann, Enders and Müller (2011); Kollmann (2013); Dedola, Karadi and
Lombardo (2013); Perri and Quadrini (2014).




                                                               9
rived in the previous subsection (see equation (6)). Households optimally value the currency trade ac-

cording to its expected (discounted at R) excess returns. Notice that this mean-return criterion holds

despite the households being risk averse. The simplification occurs because variations in marginal

utility are exactly offset by variations in the relative price of non-tradable goods, so that marginal

utility in terms of the numéraire (the NT good) is constant across states of the world. In the absence

of frictions our financiers would simply be a veil and the optimality condition in maximization (7)
                                                         h             i
                                                                     e1
would impose the household optimality criterion: 0 = E β R − R e0 .∗


      To capture the role of limited financial risk-bearing capacity by the financiers we assume that

in each period, after taking positions but before shocks are realized, the financier can divert a por-

tion of the funds she intermediates. If the financier diverts the funds, her firm is unwound and
                                                                                             q0                               q0
the households that had lent to her recover a portion 1 − Γ                                  e0    of their credit position   e0   , where

Γ = γ var (e1 )α , with γ ≥ 0, α ≥ 0.12 The appendix at the end of the paper provides further details

and regularity conditions for this constraint. As will become clear below, our functional assumption

regarding the diversion of funds is not only a convenient specification for tractability, but also stresses

the idea that financiers’ outside options increase in the size and volatility, or complexity, of their bal-

ance sheet. This constraint captures the relevant market practice in financial institutions whereby

risk taking is limited not only by the overall size of the positions, position limits, but also by their

expected riskiness, often measured by their variance. It is outside the scope of this paper to provide

deeper foundations for this constraint. The reader can think of it as a convenient specification of a

more complicated contracting problem.13 Since creditors, when lending to the financier, correctly

anticipate the incentives of the financier to divert funds, the financier is subject to a credit constraint

of the form:

                                                                                                      2
                                              V0                q0              q0                q0
(8)                                                          ≥               Γ     =Γ                     .
                                              e0                e0              e0                e0
                                             |{z}              |{z}          | {z } |             {z      }
                                        Intermediary Value      Total            Diverted   Total divertable
                                              in yen           Claims            Portion         Funds



Limited commitment constraints in a similar spirit have been popular in the literature; for earlier use
  12 Given                                                                   q
             that the balance sheet consists of q0 dollars and − e00 yen, the Yen value of the financier’s liabilities is always
            q0
equal to     , irrespective of whether q0 is positive or negative; hence the use of absolute value in the text above. More
            e0
                                                                                      
                                                                                 q       q
formally, the financier’s creditors can recover a Yen value equal to: max 1 − Γ e00 , 0 e00 .
  13 Such foundations could potentially be achieved in models of financial complexity where bigger and riskier balance
sheets lead to more complex positions. In turn, these more complex positions are more difficult and costly for creditors to
unwind when recovering their funds in case of a financier’s default.


                                                                        10
as well as foundations see among others: Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001); Kiyotaki and Moore

(1997); Hart and Moore (1994), and Hart (1995). Here we follow most closely the formulation in

Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Maggiori (2014).14

       The constrained optimization problem of the financier is:

                                                                                                q20
                                              
                                           ∗ e1
(9)                     max V0 = E β R − R         q0 ,                   subject to   V0 ≥ Γ       .
                         q0                  e0                                                 e0

Since the value of the financier’s firm is linear in the position q0 , while the right hand side of the

constraint is convex in q0 , the constraint always binds.15 Substituting the firm’s value into the con-
                                                                   h        ∗
                                                                              i
straint and re-arranging (using R = 1/β), we find: q0 = Γ1 E e0 − e1 RR . Integrating the above

demand function over the unit mass of financiers yields the aggregate financiers’ demand for assets:
         h          ∗
                      i
Q0 = Γ1 E e0 − e1 RR . We collect this result in the Lemma below.

Lemma 2. (Financiers’ downward sloping demand for dollars) The financiers’ constrained optimization

problem implies that the aggregate financial sector’s optimal demand for Dollar bonds versus Yen bonds follows:

                                                               R∗
                                                                 
                                                    1
(10)                                           Q 0 = E e0 − e1      .
                                                    Γ          R

where


(11)                                               Γ = γ (var (e1 ))α .


       The demand for dollars decreases in the strength of the dollar (i.e. increases in e0 ), controlling for

the future value of the Dollar (i.e. controlling for e1 ). Notice that Γ governs the ability of financiers

to bear risks; hence in the rest of the paper we refer to Γ as the financiers’ risk bearing capacity. The

higher Γ, the lower the financiers’ risk bearing capacity, the steeper their demand curve, and the

more segmented the asset market. To understand the behavior of this demand, let us consider two

polar opposite cases. When Γ = 0, financiers are able to absorb any imbalances, i.e. they want to
  14 We  generalize these constraints by studying cases where the outside option is directly increasing in the size of the
balance sheet and its variance. Adrian and Shin (2013) provide foundations and empirical evidence for a value-at-risk
constraint that shares some of the properties of our constraint above.
  15 Intuitively, given any non-zero expected excess return in the currency market, the financier will want to either borrow

or lend as much as possible in Dollar and Yen bonds. The constraint limits the maximum position and therefore binds. We
make the very mild assumption that the model parameters always imply: Ω0 ≥ −1. That is, we assume that the expected
excess returns from currency speculation never exceed 100% in absolute value. This bound is several order of magnitudes
greater than the expected returns in the data (of the order of 0-6%) and has no economic bearing on our model.


                                                            11
take infinite positions whenever there is a non-zero expected excess return in currency markets. So
                                              h         ∗
                                                          i
uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) holds: E e0 − e1 RR = 0. When Γ ↑ ∞, then Q0 = 0; financiers

are unwilling to absorb any imbalances, i.e. they do not want to take any positions, no matter what

the expected returns from risk-taking. In the intermediate cases (0 < Γ < ∞) the model endoge-

nously generates a deviation from UIP and relates it to financiers’ risk taking. On the contrary, since

the covered interest rate parity (CIP) condition is an arbitrage involving no risk it is always satisfied.

Similarly the model smoothly converges to the frictionless benchmark (Γ ↓ 0) as the economy be-

comes deterministic (var (e1 ) ↓ 0). Section III.A studies the carry trade and provides further analysis

on UIP and CIP.

     Since Γ, the financiers’ risk bearing capacity, plays a crucial role in our theory, we refer hereafter

to the setup described so far as the basic Gamma model. In many instances, like the one above, it is most

intuitive to consider comparative statics on Γ rather than its subcomponents, and we do so for the

remainder of the paper; in some instances it is interesting to consider the effect of each subcomponent

γ and var (e1 ) separately.16

     We stress that the above demand function captures the spirit of international financial interme-

diation by providing a simple and tractable specification for the constrained portfolio problem that

generates the demand function that has been central to the limits of arbitrage theory pioneered by

De Long et al. (1990a,b), Shleifer and Vishny (1997), and Gromb and Vayanos (2002). We follow the

pragmatic tradition of macroeconomics and frictional finance, and we take as given the prevalence

of frictions and short-term debt in different currencies, and proceed to analyze their equilibrium

implications. This direct approach to modeling financial imperfections has a long standing tradi-

tion and has proved very fruitful with recent contributions by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997); Gromb

and Vayanos (2002); Mendoza, Quadrini and Rıos-Rull (2009); Mendoza (2010); Gertler and Kiyotaki

(2010); Garleanu and Pedersen (2011); Perri and Quadrini (2014).17

     For simplicity, we assume (for now and for much of this paper) that financiers rebate their profits

and losses to the Japanese households, not the US ones. This asymmetry gives much tractability to

the model, at fairly little cost to the economics.18
  16 The reader is encouraged either to intuitively consider the case α = 0, or to follow the formal proofs that show the sign

of the comparative statics to be invariant in Γ and γ.
  17 Even in the most recent macro-finance literature in closed economy, intense foundations of the contracting environ-

ment have either been excluded or relegated to separate companion pieces (Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014); He and
Krishnamurthy (2013)). See Duffie (2010) for an overview.
  18 For completeness, note that this assumption had already been implicitly made in deriving the US households’ inter-




                                                             12
       Before moving to the equilibrium, note that we are modeling the ability of financiers to bear

substantial risks over a horizon that ranges from a quarter to a few years. Our model is silent on

the high frequency market-making activities of currency desks in investment banks. To make this

distinction intuitive, let us consider that the typical daily volume of foreign exchange transactions is

estimated to be $5.3 trillion.19 This trading is highly concentrated among the market making desks of

banks and is the subject of attention in the market microstructure literature pioneered by Evans and

Lyons (2002). While these microstructure effects are interesting, we completely abstract away from

these activities by assuming that there is instantaneous and perfect risk sharing across financiers, so

that any trade that matches is executed frictionlessly and nets out. We are only concerned with the

ultimate risk, most certainly a small fraction of the total trading volume, which financiers have to

bear over quarters and years because households’ demand is unbalanced.20


II.C     Equilibrium Exchange Rate

Recall that for simplicity we are for now only considering imbalances resulting from trade flows

(imbalances from portfolio flows will soon follow). The key equations of the model are the financiers’

demand:

                                                                    R∗
                                                                      
                                                        1
(12)                                             Q0 =     E e0 − e1      ,
                                                        Γ           R

and the equilibrium “flow” demand for dollars in the Dollar-Yen market at times t = 0, 1:


(13)                                                ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Q0 = 0,

(14)                                              ξ 1 e1 − ι1 − RQ0 = 0.

temporal budget constraint in equation (4). This assumption is relaxed in the online appendix, where we solve for general
and symmetric payoff functions numerically.
  19 Source: Bank of International Settlements (2013).
  20 This is consistent with evidence that market-making desks in large investment banks, for example Goldman Sachs,

might intermediate very large volumes on a daily basis but are almost always carrying no residual risk at the end of
the business day. In contrast, proprietary trading desks (before recent changes in legislation) or investment management
divisions of the same investment banks carry substantial amounts of risk over horizons ranging from a quarter to a few
years. These investment activities are the focus of this paper. Similarly, our financiers capture the risk-taking activities of
hedge funds and investment managers that have no market making interests and are therefore not the center of attention
in the microstructure literature.




                                                              13
Equation (13) is the market clearing equation for the Dollar against Yen market at time zero. It states

that the net demand for Dollar against Yen has to be zero for the market to clear. The net demand has

two components: ξ 0 e0 − ι0 , from US net exports, and Q0 , from financiers. Recall that we assume that

US households do not hold any currency exposure: they convert their Japanese sales of ξ 0 yen into

dollars, for a demand ξ 0 e0 of dollars. Likewise, Japanese households have ι0 dollars worth of exports

to the US and sell them, as they only keep Yen balances.21 At time one, equation (14) shows that

the same net-export channel generates a demand for dollars of ξ 1 e1 − ι1 ; while the financiers need to

sell their dollar position RQ0 that has accrued interest at rate R.22 We now explore the equilibrium

exchange rate in this simple setup.

       Equilibrium exchange rate: a first pass           To streamline the algebra and concentrate on the key

economic content, we assume for now that β = β∗ = 1, which implies R = R∗ = 1, and that ξ t = 1

for t = 0, 1. Adding equations (13) and (14) yields the US external intertemporal budget constraint:


(15)                                                e1 + e0 = ι 0 + ι 1 .


Taking expectations on both sides: E [e1 ] = ι0 + E[ι1 ] − e0 . From the financiers’ demand equation we

have:

                            E [e1 ] = e0 − ΓQ0 = e0 − Γ (ι0 − e0 ) = (1 + Γ) e0 − Γι0 ,

where the second equality follows from equation (13). Equating the two expressions for the time-one

expected exchange rate, we have:


                                    E [e1 ] = ι0 + E[ι1 ] − e0 = (1 + Γ) e0 − Γι0 .


Solving this linear equation for the exchange rate at time zero, we conclude:

                                                      (1 + Γ ) ι 0 + E[ ι 1 ]
                                               e0 =                           .
                                                            2+Γ
   21 These assumptions are later relaxed in Section II.D and in the online appendix where households are allowed to have

(limited) foreign currency positions.
   22 At the end of period 0, the financiers own Q dollars and − Q /e yen. Therefore, at the beginning of period one, they
                                                  0                 0 0
hold RQ0 dollars and − R∗ Q0 /e0 yen. At time one, they unwind their positions and give the net profits to their principals,
which we assume for simplicity to be the Japanese households. Hence they sell RQ0 dollars in the Dollar-Yen market at
time one.




                                                             14
We define { X } ≡ X − E[ X ] to be the innovation to a random variable X. Then, the exchange rate at

time t = 1 is:


                   e1 = ι 0 + ι 1 − e0 = ι 0 + E [ ι 1 ] + { ι 1 } − e0
                                                     (1 + Γ ) ι 0 + E[ ι 1 ]           ι 0 + (1 + Γ ) E[ ι 1 ]
                      = { ι 1 } + ι 0 + E[ ι 1 ] −                           = {ι1 } +                         .
                                                           2+Γ                                2+Γ

This implies that var (e1 ) = var (ι1 ), so that, by (11), Γ = γ var (ι1 )α .

       We collect these results in the Proposition below.

Proposition 1. (Basic Gamma equilibrium exchange rate) Assume that ξ t = 1 for t = 0, 1, and that

interest rates are zero in both countries. The exchange rate follows:

                                                 (1 + Γ ) ι 0 + E[ ι 1 ]
(16)                                        e0 =                         ,
                                                          2+Γ
                                                           ι 0 + (1 + Γ ) E[ ι 1 ]
                                            e1 = { ι 1 } +                         ,
                                                                  2+Γ

                                                                                                                                   Γ(ι0 −E[ι1 ])
                                                                                                            h             i
                                                                                                                e0 − e1
where {ι1 } is the time-one import shock. The expected Dollar appreciation is: E                                   e0         =   (1+ Γ ) ι 0 +E[ ι 1 ]
                                                                                                                                                        .

Furthermore, Γ = γ var (ι1 )α .

       Depending on Γ, the time-zero exchange rate varies between two polar opposites: the UIP-based

and the financial-autarky exchange rates, respectively. Both extremes are important benchmarks of

open economy analysis, and the choice of Γ allows us to modulate our model between these two

useful benchmarks. Γ ↑ ∞ results in e0 =               ι0
                                                       ξ0 ,   which we have shown in Section II.A to be the financial

autarky value of the exchange rate. Intuitively, financiers have so little risk-bearing capacity that

no financial flows can occur between countries and, therefore, trade has to be balanced period by
                                                                       ι 0 +E[ ι 1 ]
period. When Γ = 0, UIP holds and we obtain e0 =                            2        .   Intuitively, financiers are so relaxed about

risk taking that they are willing to take infinite positions in currencies whenever there is a positive

expected excess return from doing so. UIP only imposes a constant exchange rate in expectation

E[e1 ] = e0 ; the level of the exchange rate is then obtained by additionally using the inter-temporal

budget constraint in equation (15).

       To further understand the effect of Γ, notice that at the end of period 0 (say, time 0+ ), the US
                                                                                E[ι1 ]−ι0
net foreign asset (NFA) position is N0+ = ξ 0 e0 − ι0 =                          2+ Γ .       Therefore, the US has positive NFA

at t = 0+ iff ι0 < E [ι1 ]. If the US has a positive NFA position, then financiers are long the Yen

                                                                  15
and short the Dollar. For financiers to bear this risk, they require a compensation: the Yen needs to

appreciate in expectation. The required appreciation is generated by making the Yen weaker at time

zero. The magnitude of the effect depends on the extent of the financiers’ risk bearing capacity (Γ),
                                                                         ∂e0       ι 0 −E[ ι 1 ]       − N0+
as formally shown here by taking partial derivatives:                          =                   =   2+ Γ .   We collect the result in
                                                                         ∂Γ         (2+ Γ )2
the Proposition below.

Proposition 2. (Effect of financial disruptions on the exchange rate) In the basic Gamma model, we have:
γ de0       ∂e0       − N0+                 E[ι1 ]−ι0
Γ dγ    =   ∂Γ    =   2+Γ , where   N0+ =    2+ Γ       is the US net foreign asset (NFA) position. When there is a financial

disruption (↑ γ, ↑ Γ), countries that are net external debtors ( N0+ < 0) experience a currency depreciation

(↑ e), while the opposite is true for net-creditor countries.

Intuitively, net external-debtor countries have borrowed from the world financial system, thus gen-

erating a long exposure for financiers to their currencies. Should the financial system’s risk bearing

capacity be disrupted, these currencies would depreciate to compensate financiers for the increased

(perceived) risk. This modeling formalizes a number of external crises where broadly defined global

risk aversion shocks, embodied here in Γ, caused large depreciations of the currencies of countries

that had recently experienced large capital inflows. Della Corte, Riddiough and Sarno (2014) confirm

our theoretical prediction in the data. They show that net-debtor countries’ currencies have higher

returns than net-creditors’ currencies, tend to be on the receiving end of carry trade related specula-

tive flows, and depreciate when financial disruptions occur. In this basic model the entire external

balance of a country is absorbed by the financier; we will relax this shortly by providing a distinct

role between Q and the external balance. Here we clarify that the driving force behind the result in

Proposition 2 is the position of the financiers, i.e. what matters for the effect of an increase in Γ on the

exchange rate if whether Q is positive on negative. The proposition stresses the idea that financiers

are more likely to be long the currency of debtor countries since these countries have borrowed from

the world financial system.23

        To illustrate how the results derived so far readily extend to more general cases, we report below

expressions allowing for stochastic US export shocks ξ t , as well as non-zero interest rates. Several

more extensions can be found in Section IV and the online appendix.

  23 Inmapping the proposition into the data one can think that the net foreign asset positions are correlated with Q, but
the correlation can be less than perfect, with instances like the US where the two might be substantially different (see Shin
(2012); Maggiori (2014)).



                                                                  16
Proposition 3. With general trade shocks and interest rates (ι t , ξ t , R, R∗ ), the values of exchange rate at times

t = 0, 1 are:
                                                ι
                                                      
                                            ι0 + R1
                                   E         + Γι
                                               R∗
                                               ξ1
                                                  0


(17)                          e0 =      ξ
                                                     ;             e1 = E [ e1 ] + { e1 } ,
                                     ξ + 1
                                  E 0 ξ 1R∗ + ΓξR∗
                                                    0




where we again denote by { X } ≡ X − E [ X ] the innovation to a random variable X, and

                                             h ∗            i            h ∗ i
                                        R  E  R
                                              ξ1  ι 0 + ι1
                                                        R      + Γξ  0 E     R ι1
                                                                             ξ1 R
(18)                         E [ e1 ] = ∗        h              i               ,
                                       R            ∗
                                              E Rξ 1 ξ 0 + Rξ 1∗ + Γξ 0
                                                                 h           i
                                                                       R∗ ι1
                                        
                                         ι1             ι 0 −  E   ξ 0 ξ1 R
                                                                                     
                                                                                     1
(19)                          { e1 } =        +R h ∗                   i              .
                                         ξ1       E R ξ + 1∗ + Γξ
                                                          ξ1    0
                                                                    ξ
                                                                     R            0
                                                                                     ξ1


When ξ 1 is deterministic, Γ = γvar ( ξι11 )α . The proof of this Proposition reports the corresponding solution for

Γ when ξ 1 is stochastic.


II.D     The Impact of Portfolio Flows

We now further illustrate how the supply and demand of assets do matter for the financial determination of

the exchange rate. We stress the importance of portfolio flows in addition, and perhaps more impor-

tantly than, trade flows for our framework. The basic model so far has focused on current account, or

net foreign asset, based flows; we introduce here pure portfolio flows that alter the countries’ gross

external positions. We focus here on the simplest form of portfolio flows from households, not so

much for their complete realism, but because they allow for the sharpest analysis of the main forces

of the model. The online appendix extends this minimalistic section to more general flows.


II.D.1    Asset Flows Matter in the Gamma Model

Consider the case where Japanese households have, at time zero, an inelastic demand (e.g. some noise

trading) f ∗ of Dollar bonds funded by an offsetting position − f ∗ /e0 in Yen bonds. Both transactions

face the financiers as counterparties.

       While we take these flows as exogenous, they can be motivated as a liquidity shock, or perhaps

as a decision resulting from bounded rationality or portfolio delegation. Technically, the maximiza-


                                                           17
tion problem for the Japanese household is the one written before, where the portfolio flow is not a

decision variable coming from a maximization, but is simply an exogenous action.24

       The flow equations are now given by:


(20)                         ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Q0 + f ∗ = 0,            ξ 1 e1 − ι1 − RQ0 − R f ∗ = 0.

                                         h                          i
                                                             R∗
The financiers’ demand is still Q0 = Γ1 E e0 −               R e1       . The equilibrium exchange rate is derived in the

Proposition below.

Proposition 4. (Gross capital flows and exchange rates) Assume ξ t = R = R∗ = 1 for t = 0, 1. With

an inelastic time-zero additional demand f ∗ for Dollar bonds by Japanese households who correspondingly sell

− f ∗ /e0 of Yen bonds, the exchange rates at times t = 0, 1 are:

                         (1 + Γ ) ι 0 + E[ ι 1 ] − Γ f ∗                             ι 0 + (1 + Γ ) E[ ι 1 ] + Γ f ∗
                  e0 =                                   ;          e1 = { ι 1 } +                                   .
                                     2+Γ                                                       2+Γ

Hence, additional demand f ∗ for dollars at time zero induces a Dollar appreciation at time zero, and subsequent

depreciation at time one. However, the time-average value of the Dollar is unchanged: e0 + e1 = ι0 + ι1 ,

independently of f ∗ . Furthermore, Γ = γ var (ι1 )α .

       Proof. Define: ι̃0 ≡ ι0 − f ∗ , and ι̃1 ≡ ι1 + f ∗ . Given equations (20), our “tilde” economy is

isomorphic to the basic economy considered in equations (13) and (14). For instance, import demands

are now ι̃ t rather than ι t . Hence, Proposition 1 applies to this “tilde” economy, thus implying that:

                           (1 + Γ) ι̃0 + E[ι̃1 ]   (1 + Γ ) ι 0 + E[ ι 1 ] − Γ f ∗
                      e0 =                       =                                 ,
                                   2+Γ                         2+Γ
                                    ι̃0 + (1 + Γ) E[ι̃1 ]           ι 0 + (1 + Γ ) E[ ι 1 ] + Γ f ∗
                      e1 = {ι̃1 } +                       = {ι1 } +                                 . 
                                           2+Γ                                    2+Γ

An increase in Japanese demand for Dollar bonds needs to be absorbed by financiers, who corre-

spondingly need to sell Dollar bonds and buy Yen bonds. To induce financiers to provide the desired

bonds, the Dollar needs to appreciate on impact as a result of the capital flow, in order to then be ex-

pected to depreciate, thus generating an expected gain for the financiers’ short Dollar positions. This

example emphasizes that our model is an elementary one where a relative price, the exchange rate,
                                                                               Y∗    + p∗ YF,t +π ∗        C∗   + p∗ C ∗ + p∗ C ∗
  24 The Japanese households’ state-by-state budget constraint is ∑1t=0 NT,t RF,t∗t          t
                                                                                               = ∑1t=0 NT,t H,tR∗H,t
                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                       F,t F,t
                                                                                                                               , where
πt∗ are FX trading profit to the Japanese, so π0∗ = 0, π1∗ = ( f ∗ + Q0 )( R − R∗ ee10 )/e1 (recall that the financiers rebate their
profits to the Japanese).


                                                                 18
has to move in order to equate the supply and demand of two assets, Yen and Dollar bonds. The

capital flows considered in this section are gross flows that do not alter the net foreign asset position,

thus introducing a first example of the distinct role for the financiers’ balance sheet from the country

net foreign asset position. In the data gross flows are much larger than net flows and we provide a

reason why they play an important role in determining the exchange rate.25

     This framework can analyze concrete situations, such as the recent large scale capital flows from

developed countries into emerging market local-currency bond markets, say by US investors into

Brazilian Real bonds, that put upward pressure on the receiving countries’ currencies. While such

flows and their impact on currencies have been paramount in the logic of market participants and

policy makers, they had thus far proven elusive in a formal theoretical analysis.

     Hau, Massa and Peress (2010) provide direct evidence that plausibly exogenous capital flows

impact the exchange rate in a manner consistent with the Gamma model. They show that, following

a restating of the weights of the MSCI World Equity Index, countries that as a result experienced

capital inflows (because their weight in the index increased) saw their currencies appreciate.

     To stress the difference between our basic Gamma model of the financial determination of ex-

change rates in imperfect financial markets and the traditional macroeconomic framework, we next

illustrate two polar cases that have been popular in the previous literature: the UIP-based exchange

rate, and the complete market exchange rate.

Financial Flows in a UIP Model.              Much of the now classic international macroeconomic analysis

spurred by Dornbusch (1976) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) either directly assumes that UIP holds

or effectively imposes it by solving a first order linearization of the model.26 The closest analog to

this literature in the basic Gamma model is the case where Γ = 0, such that UIP holds by assumption.

In this world, financiers are so relaxed, i.e. their risk bearing capacity is so ample, about supplying

liquidity to satisfy shifts in the world demand for assets that such shifts have no impact on expected

returns. Consider the example of US investors suddenly wanting to buy Brazilian Real bonds; in this

case financiers would simply take the other side of the investors’ portfolio demand with no effect on

the exchange rate between the Dollar and the Real. In fact, equation (21) confirms that if Γ = 0, then
   25 One could extend the distinction between country level positions and financiers’ balance sheet further by modeling

situations where not all gross flows are stuck, either temporarily or permanently, on the balance sheet of the financiers.
   26 Intuitively, a first order linearization imposes certainty equivalence on the model and therefore kills any risk premia

such as those that could generate a deviation from UIP.




                                                             19
portfolio flow f ∗ has no impact on the equilibrium exchange rate.27

Financial Flows in a Complete Market Model. Another strand of the literature has analyzed risk

premia predominantly under complete markets. We now show that the exchange rate in a setup with

complete markets (and no frictions) but otherwise identical to ours is constant, and therefore trivially

not affected by the flows.

Lemma 3. (Complete Markets) In an economy identical to the set-up of the basic Gamma model, other than

the fact that financial markets are complete and frictionless, the equilibrium exchange rate is constant: et = ν,

where ν is the relative Negishi weight of Japan.

     Here, we only sketch the logic and the main equations; a full treatment is relegated to the online

appendix. Under complete markets, the marginal utility of US and Japanese agents must be equal

when expressed in a common currency. Intuitively, the full risk sharing that occurs under complete

markets calls for Japan and the US to have the same marginal benefit from consuming an extra unit
                                                                                                      χt /CNT,t
of non-tradables. In our set-up, this risk sharing condition takes a simple form:                     χ∗t /CNT,t
                                                                                                            ∗    et   = ν, where
                                                                         ∗
ν is a constant.28 Simple substitution of the conditions CNT,t = χt and CNT,t = χ∗t shows that et = ν,
i.e. the exchange rate is constant.29


II.D.2       Flows, not just Stocks, Matter in the Gamma model

In frictionless models only stocks matter, not flows per se. In the Gamma model, instead, flows per

se matter. This is a distinctive feature of our model. To illustrate this, consider the case where the US

has an exogenous Dollar-denominated debt toward Japan, equal to D0 due at time zero, and D1 due

at time one.30 For simplicity, assume β = β∗ = R = R∗ = ξ t = 1 for t = 0, 1. Hence, total debt is

D0 + D1 . The flow equations now are:


                                e0 − ι0 − D0 + Q0 = 0;              e1 − ι1 − D1 − Q0 = 0.
  27 These   gross flows do not play a role in determining the exchange rate even in models, for example Schmitt-Grohé and
Uribe (2003), that assume reduced-form deviations from UIP to be convex functions of the net foreign asset position.
   28 Formally, the constant is the relative Pareto weight assigned to Japan in the planner’s problem that solves for complete-

market allocations.
   29 The irrelevance of the f gross flows generalizes also to complete, and incomplete, market models where the exchange

rate is not constant and the presence of a risk premium makes the two currencies imperfect substitutes. Intuitively in these
models the state variables are ratios of stocks of assets, such as wealth, and since these gross flows do not alter the value of
such stocks, they have no equilibrium effects because the agents can frictionlessly unwind them. In our model they have
effects because these flows alter the balance sheet of constrained financiers.
   30 Hence, the new budget constraint is 1
                                             ∑t=0 R−t (YNT,t + p H,t YH,t − Dt ) = ∑1t=0 R−t (CNT,t + p H,t CH,t + p F,t CF,t ) .


                                                               20
The exchange rate at time zero is:

                                          (1 + Γ) ι0 + E [ι1 ] (1 + Γ) D0 + D1
                                   e0 =                       +                .
                                                2+Γ                 2+Γ

Hence, when finance is imperfect (Γ > 0), both the timing of debt flows, as indicated by the term

(1 + Γ) D0 + D1 , and the total stock of debt (D0 + D1 ) matter in determining exchange rates. The
                                              Γ
early flow, D0 , receives a higher weight 12+                            1
                                                                          
                                            +Γ than the late flow, D1 , 2+Γ . In sum, flows, not just

stocks, matter for exchange rate determination.

     To highlight the contrast, let us parametrize the debt repayments as: D0 = F and D1 = − F + S.

The parameter F alters the flow of debt repayment at time zero, but leaves the total stock of debt

(D0 + D1 = S) unchanged. The parameter S, instead, alters the total stock of debt, but does not
                                                                       de0        Γ             de0
affect the flow of repayment at time zero. We note that:               dF    =   2+ Γ ,   and   dS    =    1
                                                                                                          2+ Γ .   When Γ ↑ ∞,

only flows affect the exchange rate at time zero; this is so even when flows leave the total stocks
                           
unchanged de dF
               0
                 > 0 =  de0
                        dS . In contrast, when finance is frictionless (Γ = 0), flows have no impact
                                                            
on the exchange rate, and only stocks matter de
                                              dF
                                                0
                                                  = 0 <  de0
                                                         dS . We collect the result in the Proposition

below.

Proposition 5. (Stock Vs flow matters in the Gamma model) Flows matter for the exchange rate when

Γ > 0. In the limit when financiers have no risk bearing capacity (Γ ↑ ∞), only flows matter. When risk

bearing capacity is very ample (Γ = 0), only stocks matter.


II.D.3      The Exchange Rate Disconnect

The Meese and Rogoff (1983) result on the inability of economic fundamentals such as output, in-

flation, exports and imports to predict, or even contemporaneously co-move with, exchange rates

has had a chilling and long-lasting effect on theoretical research in the field (see Obstfeld and Rogoff

(2001)).31 The Gamma model helps to reconcile the disconnect by introducing financial forces, both

the risk bearing capacity Γ and the balance sheet Q, as determinants of exchange rates. Intuitively

a disconnect occurs because economies with identical fundamentals feature different equilibrium

exchange rates depending on the incentives of the financiers to hold the resulting (gross) global im-

balances.
  31 Some forecastability of exchange rates using traditional fundamentals appears to occur at very-long horizons (e.g. 10
years) in Mark (1995) or for specific currencies, such as the US Dollar, using transformations of the balance of payments
data (Gourinchas and Rey (2007b); Gourinchas, Govillot and Rey (2010)).


                                                           21
       Recently new evidence has been building in favor of these new financial channels. In addition

to the instrumental variable approach in Hau, Massa and Peress (2010) discussed earlier, Froot and

Ramadorai (2005); Adrian, Etula and Groen (2011); Hong and Yogo (2012); Kim, Liao and Tornell

(2014), and Adrian, Etula and Shin (2014) find that flows, financial conditions, and financiers’ posi-

tions provide information about expected currency returns. Froot and Ramadorai (2005) show that

medium-term variation in expected currency returns is mostly associated with capital flows, while

long-term variation is more strongly associated with macroeconomic fundamentals. Hong and Yogo

(2012) show that speculators’ positions in the futures currency market contain information that is

useful, beyond the interest rate differential, to forecast future currency returns. Adrian, Etula and

Groen (2011); Adrian, Etula and Shin (2014) show that empirical proxies for financial conditions and

the tightness of financiers’ constraints help forecast both currency returns and exchange rates. Kim,

Liao and Tornell (2014) show that information extracted from the speculators’ positions in the futures

currency market helps to predict exchange rate changes at horizons between 6 and 12 months.

       The model can also help to rationalize the co-movement across bilateral exchange rates and be-

tween exchange rates and other asset classes. Intuitively, this occurs because all these assets are

traded by financiers and are therefore affected to some degree by the same financial forces. Verdel-

han (2013) shows that there is substantial co-movement between bilateral exchange rates both in

developed and emerging economies, while Dumas and Solnik (1995); Hau and Rey (2006); Farhi and

Gabaix (2014); Verdelhan (2013); Lettau, Maggiori and Weber (2014) link movements in exchange

rates to movements in equity markets.


II.E     Closing the Economy: Endowments, Production, and Unemployment

Very little has been said so far about output; we now close the model by describing the output market.

To build up the intuition for our framework, we consider first a full endowment economy, and then

consider production economies under both flexible and sticky prices.


                                                                       ∗ , Y }1
Endowment Economy Let all output stochastic processes {YNT,t , YH,t , YNT,t F,t t=0 be exogenous

strictly-positive endowments. Assuming that all prices are flexible and that the law of one price

(LOP) holds, one has: p H,t = p∗H,t et , and p F,t = p∗F,t et .
                                                                             at          ∗       ξ t et
       Summing US and Japanese demand for US tradable goods (CH,t =         p H,t   and CH,t =   p H,t ,   re-



                                                          22
spectively, which are derived as in Section II.A), we obtain the world demand for US tradables:
                ∗ =       a t + ξ t et
D H,t ≡ CH,t + CH,t           p H,t .    Clearing the goods market, YH,t = D H,t , yields the equilibrium price in
                                                                                                            a∗t + et
                                                                                                                  ι
                                           at + ξ t et
dollars of US tradables: p H,t =             YH,t .      An entirely similar argument yields:   p∗F,t   =     YF,t
                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                       .


Production Without Price Rigidities.                       Let us introduce a minimal model of production that will

allow us to formalize the effects of the exchange rate on output and employment. While we maintain

the assumption that non-tradable goods in each country are given by endowment processes, we now

assume that tradable goods in each country are produced with a technology linear in labor with unit

productivity. In each country, labor L is supplied inelastically and is internationally immobile.

       Simple profit maximization at the firm level yields a Dollar wage in the US of w H,t = p H,t . Under

flexible prices, goods market clearing then implies full employment YH,t = L and a US tradable
                                     a t + ξ t et
price in dollars of: p◦H,t =              L ,       where the circle in p◦ denotes a frictionless quantity. Likewise,

for Japanese tradables the equilibrium features both full employment YF,t = L and a Yen price of:
         a∗t +ι t /et
p∗◦
 F,t =        L       .

Production With Price Rigidities.                     Let us now assume that wages are “downward rigid” in do-

mestic currency at a preset level of { p̄ H , p̄∗F }, where these prices are exogenous. Let us further

assume that firms do not engage in pricing to market, so that prices are sticky in producer cur-

rency (PCP). Firm profit maximization then implies that: p H,t = max p H , p◦H,t ; or more explicitly:
                                                                                
                            
p H,t = max p H , at +Let ξ t . Hence:

                                                                                   
                                                                      at + et ξ t
(21)                                                 YH,t = min                   ,L .
                                                                         p̄ H

If demand is sufficiently low (at + ξ t et < p H L), then output is demand-determined (i.e., it depends

directly on: et , ξ t ,and at ) and there is unemployment: L − YH,t > 0. Notice that in this case the

exchange rate has an expenditure-switching effect: if the Dollar depreciates (et ↑), unemployment falls

and output expands in the US. Intuitively, since US tradables’ prices are sticky in dollars, these goods

become cheap for Japanese consumers to buy when the Dollar depreciates. In a world that is demand

constrained, this expansion in demand for US tradable is met by expanding production, thus raising

US output and employment.




                                                                   23
       Clearly, a similar expression and mechanism apply to Japanese tradables:

                                                               a∗t + ι t /et
                                                                              
(22)                                         YF,t = min                      ,L .
                                                                    p∗F

       The expenditure switching role of exchange rates has been central to the Keynesian analysis of

open macroeconomics of Dornbusch (1976); Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995). In the Gamma model, it is

enriched by being the central channel for the transmission of financial forces affecting the exchange

rate, such as the risk-bearing capacity and balance sheet of the financiers, into output and employ-

ment.

       The financial determination of exchange rates has real consequences. Let us reconsider our ear-

lier example of a sudden inflow of capital from US investors into Brazilian Real bonds. The exchange

rate in this economy with production and sticky prices is still characterized by equation (21). As

previously discussed, the capital inflow in Brazil causes the Real to appreciate and,32 if the flow

is sufficiently strong ( f sufficiently high) or the financiers’ risk bearing capacity sufficiently low (Γ

sufficiently high), the appreciation (the increase in e0 ) can be so strong as to make Brazilian goods un-

competitive on international markets; the corresponding fall in world demand for Brazilian output
     ∗ =
(↓ C H        ι0
            e0 p∗F )   causes an economic slump in Brazil with both falling output and increasing unemploy-

ment.33

       The main focus of our model is to disconnect the exchange rate from fundamentals by altering the

structure of financial markets. Of course, part of the disconnect in practice also comes from frictions

in the goods makers. These frictions can be analyzed in our model; we illustrate this by considering

prices that are sticky in the export destination currency (LCP). To make the point sharp, assume that

prices for US tradable goods are exogenously set at { p̄ H , p̄∗H } in dollars in the US and in yen in Japan,

respectively.

Lemma 4. (LCP vs PCP) Under Local Currency Pricing the value of the exchange rate is the same as

under Producer Currency Pricing, but US tradable output does not depend on the exchange rate: YH,t =
                    
min p̄aHt + p̄ξ∗t , L .
                  H


       Proof Because of the log specification, the dollar value of US imports and exports is unchanged:
  32 When                   Γ
           α = 0, ∂e
                   ∂ f = − 2+Γ < 0. More generally, a sufficient condition for this effect is that α is small.
                     0

  33 The Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega complained, as reported in Forbes Magazine (2011), that: “We have to

face the currency war without allowing our productive sector to suffer. If we allow [foreign] liquidity to [freely] enter [the
economy], it will bring the Dutch Disease to the economy.”


                                                             24
they are still ι t and et ξ t . Consequently, the value of net exports is unchanged, and the exchange rate

is unchanged from the previous formulae. Total demand is derived as above. .

LCP helps to further the disconnect between the exchange rate and fundamentals by preventing

output in the tradable sector from responding to the exchange rate.34



        III     R EVISITING C ANONICAL I SSUES WITH THE G AMMA M ODEL

We consider in this section a number of canonical issues of international macroeconomics via the

lenses of the Gamma model. While these classic issues have also been the subject of previous litera-

ture, our analysis not only provides new insights, but also allows us to illustrate how the framework

built in the previous section provides a unified and tractable rationalization of empirical regularities

that are at the center of open-economy analysis.


III.A    The Carry Trade in the Presence of Financial Shocks

In the Gamma model there is a profitable carry trade. Let us give the intuition in terms of the most

basic model first and then extend it to a set-up with shocks to the financiers’ risk bearing capacity (Γ

shocks).

    First, imagine a world in which countries are in financial autarky because the financiers have

zero risk bearing capacity (Γ = ∞), suppose that Japan has a 1% interest rate while the US has a 5%

interest rate, and that all periods (t = 0, ..., T ) are ex-ante identical with ξ t = 1 and ι t a martingale.

Thus, we have et = ι t , and the exchange rate is a random walk e0 = E [e1 ] = ... = E [eT ]. A small

financier with some available risk bearing capacity, e.g. a small hedge fund, could take advantage

of this trading opportunity and pocket the 4% interest rate differential. In this case, there is a very

profitable carry trade. As the financial sector risk bearing capacity expands (Γ becomes smaller, but

still positive), this carry trade becomes less profitable, but does not disappear entirely unless Γ = 0,

in which case the UIP condition holds. Intuitively, the carry trade in the basic Gamma model reflects

the risk compensation necessary to induce the financiers to intermediate global financial flows.
   34 Devereux and Engel (2003) stressed the absence of exchange rate effects on output under LCP. The empirical evidence

shows that, in practice, a combination of PCP, LCP and limited pass-through are present in the data (see Gopinath and It-
skhoki (2010); Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (2010); Amiti, Itskhoki and Konings (2014); Burstein and Gopinath (2015)).
For much of this paper, we focus on flexible prices or PCP as the basic cases. As shown in Lemma 4 above, our qualita-
tive analysis can easily accommodate a somewhat more limited pass-through of exchange rate changes to local prices of
internationally traded goods.



                                                           25
       In the most basic model, the different interest rates arise from different rates of time preferences,

such that R = β−1 and R∗ = β∗−1 . Without loss of generality, assume R < R∗ so that the Dollar

is the “funding” currency, and the Yen the “investment” currency. The return of the carry trade is:
         R ∗ e1                                                                                                       c
Rc ≡     R e0     − 1. For notational convenience we define the carry trade expected return as R ≡ E[ Rc ].
The calculations in Proposition 3 allow us to immediately derive the equilibrium carry trade.

Proposition 6. Assume ξ t = 1. The expected return to the carry trade in the basic Gamma model is:

                                             R∗
                              c               R E [ι1 ] − ι0
(23)                          R =     Γ                   ∗       ,         where   Γ = γ var (ι1 )α .
                                        ( R∗ + Γ) ι0 + RR E [ι1 ]

Hence the carry trade return is bigger (i) when the return differential R∗ /R is larger (ii) when the funding

country is a net foreign creditor (iii) when finance is more imperfect (higher Γ).

To gain further intuition on the above result, consider first the case where ι0 = E [ι1 ]. The first order
                          c                                                                           c      Γ
approximation to R in the case of a small interest rate differential R∗ − R is: R =                         2+ Γ   ( R∗ − R). No-
                                  c                   c
                              ∂R                   ∂R
tice that we have both        ∂Γ      > 0 and   ∂( R∗ − R)
                                                             > 0, so that the profitability of the carry trade increases the
more limited the risk-bearing capacity of the financiers and the larger the interest rate differential.35

       The effects of broadly defined “global risk aversion”, here proxied by Γ, on the profitability of

the carry trade have been central to the empirical analysis of for example Brunnermeier, Nagel and

Pedersen (2009); Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan (2011), and Lettau, Maggiori and Weber (2014).

Here we have shown that the carry trade is more profitable the lower the risk bearing capacity of the

financiers; we next formally account for shocks to such capacity in the form of a stochastic Γ.

       In addition to a pure carry force due to the interest rate differential, our model features global

imbalances as a separate risk factor in currency risk premia. The reader should recall Proposition 2

that showed how net-external-debtor countries’ currencies have a positive excess return and depre-

ciate whenever risk bearing capacity decreases (↑ Γ). This effect occurs even if both countries have

the same interest rate, thus being theoretically separate from the pure carry trade. Della Corte, Rid-

diough and Sarno (2014) test these theoretical predictions and find evidence of a global imbalance

risk factor in currency excess returns.36
   35 The first effect occurs because, given an interest rate differential, expected returns to the carry trade have to increase

whenever the risk bearing capacity of the financiers goes down to induce them to intermediate financial flows. The second
effect occurs because, given a level of risk bearing capacity for the financiers, an increase in the interest rate differential will
not be offset one to one by the expected exchange rate change due to the risk premium.
   36 Notice that we built the model so that financial forces have no effect on the interest rates and the exchange rate makes




                                                                    26
The exposure of the carry trade to financial disruptions                                          We now expand on the risks of the carry

trade by studying a three period (t = 0, 1, 2) model with stochastic shocks to the financiers’ risk

bearing capacity in the middle period. To keep the analysis streamlined, we take period 2 to be the

“long run”. Intuitively, period 2 will be a long-run steady state where countries have zero net foreign

assets and run a zero trade balance. This allows us to quickly focus on the short-to-medium-run

exchange rate dominated by financial forces and the long-run exchange rate completely anchored by

fundamentals. We jump into the analysis, and provide many of the background details of this model

in the appendix.37

       We assume that time-1 financial conditions, Γ1 , are stochastic. In the 3-period economy with a

long-run last period, the equilibrium exchange rates are:

                                              h                     i
                                       R∗         Γ1 ι1 +ι2 R∗ /R
                            Γ0 ι 0 +   R E0             Γ1 +1
                                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                              Γ1 ι1 + RR E1 [ι2 ]
(24)                e0 =                                                ;          e1 =                           ;         e2 = ι 2 .
                                        Γ0 + 1                                                      Γ1 + 1

                                                                                                               R ∗ e1
Recall that the carry-trade return between period 0 and 1 is: Rc ≡                                             R e0     − 1. Interestingly, in this
                                                                                                                          ∂e1
case the carry trade also has “exposure to financial conditions”. Notice that                                             ∂Γ1   < 0 in the equations
above, so that the Dollar (the funding currency) appreciates whenever there is a negative shock to

the financiers’ risk bearing capacity (↑ Γ1 , ↓ e1 ). Since in our chosen parametrization the carry trade
                                                                                          ∂Rc
is short Dollar and long Yen, we correspondingly have:                                    ∂Γ1     < 0, the carry trade does badly whenever
there is a negative shock to the financiers’ risk bearing capacity (↑ Γ1 ). This is consistent with the

intuition and the empirical findings in Brunnermeier, Nagel and Pedersen (2009); we obtain this

effect here in the context of an equilibrium model. We formalize and prove the results obtained so far

in the proposition below.

Proposition 7. (Determinants of expected carry trade returns) Assume that R∗ > R, 1 = ι0 = E0 [ι1 ]
                                                                           h           i
and ι1 = E1 [ι2 ]. Define the “certainty equivalent” Γ1 by Γ1 Γ+ R+1/R ≡ E0 Γ1 Γ+1R+1/R . Consider the returns to
                                                                   ∗                ∗

                                                                                              1
                                                                                   c
the carry trade,   Rc .   The corresponding expected return R ≡ E0 [ Rc ] is


                                        c                                           Γ1 + 1 + R ∗
                                       R = (R∗ − 1) Γ0                                                            .
                                                                    Γ1 (Γ0 + R∗ ) + Γ0 + (R∗ )2
all the adjustment; while this sharpens the model, we could extend the framework to allow for effects of imbalances on
both the exchange rate and interest rates.
   37 The flow demand equations in the Yen / Dollar market are: e − ι + Q = 0 for t = 0, 1, and in the long-run period
                                                                 t   t    t
                                                                                          ∗
                                                                            et −E[et+1 ] RR
e2 − ι2 = 0, with the financiers’ demand for dollars: Qt =                        Γt          . with Γt = γ vart (et+1 ).



                                                                              27
                  R∗
with R∗ ≡         R.    We have:

                                                                                           ∂Rc
    1. An adverse shock to financiers affects the returns to carry trade negatively :      ∂Γ1
                                                                                                 < 0.
                                                                    c
    2. The carry trade has positive expected returns: R > 0.
                                                                                                         c       
    3. The expected return to the carry trade is higher the worse the financial conditions are at time 0 ∂R
                                                                                                         ∂Γ0 >  0   ,
                                                                         c       
       the better the financial conditions are expected to be at time 1 ∂R
                                                                         ∂Γ
                                                                             < 0 , and the higher the interest rate
                                                                                     1
                              c           c
                           ∂R            ∂R
         differential    ( ∂R ∗   > 0,   ∂R   < 0).

The Fama Regression The classic UIP regression of Fama (1984) is in levels:38

                                                  e1 − e0
                                                          = α + β UIP ( R − R∗ ) + ε 1 .
                                                     e0

      Under UIP, we would find β UIP = 1. However, a long empirical literature finds β UIP < 1, and

sometimes even β UIP < 0. The proposition below rationalizes these findings in the context of our

model.

Proposition 8. (Fama regression and market conditions) The coefficient of the Fama regression is β UIP =
  1+ Γ1 − Γ0
                   .   Therefore one has β UIP < 1 whenever Γ0 > 0. In addition, one has β UIP < 0 if and only if
(1+ Γ0 ) ( 1+ Γ1 )
Γ1 + 1 < Γ0 , i.e. if risk bearing capacity is very low in period 0 compared to period 1.

Intuitively financial market imperfections always lead to β UIP < 1 and very bad current market

imperfections compared to future ones lead to β UIP < 0. This occurs because any positive Γ leads

to a positive risk premium on currencies that the financiers are long of and hence to a deviation

from UIP (β UIP < 1). If, in addition, financial conditions are particularly worse today compared to

tomorrow the risk premium is so big as to induce currencies that have temporarily high interest rates

to appreciate on average (β UIP < 0).

      The intuition for β UIP < 1 is as follows. In the language of Fama (1984), when Japan has high

interest rates, the risk premium on the Yen is high. The reason is that the risk premium is not entirely

eliminated by financiers, who have limited risk-bearing capacity. In the limit where finance is elim-

inated (Γ = ∞), an interest rate of 1% translate one-for-one into a risk premium of 1% (β UIP = 0). If

riskiness (assuming α > 0) or financial frictions go to 0, then β UIP goes to 1.39 In all cases, Covered
  38 The regression is most commonly performed in its logarithmic approximation version, but the levels prove more con-

venient for our theoretical treatment without loss of economic content.
  39 As riskiness (var ( e ) , var ( e )) goes to 0, Γ and Γ go to 0, so β
                          1           2               0     1              UIP goes to 1.



                                                                   28
Interest Rate Parity (CIP) holds in the model. This is because we allow financiers to eliminate all

riskless arbitrages. Online Appendix Section A.3.C) provides full details on arbitrage trading in our

model. There, we formulate a version of our basic demand (equation (10)), that applies to an arbitrary

number of assets, and is arbitrage-free. One corollary of that extension is that CIP is respected.


Exchange Rate Excess Volatility In the data exchange rates are more volatile than fundamentals, a

fact often referred to as exchange rate excess volatility. The Gamma model helps to rationalize this

volatility not only by directly introducing new sources of variation, for example shocks to the risk

bearing capacity of the financiers (γt ) and gross flows ( f t ), but also indirectly by endogenously am-

plifying fundamental volatility via the financial constraints. The intuition is that higher fundamental

volatility tightens financial constraints, tighter constraints lead to higher volatility, thus generating a

self-reinforcing feedback loop. We formalize this more subtle effect in the Lemma below and sharpen

it by not only maintaining the assumption that ξ t = 1 at all dates, but also by considering the case of

deterministic (γt ), so that the only source of volatility is fundamental, and no information revelation

about future shocks E1 [ι2 ] = E0 [ι2 ] and Var1 [ι2 ] = Var0 [ι2 ].

Lemma 5. (Endogenous Amplification of Volatility) The volatility of the exchange rate at time one is:
                 2
var (e1 ) = 1+Γ1Γ1 var (ι1 ), where Γ1 = γ1 var (ι2 )α . If α > 0 and γ1 > 0, then fundamental volatility is
                                                        ∂var (e1 )                                      ∂var (e1 )
endogenously amplified by the financial constraint:     ∂var (ι2 )
                                                                     > 0. Notice that if γ1 = 0, then   ∂var (ι2 )
                                                                                                                     = 0.


III.B    Foreign Exchange Rate Intervention

The Gamma model of exchange rates considered so far has emphasized the central role of financial

forces and in particular capital flows in the determination of exchange rates. We study here one very

prominent type of flow: currency intervention by the official sector (the central bank or the treasury

department).

    Large-scale currency interventions have recently been undertaken by the governments of Switzer-

land and Israel.40 Both governments aimed to relieve their currency appreciation in the face of tur-

moil in financial markets. By most accounts, the interventions successfully weakened the exchange

rate and boosted the real economy.41 Empirical studies, however, have yet to confront the thorny
  40 The Czech Republic also intervened in the currency market in November 2013 with the aim of depreciating the Koruna

to boost the domestic economy
  41 Israel central bank governor Stanley Fisher remarked: “I have no doubt that the massive purchases [of foreign ex-




                                                          29
issue of endogeneity of the policy and future empirical work is necessary to provide a full empirical

assessment.42

     Here we focus on proving a framework to understand under which conditions foreign exchange

rate intervention can be a powerful tool to combat exchange rate movements generated by financial

turmoil. The limited risk bearing capacity of the financiers in our model is at the core of the effects

of FX intervention on exchange rates. Indeed, Backus and Kehoe (1989) show that in a general class

of models in which currencies are imperfect substitutes due to risk premia, but in which importantly

there are no financial frictions, FX interventions have no effect on the exchange rate.

     For notational simplicity, we set most parameters at 1: e.g. ι0 = ξ t = at = a0∗ = β = β∗ = 1.

We allow ι1 to be stochastic (keeping E [ι1 ] = 1, and setting a1∗ = ι1 for symmetry) so that currency

trading is risky.

     At time 0, the Japanese government intervenes in the currency market vis-à-vis the financiers: it

buys q∗ dollars and sells q∗ /e0 yen. By Proposition 4 we immediately obtain the result below (as the

government creates a flow f ∗ = q∗ in the currency market):

Lemma 6. If the Japanese government buys q∗ dollars and sells q∗ /e0 yen at time 0, the exchange rates satisfy
              Γ                         Γ
: e0 = 1 −         ∗
             2+ Γ q ,   and e1 = 1 +   2+ Γ q
                                              ∗   + {ι1 }, with Γ = γ var (ι1 )α .

The intervention has no impact on the average exchange rate: e0 + E[e1 ] = 1 irrespective of q∗ . The

intervention induces a depreciation at time 0, and an appreciation at time 1. We call this effect the

“boomerang effect”. A currency intervention can change the level of the exchange rate in a given

period, but not the average level of the exchange rate over multiple periods. Lemma 6 highlights

the importance of the frictions: if Γ = 0, a frictionless set-up analogous to that in Backus and Kehoe

(1989), there is no effect of the intervention on the exchange rate. Correspondingly, the potency of

the intervention is strictly increasing in the severity of the frictions: the higher the Γ the more the

exchange rate moves for a given size of the intervention.

     A classic criticism of portfolio balance models is that only extremely big interventions are ef-

fective because for an intervention to be effective it needs to alter very large stocks of assets: either
change] we made between July 2008 and into 2010 [...] had a serious effect on the exchange rate which I think is part of the
reason that we succeeded in having a relatively short recession.” Levinson (2010)
  42 Blanchard, de Carvalho Filho and Adler (2014) find empirical support for the efficacy of this policy. An earlier skeptical

empirical literature, that mostly focused on interventions of considerable smaller size, is summarized by Sarno and Taylor
(2001). Dominguez and Frankel (1993a,b) find empirical support for the effect of foreign exchange rate intervention via a
portfolio balance channel.



                                                               30
the entire stock of assets outstanding or the country level gross external assets and liabilities. In

our framework interventions are more effective because they need only alter Q, the balance sheet of

financiers, which is potentially substantially smaller than the entire stock of assets.

    Our framework also sheds light on the real consequence of FX intervention on output and risk-

sharing. We assume that in the short run, i.e. period t = 0, Japanese tradables’ prices are sticky

in domestic currency (PCP) as in Section II.E; prices are flexible in the long run, i.e. period t = 1.

We postulate that at time zero the price is downward rigid at a level p∗F that is sufficiently high

as to cause unemployment in the Japanese tradable sector. US tradable prices are assumed to be

flexible. This captures a situation in which one country is in a recession, with high slack capacity and

unemployment, so much so that its output is demand driven.

Proposition 9. (FX intervention) Assume that Γ > 0 and that at time zero Japanese tradable goods’ prices

are downward rigid at a price p∗F that is sufficiently high to cause unemployment in the Japanese tradable

sector. A Japanese government currency intervention, whereby the government buys q∗ ∈ [0, q∗ ] worth of

Dollar bonds and sells q∗ /e0 yen bonds at time zero, depreciates the Yen and increases Japanese output. q∗ is

the smallest intervention that restores full employment in Japan. The intervention distorts consumption with
                                         ∗
                                        CH,t               CF,t                           et
the consumption shares determined by:    L     = s∗t and   YF,t   = 1 − s∗t with s∗t =   1+ e t   for t = 0, 1.

    Note that there are two preconditions for this intervention analysis. The first one is that prices

are sticky (fixed) in the short run at a level that generates a fall in aggregate demand and induces an

equilibrium output below the economy’s potential. This condition, i.e. being in a demand driven state

of the world, is central to the Keynesian analysis where a depreciation of the exchange rate leads

to an increase in output via an increase in export demand. If this condition is satisfied a first order

output loss would occur even in a world of perfect finance. The second precondition is that financial

markets are imperfect, i.e. Γ > 0. Recall from Lemma 6 that the ability of the government to affect

the time-zero exchange rate is inversely proportional to Γ. When markets are frictionless (Γ = 0) the

government FX policy has no effect on the time-zero exchange rate, even if prices are sticky, because

financiers would simply absorb the intervention without requiring a compensation for the resulting

risk.

    The intervention has two distinct effects on consumption. The first effect is an increase in world

consumption because, as described above, the intervention expands Japanese output without de-

creasing US output. The second effect is a distortion in the share of world output consumed by

                                                           31
each country. Both effects are clearly illustrated by the Japanese consumption of Japanese tradable

goods:43
                                                 ∗       1       e0 YF,0
                                                CF,0 =       =           L
                                                         p∗F   1 + e0 L
                e0
The term      1 + e0   is the equilibrium share of Japanese tradables consumed by Japanese households. The

intervention reduces this share via a Dollar appreciation (e0 ↓). At the same time, the intervention
                                                                                YF,0
increases total Japanese output by reducing slack: the term                      L     ∈ (0, 1] is decreasing in e0 since
output is demand driven. The functional specifications of the model (logarithmic utility and linear
                                                     ∗ unchanged; the boomerang effect, however,
production) make the two effect cancel out and keep CF,0
                                                                    ∗ ] ↑). US consumption of both
will induce an expected increase in the consumption next period (E[CF,1

tradable goods increases at time zero, due both to an increase in US share of world consumption and

an increase in output, but then falls at time 1.

     Overall the intervention boosts world output with the cost of intertemporal distortions in con-

sumption. Interestingly, the suggested policy is not of the beggar thy neighbor type: the Japense cur-

rency intervention, even with its aim to weaken the Yen, actually increases consumption, at least in

the short run, in the US. The US benefits from an increase in Japanese output with no loss of US

output. We highlight that currency wars can only occur when both countries are in a slump and the

post-intervention weaker Yen causes a first order output loss in the US.44

     The intervention has real effects even in this calibration that has been chosen so that before the

intervention households have no incentives to trade in financial markets even if they were allowed to

do so freely and optimally. Similarly, the financiers have no incentives to trade at equilibrium prices

both before and after the intervention.45 To further isolate the sole effect of financial frictions on the

intervention outcome, we have assumed that the intervention’s proceeds and losses are rebated lump

sum (i.e. non-distortionary) by the Japanese government to its citizens.


  43 The                                                                                                               a∗t
           first equality follows from the demand function of Japanese households for Japanese tradables (CF,t =       p∗F,t ),   the
second equality follows from the equilibrium output function of Japanese tradables in Section II.E.
  44 Cavallino (2014) builds on this analysis and analyzes the joint use of FX intervention and monetary policy.
  45 Indeed, in this economy (before the government intervention) the exchange rate is at 1, and is expected to remain

at 1 on average, therefore financiers optimally choose to not trade at all. Similarly US household are on their “shadow"
Euler equation and would not want to trade Yen bonds even if allowed to do so. Japanese household would have a small
incentive to trade since their shadow Euler equation has a Jensen inequality term (an additional term compared to the
US household Euler equation). After the intervention, financiers still have no further incentives to trade having already
optimized their positions in response to the intervention. Of course, household would now like to trade but these unlimited
optimal trades are not possible (here as in the rest of the model) due to the frictions in the intermediation process. Therefore
the policy success relies on the presence of financial frictions rather than a direct failure of Ricardian equivalence.


                                                              32
The Potency of Intervention: Combining FX Intervention and Capital Controls                            It is often argued

by policy markers that currency intervention should be undertaken together with capital controls.

The Gamma model provides a unified view of this policy combination because capital controls in-

crease the financial market segmentation thus enhancing the potency of currency intervention.

     We introduce a second policy instrument, taxation of the financiers, which is a form of capital

controls.46 We consider a proportional (Japanese) government tax on each financier’s profits; the tax

proceeds are rebated lump sum to financiers as a whole. Recall the imperfect intermediation problem

in Section II.B, we now assume that the after-tax value of the intermediary is Vt (1 − τ ), where τ is

the tax rate. The financiers’ optimality condition, derived in a manner entirely analogous to the
                                                                 ∗
                                                      E[e0 −e1 RR ](1−τ )
optimization problem in equation (9), is now: Q0 =             Γ          . Notice that this is equivalent

to changing Γ to an effective Γeff ≡ 1−Γ τ , so that the financiers’ demand can be rewritten as Q0 =
           ∗
E[e0 −e1 RR ]
    Γ eff     . We consider the leading case of ξ t deterministic and collect the result in the Proposition

below.

Proposition 10. Assume ξ t is deterministic, a tax τ on finance is equivalent to lowering the financiers’ risk
                                                             α
bearing capacity by increasing Γ to Γeff ≡ 1−Γ τ = 1−γ τ var ξι11 . A higher tax increases the effective Γeff , thus

reducing the financiers’ risk bearing capacity. The sign of the effect of the tax on exchange rates depends on

the position that the financiers would have taken absent the tax (Q− ): if the financiers are long (short) dollars

Q− > 0 (Q− < 0), then a tax depreciates (appreciates) the Dollar. The potency of FX intervention increases

in the tax.

     First we note that if the equilibrium before the government intervention features zero risk tak-

ing by the financiers (Q0 = 0), as was the case in the economy studied in the previous analysis of

FX intervention, then the tax τ is entirely ineffective. Intuitively, this occurs because there are zero

expected profits to tax, and therefore the tax has no effect on ex-ante incentives.

     More generally we recall from Proposition 2 that an increase in Γ, in this case an increase in

Γeff due to an increase in τ, has the opposite effect on the exchange rate depending on whether the

financiers are long or short the Dollar to start with, i.e. depending on the sign of Q0 before the

tax is imposed. For example, the tax would make the Dollar depreciate on impact if the financiers

were long dollars to start with (Q0 > 0), but the same tax would make the Dollar appreciate if the
  46 There is a recent and interesting literature on the use of capital controls: Rey (2013); Costinot, Lorenzoni and Werning

(2014); Farhi and Werning (2014, 2013); Farhi, Gopinath and Itskhoki (2014); Farhi and Werning (2012a,b); Magud, Reinhart
and Rogoff (2011); Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2012); Mendoza (2010); Bianchi (2010); Korinek (2011).


                                                             33
financiers had the opposite position to start with. In practice this means that policy makers who are

considering imposing capital controls, or otherwise taxing international finance, should pay close

attention to the balance sheets of financial institutions that have exposures to their currency. Basing

the policy on reduced form approaches or purely on traditional macroeconomics fundamentals can

not only be misguiding, but might actually generate the opposite outcome for the exchange rate from

the desired one. Finally, recall from Lemma 6 that the effect of currency intervention on the exchange

rate is bigger the lower the financiers’ risk bearing capacity (the higher the Γ). It follows that a tax on

finance or a capital control, by implicitly reducing risk bearing capacity, increases the potency of FX

intervention.



                  IV      A NALYTICAL G ENERALIZATION OF THE M ODEL

The basic version of the Gamma model presented so far was real, and we now show that it can readily

be extended to a nominal version where the nominal exchange rate is determined, similarly to our

baseline model, in an imperfect financial market.47

     We assume that money is only used domestically by the households and that its demand is cap-

tured, in reduced form, in the utility function of households in each country.48 Financiers do not

use money, but they trade in nominal bonds denominated in the two currencies. The US consump-

tion basket is now extended to include a real money balances component such that the consumption
                     h ωt                                i θ1
                        Mt                    a                t
aggregator is: Ct ≡     Pt    (CNT,t ) (CH,t ) (CF,t )
                                      χ t       t      ι t       , where M is the amount of money held by
                                                                     M
the households and P is the nominal price level so that              P   is real money balances. We maintain the

normalization of preference shocks by setting θt ≡ ωt + χt + at + ι t . Correspondingly, the Japanese
                                   ∗                                   1∗
                              ∗     Mt∗ ωt    ∗       ∗ ∗       ∗    a ∗ θt
consumption basket is now: Ct ≡     P∗      (CNT,t ) (CH,t ) (CF,t )
                                                    χ t     ξ t        t      .
                                               t

     Money is the numéraire in each economy, with local currency price equal to 1. The static utility

maximization problem is entirely similar to the one in the basic Gamma model in Section II.A, and
                                                                                    ωt                      χt
standard optimization arguments lead to demand functions: Mt =                      λt ;   p NT,t CNT,t =   λt ;   p F,t CF,t =
   47 Notice that we have indeed set up the “real” model in the main text in such a way that non-tradables in each country

play a role very similar to money and where, therefore, the exchange rate is rather similar to a nominal exchange rate (see
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996)[Ch. 8.3]). In this section we make such analogy more explicit. Online Appendix A.1.D provides
a full discussion of the CPI-based real exchange rate and the nominal exchange rate in our model. Alvarez, Atkeson and
Kehoe (2009) provide a model of nominal exchange rates with frictions in the domestic money markets, while our model
has frictions in the international capacity to bear exchange-rate risk.
   48 A vast literature has focused on foundations of the demand for money; such foundations are beyond the scope of

this paper and consequently we focus on the simplest approach that delivers a plausible demand for money and much
tractability.


                                                            34
ιt
λt ,   where, we recall from earlier sections, λt is the Lagrange multiplier on the households’ static

budget constraint.49 Substituting for the value of the Lagrange multiplier, money demand is given

by Mt = ωt Pt Ct and is proportional to total nominal consumption expenditures; the coefficient of

proportionality, ωt , is potentially stochastic.50
                                Mts                Mts∗
       Let us define mt ≡       ωt    and m∗t ≡    ωt∗ ,   where Mts and Mts∗ are the money supplies.51 Notice that

since money (as in actual physical bank notes) is non-tradable across countries or with the financiers

(but bonds that pay in units of money are tradable with the financiers as in the previous sections), the

money market clearing implies that the central bank can pin down the level of nominal consumption

expenditure (mt = λ− 1  ∗    ∗−1 52
                   t , mt = λt  ). The nominal exchange rate et is the relative price of the two
currencies. It is defined as the strength of the Yen, so that an increase in et is a Dollar depreciation.53
                                                                          ιt
       US nominal imports in dollars are: p F,t CF,t =                    λt   = ι t mt . Similarly, Japanese demand for US
tradables is: p∗H,t CH,t
                     ∗ = ξ m∗ . Hence, US nominal exports in dollars are: p∗ C ∗ e = ξ e m∗ . We
                          t t                                              H,t H,t t  t t t

conclude that US nominal net exports in dollars are: NXt = ξ t et m∗t − ι t mt .

       We assume that the financiers solve:54

                                                                                                                     R ∗ e1
                                                                                                                         
                                                         | q0 |
         max V0 = Ω0 q0 ,        subject to V0 ≥ min 1, Γ ∗                        | q0 | ,   where Ω0 ≡ E0       1−          .
           q0                                            m 0 e0                                                      R e0

Notice that m0∗ is now scaling the portion of nominal assets that the financiers’ can divert to ensure

that such fraction is scale invariant to the level of the Japanese money supply and hence the nominal
  49 The   budget constraint of the households is now:
                    1                                            1
                   ∑ R−t ( p NT,t YNT,t + p H,t YH,t + Mts ) = ∑ R−t ( p NT,t CNT,t + p H,t CH,t + pF,t CF,t + Mt ) .
                   t =0                                        t =0

where    Mts  is the seignorage rebated lump-sum by the government, which is equal to Mt in equilibrium.
  50 The money demand equation is similar to that of a cash in advance constraint where money is only held by the con-

sumers within the period, i.e. they need to have enough cash at the beginning of the period to carry out the planned period
consumption. For constraints of this type see Helpman (1981); Helpman and Razin (1982).
  51 It is often convenient to consider the cashless limit of our economies by taking the limit case when { M s , M s∗ , ω , ω ∗ } ↓ 0
                                                                                                             t     t      t   t
such that {mt , m∗t } are finite; however, this is not needed for positive analysis.
  52 The central bank in each period choses money supply after the preference shocks are realized so that m and m∗ are

policy variables. We abstract here from issues connected with the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Notice the
duality between money in the current setup and non-tradable goods in the basic Gamma model of Section II. If Mt = ωt
and CNT,t = χt , one recovers the equations in Section II, because the demand for money implies λt = 1, in which case the
demand for non-tradables implies that p NT,t = 1.
  53 To keep simpler notations, we denote the nominal exchange rate by e , the same symbol used for the exchange rate in
                                                                               t
the basic Gamma model.
  54 When we consider setups that are more general than the basic Gamma model of Section II, we maintain the simpler

formulation of the financiers’ demand function. We do not directly derive the households’ valuation of currency trades
in these more general setups. Our demand functions are very tractable and carry most of the economic content of more
general treatments; we leave it for the extension Section A.4 to characterize numerically financier value functions more
complex than those analyzed in closed form here.


                                                                     35
value in Yen of the assets.55

       Finally, the nominal interest rates are given by the households’ intertemporal optimality condi-

tions (Euler Equations):

                                0
                                  "                     #
                               U1,C
                                                                                           
                                      p NT,0                       χ1 /CNT,1 p NT,0          m0
                       1 = E βR 0 NT                        = E βR                    = βRE     ,
                               U0,CNT p NT,1                       χ0 /CNT,0 p NT,1          m1

                                                                        m0∗
                         h        i                                 h         i
                             m0
so that R−1 = βE             m1       . Similarly, R∗−1 = β∗ E          m1∗       . These interest rate determination formulas

extend those in equation (6) to the nominal setup.


Equilibrium Exchange Rate in the Extended Setup.                              When we include all the extensions to the basic

Gamma model considered so far, the key equations to solve for the equilibrium nominal exchange

rate are the flow equations in the international bond market:


(25)                                   m0∗ ξ 0 e0 − m0 ι0 + Q0 + f ∗ − f e0 − DUS + D J e0 = 0,

(26)                                            m1∗ ξ 1 e1 − m1 ι1 − RQ0 − R f ∗ + R∗ f e1 = 0,


and the financiers’ demand curve:

                                                          m0∗           R∗
                                                                          
(27)                                                 Q0 =     E e0 − e1      .
                                                          Γ             R

       Equations 25-26 allow for household trading of foreign currency. They extend Section II.D.1,

that only considered liquidity/noise trading, by allowing these demand functions for foreign bonds

to depend on all fundamentals, but not directly depend on the exchange rate.56 Equations 25-26

also allow for each country to start with a stock of foreign assets and liabilities. The US net foreign

liabilities in dollars are DUS and Japan net foreign liabilities in yen are D J .57
                                                                    m∗
  55 The constraint Γ = γvar (e1 )α can become Γ = γvar (e1 m11 )α , to make the model invariant to predictable changes to
money supply.
  56 We allow the demand functions for foreign bonds from US and Japanese households, denoted by f and f ∗ respectively,

to depend on all present and expected future fundamentals. We use the shorthand notation f and f ∗ to denote the generic
functions: f ( R, R∗ , ι, ξ, ...) and f ∗ ( R, R∗ , ι, ξ, ...). For example, demand functions that load on a popular trading strategy,
the carry trade, that invests in high interest rate currencies while funding the trade in low interest rate currencies can be
expressed as f = b + c( R − R∗ ) and f ∗ = d + g( R − R∗ ), for some constants b, c, d, g. Interestingly, both gross capital flows
and trade flows could be ultimately generated by financial frictions (see Antràs and Caballero (2009)). Dekle, Hyeok and
Kiyotaki (2014) employ the reduced form approach and put holdings of foreign bonds directly in the utility function of
domestic agents to generate flows. The online appendix extends the present results to demand functions that depend on
the exchange rate directly by solving the model numerically.
  57 We could have alternatively assumed that only a fraction η of the debt had to be intermediated in which case we would



                                                                    36
     We show in the proposition below that the solution method, even in this more general case,

follows the simple derivation of the basic model by representing the current economy as a “pseudo”
                                                                                  ∗
basic economy. We also note that these results do not impose that YNT,t = χt and YNT,t = χ∗t , thus
generalizing the analysis in Section II.

Proposition 11. In the richer model above (with money, portfolio flows, external debt, and shocks to imports

and exports) the values for the exchange rates e0 and e1 are those in Proposition 3, replacing imports (ι t ),

exports (ξ t ), and the risk bearing capacity (Γ) by their “pseudo” counterparts {eι t , ξet , Γ
                                                                                               e}, defined as: eι0 ≡

                                                                                           e ≡ γ/m0∗ , Γ
m0 ι0 + DUS − f ∗ ; ξe0 ≡ m0∗ ξ 0 + D J − f ; eι1 ≡ m1 ι1 + R f ∗ ; ξe1 ≡ m1∗ ξ 1 + R∗ f ; γ           e ≡ Γ/m∗ .
                                                                                                              0

     Proof: Equations (25)-(26) reduce to the basic flow equations, equations (13)-(14), provided we

replace ι t and ξ t by eι t and ξet . Similarly, equation (27) reduces to equation (10), provided we replace Γ

by Γ.
   e Then the result follows from the proof of Proposition 3.

Intuitively, the pseudo imports (eι) are composed of factors that lead consumers and firms to sell

dollars and hence “force” financiers to be long the Dollar. An entirely symmetric intuition applies to
                    
the pseudo exports ξe .

     We collect here a number of qualitative results for the generalized economy. While some proper-

ties do not strictly depend on Γ > 0 and therefore can be derived even in UIP models, it is nonetheless

convenient to provide a unified treatment in the present model. We assume that eι t and ξet are posi-

tive at dates 0 and 1. Otherwise, various pathologies can happen, including the non-existence of an

equilibrium (e.g. formally, a negative exchange rate).

Proposition 12. The Dollar is weaker: 1) (Imports-Exports) when US import demand for Japanese goods

(ι t ) is higher; when Japanese import demand for US goods (ξ t ) is lower; 2) (“Myopia” from an imperfect

financial system) higher Γ increases the effects in point 1) by making current imports matter more than

future imports;58 3) (Debts and their currency denomination) when US net external liabilities in dollars

(DUS ) are higher; when Japanese net external liabilities in Yen (D J ) are lower; 4) (Financiers’ risk-bearing

capacity) when financial conditions are worse (Γ is higher), conditional on Japan being a net creditor at time

0+ (N0+ < 0); 5) (Demand pressure) when the noise demand for the Dollar ( f ∗ ) is lower, as long as Γ > 0;

6) (Interest rates) when the US real interest rate is lower; when the Japanese real interest rate is higher; 7)

(Money supply) when the US current money supply (m0 ) is higher; when the Japanese current money supply
get a flow of ηD at time zero and a flow (1 − η ) RD at time 1.
  58 That is, ∂e /∂ι and ∂e /∂ι are positive and respectively increasing and decreasing in Γ.
                0   0      0   1



                                                           37
(m0∗ ) is lower.

Point 3 above highlights a valuation channel to the external adjustments of countries. The exchange

rate moves in a way that facilitates the re-equilibration of external imbalances. Interestingly, it is not

just the net-external position of a country, its net foreign assets, that matters for external adjustment,

but actually the (currency) composition of its gross external assets and liabilities (DUS and D J ). This

basic result is consistent with the valuation channel to external adjustment highlighted in Gourinchas

and Rey (2007a,b); Lane and Shambaugh (2010).



                                         V     C ONCLUSION

We presented a theory of exchange rate determination in imperfect capital markets where financiers

bear the risks resulting from global imbalances in the demand and supply of international assets.

Exchange rates are determined by the balance sheet risks and risk bearing capacity of these financiers.

Exchange rates in our model are disconnected from traditional macroeconomic fundamentals, such

as output, inflation and the trade balance and are instead more connected to financial forces such as

the demand for assets denominated in different currencies. Our model is tractable, with simple to

derive closed form solutions, and can be generalized to address a number of both classic and new

issues in international macroeconomic analysis.

N EW Y ORK U NIVERSITY, S TERN S CHOOL OF B USINESS
H ARVARD U NIVERSITY


                                              A PPENDIX
The financiers’ optimization problem. We clarify here the role of the mild assumption, made in
footnote 15, that 1 ≥ Ω0 ≥ −1. Formally, the financiers’ optimization problem is:

                                                                                      R ∗ e1
                                                                                          
                                                    | q0 |
       max V0 = Ω0 q0 , subject to V0 ≥ min 1, Γ             |q0 | , where Ω0 ≡ E 1 −          .
         q0                                           e0                              R e0

Notice that Ω0 is unaffected by the individual financier’s decisions and can be thought of as exoge-
nous in this constrained maximization problem.
   Consider the case in which Ω0 > 0, then the optimal choice of investment has q0 ∈ (0, ∞). Notice
                                                                                                         q2
that Ω0 ≤ 1 trivially. Then one has V0 ≤ q0 . In this case, the constraint can be rewritten as: V0 ≥ Γ e00 ,
                                                                                                        |q |
because the constraint will always bind before the portion of assets that the financiers can divert Γ e00
reaches 1. This yields the simpler formulation of the constraint adopted in the main text.
     Now consider the case in which Ω0 < 0, then the optimal choice of investment has q0 ∈ (−∞, 0).
It is a property of currency excess returns that Ω0 has no lower bound. In this paper, we assume

                                                    38
that the parameters of the model are as such that Ω0 > −1, i.e. we assume that the worst possible
(discounted) expected returns from being long a Dollar bond and being short a Yen bond is -100%.
Economically this is an entirely innocuous assumption given that the range of expected excess returns
in the data is approximately [-6%,+6%]. With this assumption in hand we have V0 ≤ |q0 |, and hence
we can once again adopt the simpler formulation of the constraint because the constraint will always
                                                                  |q |
bind before the portion of assets that the financiers can divert Γ e00 reaches 1.
     As pointed out in the numerical generalization section of the Online Appendix (Section A.4),
more general (and non-linear) value functions would apply once the simplifying assumptions made
in the text are removed and depending on who the financiers’ repatriate their profit and losses to. In
the main body of the paper, we maintain the assumption that the financiers’ use the US household
valuation criterion; this makes the model most tractable while very little economic content is lost.
The numerical generalizations in the online appendix provide robustness checks by solving the non-
linear cases.

                                            R EFERENCES
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2013. “Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk.” Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies.
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. “Risk appetite and exchange rates.” Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report.
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Jan JJ Groen. 2011. “Financial amplification of foreign exchange
  risk premia.” European Economic Review, 55(3): 354–370.
Allen, Polly R., and Peter B. Kenen. 1983. Asset Markets and Exchange Rates: Modeling an Open Econ-
  omy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J Kehoe. 2002. “Money, interest rates, and ex-
  change rates with endogenously segmented markets.” Journal of political economy, 110(1): 73–112.
Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J Kehoe. 2009. “Time-varying risk, interest rates,
  and exchange rates in general equilibrium.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 851–878.
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2014. “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate
  Disconnect.” American Economic Review, 104(7): 1942–78.
Antràs, Pol, and Ricardo J Caballero. 2009. “Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial Frictions Perspec-
  tive.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(4): 701–744.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric Van Wincoop. 2010. “Infrequent portfolio decisions: A solution to the
  forward discount puzzle.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 870–904.
Backus, David K., and Gregor W. Smith. 1993. “Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic
  economies with non-traded goods.” Journal of International Economics, 35(3-4): 297–316.
Backus, David K., and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1989. “On the denomination of government debt : A critique
  of the portfolio balance approach.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 23(3): 359–376.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1992. “International Real Business Cy-
  cles.” Journal of Political Economy, 100(4): 745–75.
Bank of International Settlements. 2013. “Triennial Central Bank Survey.” Preliminary Report.
Bianchi, Javier. 2010. “Credit externalities: Macroeconomic effects and policy implications.” American
  Economic Review, 100(2): 398–402.
Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi, and Filipa Sa. 2005. “International Investors, the U.S. Cur-
  rent Account, and the Dollar.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 36(1): 1–66.
Blanchard, Olivier, Irineu de Carvalho Filho, and Gustavo Adler. 2014. “Can Sterilized Foreign Ex-
  change Intervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from the Global Financial Cycle?” Unpublished
  Manuscript.
Branson, William H., and Dale W. Henderson. 1985. “The specification and influence of asset mar-
  kets.” In Handbook of International Economics. Vol. 2 of Handbook of International Economics, , ed. R. W.
  Jones and P. B. Kenen, Chapter 15, 749–805. Elsevier.
Branson, William H., Hannu Halttunen, and Paul Masson. 1979. “Exchange rates in the short run :
  Some further results.” European Economic Review, 12(4): 395–402.


                                                    39
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. “A macroeconomic model with a financial sec-
  tor.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 379–421.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2009. “Carry Trades and Currency
  Crashes.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, Volume 23. NBER Chapters, 313–347. NBER, Inc.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. “Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity.” Forth-
  coming Review of Economic Studies.
Burstein, Ariel, and Gita Gopinath. 2015. “Chapter 7 - International Prices and Exchange Rates.” In
  Handbook of International Economics. Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, , ed. Kenneth Ro-
  goff Elhanan Helpman and Gita Gopinath, 391 – 451. Elsevier.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2001. “International and domestic collateral con-
  straints in a model of emerging market crises.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(3): 513–548.
Calvo, Guillermo A, and Carlos Alfredo Rodriguez. 1977. “A model of exchange rate determination
  under currency substitution and rational expectations.” The Journal of Political Economy, 617–625.
Cavallino, Paolo. 2014. “Capital Flows and Foreign Exchange Intervention.” NYU Working Paper.
Chari, Varadarajan V, Patrick J Kehoe, and Ellen R McGrattan. 2002. “Can sticky price models
  generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates?” The Review of Economic Studies, 69(3): 533–
  563.
Citigroup. 2013. “BASEL II.5 MARKET RISK DISCLOSURES AS OF AND FOR THE PERIOD
  ENDED MARCH 31, 2013.” http://citigroup.com/citi/investor/data/b25d130331.
  pdf?ieNocache=32.
Colacito, Riccardo, and Mariano M. Croce. 2011. “Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange
  Rate.” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1): 153–181.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. 2008. “International risk sharing and the
  transmission of productivity shocks.” The Review of Economic Studies, 75(2): 443–473.
Costinot, Arnaud, Guido Lorenzoni, and Ivan Werning. 2014. “A theory of capital controls as dy-
  namic terms-of-trade manipulation.” Journal of Political Economy, 122(1): 77–128.
Dedola, Luca, Peter Karadi, and Giovanni Lombardo. 2013. “Global implications of national uncon-
  ventional policies.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(1): 66 – 85. Carnegie-NYU-Rochester Confer-
  ence.
De Grauwe, Paul. 1982. “The exchange rate in a portfolio balance model with a banking sector.”
  Journal of International Money and Finance, 1(1): 225–239.
Dekle, Robert, Jeong Hyeok, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2014. “Dynamics of Firms and Trade in Gen-
  eral Equilibrium.” Unpublished Manuscript Princeton University.
Della Corte, Pasquale, S. Riddiough, and Lucio Sarno. 2014. “Currency Premia and Global Imbal-
  ances.” Unpublished manuscript, Imperial College and City University.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann. 1990a.
  “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 703–738.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann. 1990b.
  “Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation.” Journal of Finance,
  45(2): 379–395.
de Macedo, Jorge Braga, and Urho Lempinen. 2013. “Exchange rate dynamics revisited.” National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 19718.
Deutsche Bank. 2013. “Annual Report: Value-at-Risk Metrics of Trading Units of Deutsche
  Bank Group Trading (excluding Postbank).” https://annualreport.deutsche-bank.
  com/2013/ar/management-report/risk-report/trading-market-risk/
  value-at-risk-of-the-trading-units.html.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel. 2003. “Monetary policy in the open economy revisited:
  Price setting and exchange-rate flexibility.” Review of Economic Studies, 70(4): 765–783.
Diebold, Francis X., and Peter Pauly. 1988. “Endogenous risk in a portfolio-balance rational-
  expectations model of the Deutschemark-Dollar rate.” European Economic Review, 32(1): 27–53.
Dominguez, Kathryn M, and Jeffrey A Frankel. 1993a. “Does Foreign-Exchange Intervention Mat-
  ter? The Portfolio Effect.” American Economic Review, 83(5): 1356–69.
Dominguez, K.M., and J.A. Frankel. 1993b. Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Work? Institute for
  International Economics.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976. “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of Political Economy,
  84(6): 1161.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer. 1980. “Exchange Rates and the Current Account.” Ameri-


                                                  40
  can Economic Review, 70(5): 960–71.
Driskill, Robert, and Stephen McCafferty. 1980a. “Exchange-rate variability, real and monetary
  shocks, and the degree of capital mobility under rational expectations.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 95(3): 577–586.
Driskill, Robert, and Stephen McCafferty. 1980b. “Speculation, rational expectations, and stability
  of the foreign exchange market.” Journal of International Economics, 10(1): 91–102.
Duffie, Darrell. 2010. “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital.” The
  Journal of finance, 65(4): 1237–1267.
Dumas, Bernard. 1992. “Dynamic Equilibrium and the Real Exchange Rate in a Spatially Separated
  World.” Review of Financial Studies, 5(2): 153–80.
Dumas, Bernard, and Bruno Solnik. 1995. “The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk.” Journal of
  Finance, 50(2): 445–79.
Euromoney. 2014. “FX Survey.”
Evans, Martin, and Richard K. Lyons. 2002. “Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 110(1): 170–180.
Evans, Martin D. D., and Richard K. Lyons. 2012. “Exchange Rate Fundamentals and Order Flow.”
  Quarterly Journal of Finance, 2(4): 1–63.
Fama, Eugene F. 1984. “Forward and spot exchange rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 14(3): 319–
  338.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2012a. “Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal Capital Controls
  with Fixed Exchange Rates.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University and MIT.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2012b. “Fiscal Unions.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard Uni-
  versity and MIT.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2013. “Dilemma not trilemma? Capital controls and exchange
  rates with volatile capital flows.” IMF working paper. Harvard University and MIT.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2014. “A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence
  of Nominal Rigidities.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University and MIT.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. 2014. “Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates.” Unpublished
  manuscript, Harvard University and NYU.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2014. “Fiscal Devaluations.” Forthcoming Re-
  view of Economic Studies.
Forbes Magazine. 2011. http://www.forbes.com/sites/afontevecchia/2011/04/18/
  mantega-inflation-under-control-in-brazil-as-qe2-pressures-real/.
Froot, Kenneth A, and Jeremy C. Stein. 1991. “Exchange rates and foreign direct investment: an
  imperfect capital markets approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4): 1191–1217.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Tarun Ramadorai. 2005. “Currency Returns, Intrinsic Value, and
  Institutional-Investor Flows.” Journal of Finance, 60(3): 1535–1566.
Froot, Kenneth A., Paul G. J. O’Connell, and Mark S. Seasholes. 2001. “The portfolio flows of inter-
  national investors.” Journal of Financial Economics, 59(2): 151–193.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 129(4): 1661–1710.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2011. “Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from
  the law of one price.” Review of Financial Studies, 24(6): 1980–2022.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Busi-
  ness Cycle Analysis.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics. Vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics,
  Chapter 11, 547–599. Elsevier.
Gopinath, Gita, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2010. “Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-Through.” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 675–727.
Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon. 2010. “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
  Pass-Through.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 304–36.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2007a. “From world banker to world venture capitalist:
  US external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege.” In G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustain-
  ability and Adjustment.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2007b. “International financial adjustment.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 115(4): 665–703.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Nicolas Govillot, and Hélène Rey. 2010. “Exorbitant Privilege and Ex-

                                                41
  orbitant Duty.” Unpublished manuscript, UC Berkeley and LBS.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2002. “Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
  constrained arbitrageurs.” Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2): 361–407.
Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein. 2014. “Monetary policy and long-term real rates.” Journal
  of Financial Economics.
Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, contracts, and financial structure. Oxford University Press.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. 1994. “A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4): 841–879.
Hassan, Tarek A. 2013. “Country Size, Currency Unions, and International Asset Returns.” Journal of
  Finance, 68(6): 2269–2308.
Hau, Harald, and Hélène Rey. 2006. “Exchange Rates, Equity Prices, and Capital Flows.” Review of
  Financial Studies, 19(1): 273–317.
Hau, Harald, Massimo Massa, and Joel Peress. 2010. “Do Demand Curves for Currencies Slope
  Down? Evidence from the MSCI Global Index Change.” Review of Financial Studies, 23(4): 1681–
  1717.
Helpman, Elhanan. 1981. “An exploration in the theory of exchange-rate regimes.” The Journal of
  Political Economy, 865–890.
Helpman, Elhanan, and Assaf Razin. 1982. “Dynamics of a Floating Exchange Rate Regime.” Journal
  of Political Economy, 90(4): pp. 728–754.
Henderson, Dale W., and Kenneth Rogoff. 1982. “Negative net foreign asset positions and stability
  in a world portfolio balance model.” Journal of International Economics, 13(1-2): 85–104.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2013. “Intermediary Asset Pricing.” American Economic
  Review, 103(2): 732–70.
Hong, Harrison, and Motohiro Yogo. 2012. “What does futures market interest tell us about the
  macroeconomy and asset prices?” Journal of Financial Economics, 105(3): 473–490.
Ivashina, Victoria, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2012. “Dollar Funding and the Lend-
  ing Behavior of Global Banks.” NBER Working Paper 18528.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Andrew K. Rose. 2002. “Noise trading and exchange rate regimes.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 117(2): 537–569.
Kim, Young Ju, Zhipeng Liao, and Aaron Tornell. 2014. “Speculators Positions and Exchange Rate
  Forecasts: Beating Random Walk Models.” Unpublished Manuscript UCLA.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2): 211–
  248.
Kollmann, Robert. 2013. “Global Banks, Financial Shocks, and International Business Cycles: Evi-
  dence from an Estimated Model.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45(s2): 159–195.
Kollmann, Robert, Zeno Enders, and Gernot J Müller. 2011. “Global banking and international
  business cycles.” European Economic Review, 55(3): 407–426.
Korinek, Anton. 2011. “The new economics of prudential capital controls: A research agenda.” IMF
  Economic Review, 59(3): 523–561.
Kouri, Pentti J. K. 1976. “The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the Short Run and in
  the Long Run: A Monetary Approach.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78(2): 280–304.
Lane, Philip R, and Jay C Shambaugh. 2010. “Financial exchange rates and international currency
  exposures.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 518–540.
Lettau, Martin, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber. 2014. “Conditional risk premia in currency
  markets and other asset classes.” Journal of Financial Economics, 114(2): 197 – 225.
Levinson, Charles. 2010. “Interview Transcript: Stanley Fischer.” Wall Street Journal. http://
  online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304510704575562410676436730
  (accessed January 15, 2014).
Lucas, Robert E. 1982. “Interest rates and currency prices in a two-country world.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 10(3): 335–359.
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2011. “Common risk factors in currency
  markets.” Review of Financial Studies, 24(11): 3731–3777.
Maggiori, Matteo. 2014. “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Curren-
  cies.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Magud, Nicolas E., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2011. “Capital Controls: Myth
  and Reality - A Portfolio Balance Approach.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER


                                                  42
  Working Papers 16805.
Mark, Nelson C. 1995. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon Predictabil-
  ity.” American Economic Review, 85(1): 201–18.
Martin, Ian. 2011. “The Forward Premium Puzzle in a Two-Country World.” NBER Working Paper
  17564.
Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff. 1983. “Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies :
  Do they fit out of sample?” Journal of International Economics, 14(1-2): 3–24.
Mendoza, Enrique G. 2010. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage.” American Economic Re-
  view, 100(5): 1941–1966.
Mendoza, Enrique G, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Vıctor Rıos-Rull. 2009. “Financial Integration,
  Financial Development, and Global Imbalances.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(3).
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2004. “External adjustment.” Review of World Economics, 140(4): 541–568.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux.” Journal of Political
  Economy, 103(3): 624–660.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2001. “The six major puzzles in international macroeco-
  nomics: is there a common cause?” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15. , ed. Ben S.
  Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, 339–412. The MIT Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 1996. Foundations of International Macroeconomics. MIT
  Press.
Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon. 2007. “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates.” Review of Financial
  Studies, 20: 1139–1180.
Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon. 2008. “The Role of Portfolio Constraints in the International
  Propagation of Shocks.” Review of Economic Studies, 75(4): 1215–1256.
Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon. 2010. “An asset-pricing view of external adjustment.” Journal
  of International Economics, 80(1): 144–156.
Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon. 2012. “Equilibrium Portfolios and External Adjustment Under
  Incomplete Markets.” Unpublished Manuscript LBS.
Perri, Fabrizio, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2014. “International recessions.”
Rey, Hélène. 2013. “Dilemma not Trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy indepen-
  dence.” Jackson Hole Economic Symposium.
Sarno, Lucio, and Mark P. Taylor. 2001. “Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange Market: Is It
  Effective and, If so, How Does It Work?” Journal of Economic Literature, 39(3): pp. 839–868.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martın Uribe. 2003. “Closing small open economy models.” Journal
  of international Economics, 61(1): 163–185.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe. 2012. “Pegs and Pain.” Working paper Columbia Uni-
  versity.
Shin, Hyun Song. 2012. “Global banking glut and loan risk premium.” IMF Economic Review,
  60(2): 155–192.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. “The limits of arbitrage.” Journal of Finance, 52(1): 35–
  55.
Stathopoulos, Andreas. 2012. “Asset prices and risk sharing in open economies.” Unpublished
  manuscript, University of Southern California.
Tobin, James, and Jorge B. de Macedo. 1979. “The Short-Run Macroeconomics of Floating Exchange
  Rates: An Exposition.” Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University Cowles
  Foundation Discussion Papers 522.
Verdelhan, Adrien. 2010. “A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium.” Journal
  of Finance, 65(1): 123–146.
Verdelhan, Adrien. 2013. “The share of systematic variation in bilateral exchange rates.” Unpublished
  Manuscript MIT.




                                                  43
        Online Appendix to “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate
                                 Dynamics”
                                   Xavier Gabaix                        Matteo Maggiori

                                            Not for Publication. March 2015


          A.1      F URTHER D ETAILS FOR THE M AIN B ODY OF THE PAPER
A.1.A     A More Abstract Version of the Market Structure
It may be useful to have a more abstract presentation of the basic model. We focus on the US side, as the
Japanese side is entirely symmetric.
    For generality, we present the monetary model, and then show how the real model can be viewed as a
special case of it. We call
                                       c = (CH , CF , CNT , M, 0, 0) ,
the vector of consumptions of CH US tradables, CF Japanese tradables, CNT US non-tradables, and a quan-
tity M of US money, respectively. The last 2 slots in vector c (set at 0) are the consumption of Japanese
non-tradables, and Japanese money: they are zero for the US consumer. Likewise, the Japanese consumer
has consumption:
                                      c∗ = (C H
                                              ∗
                                                , CF∗ , 0, 0, CNT
                                                               ∗
                                                                  , M∗ ) .
The Japanese household consumes CH  ∗ US tradables, C ∗ Japanese tradables, 0 US non-tradables, 0 US
                                                           F
money, CNT Japanese non-tradables, and M∗ Japanese money.
        ∗
    The US production vector is
                                      y = (y H , 0, y NT , Ms , 0, 0) .
This shows that the US produces y H US tradables, 0 Japanese tradables, y NT US non-tradables, and 0
Japanese non-tradables and money. Here Ms is the money supply given by the government to the house-
hold. Japanese production is similarly

                                              y∗ = (0, y∗F , 0, 0, y∗NT , Ms∗ ) .

The vector of prices in the US is
                                               p = ( p H , p F , p NT , 1, 0, 0) .
Utility is u (ct , φt ), where φt is a taste shock. In the paper, φt = ( at , ι t , χt , ωt , 0, 0), so that in the utility
function is
                                                        6
                                      u (ct , φt ) =   ∑ φit ln cit , for t = 0, . . . , T.
                                                       i =1

Consumptions are non-negative, cit ≥ 0 for all i, t.
     The fourth and sixth components of the above vectors correspond to money. In the real model they are
set to 0. Then, in this
                     real model,
                                 the numéraire is the non-tradable good, so that p NT = 1.
                              J
     We call Θt = ΘUSt , Θt the holding by the US of US bonds and Japanese bonds, Pt = (1, et ) the price
of bonds in dollars.
     The US consumers’ problem is:

                                                                 T
(A.1)                                              max E ∑ βt u (ct , φt ) ,
                                              (ct ,ΘUS
                                                    t )t≤ T t =0

s.t.



                                                              A.1
(A.2)                      pt · (yt − ct ) + Pt · Dt Θt−1 + πtF = Pt · Θt , for t = 0, ..., T,

and

(A.3)                                                         Θ T = 0.

     Here Dt = diag ( R, R∗ ) is the diagonal matrix expressing the gross rate of return of bonds in each
currency and πtF is a profit rebated by financiers. The left-hand side of (A.2) is the households’ financial
wealth (in dollars) after period t. US firms are fully owned by US households. Because the economy is
fully competitive, they make no profit. The entire production comes as labor income, whose value is pt · yt .
The budget constraint is the terminal asset holdings should be 0, which is expressed by (A.3). Finally, as is
usual, ct and ΘUS
                t are adapted process, i.e. they depend only on information available at date t.
     In the above maximization problems, US consumers choose optimally their consumption vector ct and
                                                                                                 J
                             t . However, they do not choose their holding of Japanese bonds Θt optimally.
their dollar bond holdings ΘUS
                                                          J
In the basic model we preclude such holdings and set Θt = 0. In the extended model, we allow for such
holdings and study simple and intuitive cases: for instance, at time 0 the holdings of Japanese bonds can be
                  J
an endowment Θ−1 = D J (or Japanese debt denoted in Yen). Alternatively, they could be a liquidity (noise
                 J
trader) shock Θ0 = − f , or we could have f be a function of observables, but not the exchange rate directly,
e.g. f = b + c ( R − R∗ ) for a carry-trader. We do not focus on the foundations for each type of demand, but
actually take the demands as exogenously specified. Possible microfoundations for these demands range
from rational models of portfolio delegation where the interest rate is an observable variable that is known,
in equilibrium, to load on the sources of risk of the model (see Section III.A), to models of “reaching for
yield" (Hanson and Stein, 2014), or to the “boundedly rational” households who focus on the interest rate
when investing without considering future exchange rate changes or covariance with marginal utility (as
in Gabaix (2014)).
     To summarize, while all goods are frictionlessly traded within a period (with the non-tradable goods
being traded only within a country), asset markets are restricted: only US and Japanese bonds are traded
(rather than a full set of Arrow-Debreu securities).
     The goods market clearing condition is:

(A.4)                                   yt + y∗t = ct + c∗t at all dates t ≤ T.

Firms produce and repatriate their sales at every period. They have net asset flows,
                                                   f irms
                                               Θt           = p∗Ht c∗Ht (et , −1) ,
                                                                                 
                                               f irms,∗                        1
                                              Θt            = p Ft c Ft −1,         .
                                                                               et

The first equation expresses the asset flows of US exporters: in Japan, they have sales of p∗Ht c∗Ht Yen in Japan
market; they repatriate those yens (hence a flow of − p∗Ht c∗Ht in Yen), to buy dollars (hence a flow of p∗Ht c∗Ht et
dollars).
     For instance, in the model with the log specification,
                                     f irms
                                   Θt           = p∗Ht c∗Ht (et , −1) = m∗t ξ t (et , −1) ,
                                                                                        
                                       f irms,∗                    1                    1
                                   Θt           = p Ft c Ft −1,         = mt ι t −1,         ,
                                                                   et                   et
                                                            
         f irms    f irms,∗
so that Θt      + Θt        = (m∗t ξ t et − mt ι t ) 1, − e1t . The real model is similar, replacing mt and m∗t by 1.
     The gross demand by financiers is Qt (1, −1/et ). Each period the financiers sell the previous period




                                                                A.2
position, so that their net demand is:

(A.5)                         Qt (1, −1/et ) − Dt Qt−1 (1, −1/et−1 ) = (1 − Dt L) Qt (1, −1/et ) ,

where L is the lag operator, L Xt = Xt−1 .
     Financiers choose Qt optimally, given the frictions, as in the main body of the paper and we do not
restate their problem here for brevity. In the last period, holdings are 0, i.e. Q T = 0.
     The asset market clearing condition is that the net demand for bonds is 0
                                 f irms       f irms,∗
(A.6)                          Θt         + Θt           + (1 − Dt L) (Θt + Θ∗t + Qt (1, −1/et )) = 0.

For instance, for consumers, (1 − Dt L) Θt is the increased asset demand by the agent. To gain some intu-
ition, the first coordinate of equation (A.6), evaluated at time t = 0, in the case where Θt = Θ∗t = 0, gives
equation (25) of the paper:
                                           ξ 0 e0 m0∗ − ι0 m0 + Q0 = 0;
and in the real case (corresponding to m0 = m0∗ = 1), we obtain the basic equation (13) of the paper:

                                                            ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Q0 = 0.

We now state formally the definition of equilibrium in the case of flexible prices. Recall that we assume the
law of one price in goods market to hold such that:

(A.7)                                          p∗Ht = p Ht /et , p∗Ft = p Ft /et .
                                                                                                          
                                                                                    f irms    f irms,∗
Definition A competitive equilibrium consists of allocations ct , c∗t , Θt , Θ∗t , Θt      , Θt        , Qt , prices pt , p∗t ,
exchange rate et , for t = 0, . . . , T such that the US consumers optimize their utility function (A.1) under the
above constraints (A.2-A.3), Japanese consumers optimize similarly, goods markets clear (A.4), and asset
markets clear (A.6), and the law of one price (A.7) holds.

     As explained in the paper (Lemma 4), if we use local currency pricing (i.e. change (A.7), and replace
the value of p∗Ht and p Ft by other, potentially arbitrary, values), the equilibrium value of the exchange rate
does not change (though consumptions do change).
     The timing was already stated in the paper, but for completeness we restate it here. At time 0, pro-
ducers produce, consumers demand and consume, exporters repatriate their sales, financiers take their
FX positions, and asset and goods market clear (simultaneously, like in Arrow-Debreu). The potential di-
version by the financiers happens at time 0+ , right after time 0 (of course, no diversion happens on the
equilibrium path). Then, at time 1 and potentially future periods, the same structure is repeated (with no
financiers’ position in the last period).

A.1.B     Maximization Problem of the Japanese Household
We include there many details excluded from Section II for brevity. The dynamic budget constraint of
Japanese households (which holds state by state) is:

                                  1     ∗
                                       YNT,t + p∗F,t YF,t + πt∗        1      ∗
                                                                             CNT,t + p∗H,t CH,t
                                                                                            ∗ + p∗ C ∗
                                 ∑                                    ∑
                                                                                                 F,t F,t
                                                                  =                                        ,
                                t =0
                                                 R∗t                  t =0
                                                                                        R∗t

where πt∗ are the financiers’ profits remittances to the Japanese, π0∗ = 0, π1∗ = Q0 ( R − R∗ e1 /e0 )/e1 .
   The static utility maximization problem of the Japanese household:

                       χ∗t ln CNT,t
                               ∗              ∗
                                                  + a∗t ln CF,t
                                                            ∗
                                                                + λ∗t CEt∗ − CNT,t
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                   − p∗H,t CH,t
                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                − p∗F,t CF,t
                                                                                                         ∗
                                                                                                             
          ∗
            max∗   ∗
                                    + ξ t ln CH,t                                                              ,
          CNT,t ,CH,t ,CF,t


where CEt∗ is aggregate consumption expenditure of the Japanese household, λ∗t is the associated Lagrange
multiplier, p∗H is the Yen price in Japan of US tradables, and p∗F is the Yen price in Japan of Japanese trad-

                                                                      A.3
ables. Standard optimality conditions imply:

                                ∗        χ∗t                           ξt                               a∗t
                               CNT,t =       ;       p∗H,t CH,t
                                                            ∗
                                                                =          ;             p∗F,t CF,t
                                                                                                ∗
                                                                                                    =       .
                                         λ∗t                           λ∗t                              λ∗t

Our assumption that YNT,t∗   = χ∗t , combined with the market clearing condition for Japanese non-tradables
YNT,t = CNT,t , implies that in equilibrium λ∗t = 1. We obtain:
 ∗       ∗


                                           p∗H,t CH,t
                                                  ∗
                                                      = ξt;            p∗F,t CF,t
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                  = a∗t .

A.1.C    The Euler Equation when there are Several Goods
We state the general Euler equation when there are several goods.
    With utility ut (Ct ) + βut+1 (Ct+1 ), where Ct is the vector of goods consumed (for instance, Ct =
(CNT,t , CH,t , CF,t ) in our setup), if the consumer is at his optimum, we have:

Lemma A.1. When there are several goods, the Euler equation is:

                                                        utc+  1 /p
                                                 "                             #
                                                           j,t+1   j,t+1
(A.8)                                   1 = Et βR                                  for all i, j.
                                                           utci,t /pi,t

       This should be understood in “nominal” terms, i.e. the return R is in units of the (potentially arbitrary)
numéraire.
       Proof. It is a variant on the usual one: the consumer can consume dε fewer dollars’ worth (assuming
that the “dollar” is the local unit of account) of good i at time t (hence, consume dci,t = − pdε ), invest
                                                                                                      i,t
them at rate R, and consume the proceeds, i.e. Rdε more dollars of good j at time t + 1 (hence, consume
dc j,t+1 = pRdε ). The total utility change is:
           j,t+1

                                                                                                    
                   dU = utci,t dci,t + βEt utc+  1
                                              j,t+1
                                                    dc j,t+1 = Et −utci,t /pi,t + βRutc+  1
                                                                                       j,t+1
                                                                                             /p j,t+1 dε.

At the margin, the consumer should be indifferent, so dU = 0, hence (A.8). 
     Applying this to our setup, with i = j = NT, with p NT,t = 1 and utc NT,t =                                 χt
                                                                                                                CNT,t   = 1 for t = 0, 1, we
             h       i
obtain: 1 = E βR 1/1
                  1/1 , hence R = 1/β.


A.1.D     Price Indices, Nominal and Real Exchange Rates
We explore here the relationship between the nominal and the real CPI-based exchange rate in our frame-
work. The real exchange rate can be defined as the ratio of two broad price levels, one in each country,
expressed in the same numéraire. It is most common to use consumer price indices (CPI) adjusted by the
                                                      ∗
nominal exchange rate, in which case one has: E ≡ PP e . Notice that a fall in E is a US Dollar real apprecia-
tion.
      Consider the nominal version of the basic Gamma model in Section IV. Standard calculations reported
below imply that the real CPI-based exchange rate is:
                                                            0         ∗0              ∗0
                                                    ( p∗H )ξ ( p∗F ) a ( p∗NT )χ
(A.9)                                      E = θ̃                     0              0     et ,
                                                     ( p H ) a0 ( p F )ι ( p NT )χ

where θ̃ is a function of exogenous shocks and primed variables are normalized by θ. The above equation
is the most general formulation of the relationship between the CPI-RER and the nominal exchange rate in
the Gamma model.
     Let us first derive the price indices { P, P∗ }. The US price index P is defined as the minimum cost, in



                                                                A.4
units of the numéraire (money), of obtaining one unit of the consumption basket:
                                                           ωt                                                                            θ1
                                                   Mt                                                           at                              t
                                   Ct ≡                                                  χt
                                                                     (CNT,t ) (CH,t ) (CF,t )                                         ιt
                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                   Pt

Let us define a “primed” variable as being normalized by the sum of the preference coefficients θt ; so that,
                0
for example, χt ≡ χθtt . Substituting the optimal demand for goods (see the first order conditions at the
beginning of Section IV) in the consumption basket formula we have:

                                                  ω 0                     a0                          ι0                              χ0
                                            0                   0  P                       P 0                              0    P
                                   1= ωP                         a                        ι                              χ                              .
                                                                   pH                       pF                                   p NT

Hence:                                                                                                                            
                                         0         0                   0          0      0 0           0     0      0     0      0
                           P = ( p H ) a ( p F )ι ( p NT )χ                    ( ωt ) − ωt ( ι t ) − ι t ( a t ) − at ( χ t ) − χt .

The part in square brackets is a residual and not so interesting. Similarly for Japan, we have:
                                                                                                  
                                  0         ∗0        ∗0   0   ∗0   0     0      0    ∗0    0   ∗0
                     P∗ = ( p∗H )ξ ( p∗F ) a ( p∗NT )χ (ωt∗ )−ωt (ξ t )−ξ t ( a∗t )− at (χ∗t )−χt .

The CPI-RER in equation (A.9) is then obtained by substituting the price indices above in the definition of
                               ∗
the real exchange rate E ≡ PP e . For completeness, we report below the full expression for the function θ̃
that enters in equation (A.9):
                                                        0         ∗0       0         0                0        ∗0            0             ∗0
                                                 (ωt∗ )−ωt (ξ t )−ξ t ( a∗t )−at (χ∗t )−χt
                                       θ˜t =                0          0       0     0            0        0         0            0             .
                                                       ( ωt ) − ωt ( ι t ) − ι t ( a t ) − at ( χ t ) − χt
If we impose further assumptions on Equation (A.9), we can derive some useful special cases.
The Basic Gamma Model Assume that ω = ω ∗ = 0 and p NT = p∗NT = 1 so that there is no money
and the numéraire in each economy is the non-tradable good. Recall that in the basic Gamma model of
Section II the law of one price holds for tradables, so we have p H = p∗H e and p F = p∗F e. Equation (A.9)
                               0   0         ∗0    0        ∗0
then reduces to: E = θ̃ ( p H )ξ − a ( p F ) a −ι eχ . This equation describes the relationship between the RER as
defined in the basic Gamma model and the CPI-based RER. Notice that the two are close proxies of each
                                                                                                0   0       0    0
other whenever the baskets’ shares of tradables are symmetric across countries (i.e. ξ ≈ a and a∗ ≈ ι )
                                                                                             0
and the non-tradable goods are a large fraction of the Japanese overall basket (i.e. χ∗ ≈ 1).

The Basic Complete Market Model We maintain all the assumptions from the paragraph above on
the Basic Gamma model, except that we now assume markets to be complete and frictionless. Recall from
                                                                                                                                                            0   0   ∗0   0   ∗0
Lemma 3 that we then obtain et = ν. Hence, the CPI-RER now follows: E = θ̃ ( p H )ξ − a ( p F ) a −ι νχ .
Notice that while the real exchange rate (e) is constant in complete markets in the basic Gamma model, the
CPI-RER will in general not be constant as long as the CPI baskets are not symmetric and relative prices of
goods move.

A.1.E    The Backus and Smith Condition
In the spirit of re-deriving some classic results of international macroeconomics with the Gamma model,
let us analyze the Backus and Smith condition (Backus and Smith (1993)). Let us first consider the basic
Gamma set-up but with the additional assumption of complete markets as in Lemma 3. Then by equating
marginal utility growth in the two countries and converting, via the exchange rate, in the same units, we




                                                                                   A.5
         P0 C0 /θ0       P0∗ C0∗ /θ0∗ e0
have:    P1 C1 /θ1   =   P1∗ C1∗ /θ1∗ e1 .   Re-arranging we conclude:

                                                             C0 /θ0  C ∗ /θ ∗ E
(A.10)                                                              = 0∗ 0∗ 0 ,
                                                             C1 /θ1  C1 /θ1 E1
                                                                       ∗
where the reader should recall the definition E = PP e . This is the Backus and Smith condition in our set-up
under complete markets: the perfect risk sharing benchmark equation.
    Of course, this condition fails in the basic Gamma model because agents not only cannot trade all
Arrow-Debreu claims, but also have to trade with financiers in the presence of limited commitment prob-
lems. In our framework (Section II), however, an extended version of this condition holds:

                                                           C0 /θ0  C ∗ /θ ∗ E e
(A.11)                                                            = 0∗ 0∗ 0 1 .
                                                           C1 /θ1  C1 /θ1 E1 e0

The simple derivation of this result is reported below. The above equation is the extended Backus-Smith
condition that holds in our Gamma model. Notice that our condition in equation (A.11) differs from the
standard Backus-Smith condition in equation (A.10) by the growth rate of the “nominal” exchange rate ee01 .
Since exchange rates are much more volatile in the data than consumption, this omitted term creates an
ample wedge between the complete market and the Gamma version of the Backus-Smith condition.
    The condition in equation (A.11) can be verified as follows:

                                  C0 /θ0  C ∗ /θ ∗ E e  P C /θ    P∗ C ∗ /θ ∗ 1  1
                                         = 0∗ 0∗ 0 1 ⇐⇒ 0 0 0 = 0∗ 0∗ 0∗ ⇐⇒     = ,
                                  C1 /θ1  C1 /θ1 E1 e0  P1 C1 /θ1 P1 C1 /θ1   1  1
                                                                                              ∗
where the first equivalence simply makes use of the definition E ≡ PP e , and the second equivalence follows
from Pt Ct = θt and Pt∗ Ct∗ = θt∗ for t = 0, 1. These latter equalities (we focus here on the US case) can
be recovered by substituting the households’ demand functions for goods in the static household budget
constraint: Pt Ct = CNT,t + p H,t CH,t + p F,t CF,t = χt + at + ι t = θt .


                                              A.2     E XTENSIONS OF THE M ODEL
A.2.A        Japanese Households and the Carry Trade
In most of the main body of the paper, consumers do not do the carry trade themselves. In this subsection,
we extend Proposition 6 by analyzing the case in which Japanese consumers buy a quantity f ∗ of dollar
bonds, financing the purchase by shorting an equivalent amount of Yen bonds. We let this demand take the
form:
                                             f ∗ = b ( R − R∗ ) .
Recall that Proposition 6 assumes R < R∗ , so that if b ≥ 0 the Japanese household demand is a form of
carry trade. The flow equations now are:

                                               NX0 + Q + f ∗ = 0;          NX1 − R ( Q + f ∗ ) = 0.

We summarize the implications for the equilibrium carry trade in the Proposition below.

Proposition A.1. Assume ξ t = 1 for t = 0, 1, R < R∗ and that Japanese consumers do the carry trade in amount
f ∗ , the expected return to the carry trade in the Gamma model is:
                                                             R∗
                                                      c         E [ ι 1 ] − ι 0 + f ∗ (1 + R ∗ )
                                                    R =   Γ R                    ∗               .
                                                           ( R∗ + Γ) ι0 + RR E [ι1 ] − Γ f ∗

Hence the carry trade return is bigger: (i) when R∗ /R is higher, (ii) when the funding country is a net foreign creditor,
and (iii) when consumers do the carry trade less ( f ∗ increases).


                                                                       A.6
    If consumers do the carry trade on too large a scale ( f ∗ too negative), then the carry trade becomes
               c
unprofitable, R < 0.

A.2.B      Endogenizing the Number of Financiers
In the basic model, there is a fixed quantity of financiers. We now show a possible way to endogenize entry
of financiers. This will confirm that the first order results of the paper are unchanged, except that γ is now
endogenous.            h          i       ∗
    We call Ω = E0 1 − ee10 RR the expected discounted return of currency trading. Suppose that each
potential trader has an incentive constraint of the form:

                                                                                   q2
                                                                        
                                                                     ∗ e1
                                               V0 ≡ Ωq0 = E0 β R − R         q0 ≥ G 0 ,
                                                                       e0          e0

and we have G = g (var0 (e1 ))α for a parameter g. Hence g and G are the agent’s γ and Γ. Using Rβ = 1,
this entails an individual demand:
                                                      Ωe0
                                               q0 =       ,
                                                        G
and a benefit
                                                 Ω 2 e0      Ω 2 e0
                                    V0 = Ωq0 =          =               .
                                                   G      g var0 (e1 )α
In the spirit of Jeanne and Rose (2002), we posit that financiers decide to enter at date −1 (before the values
of ι0 , E0 [ι1 ] are realized, hence before the actual expected currency trading return is known). Potential
financier i enters if and only if E−1 [V0 ] ≥ κi , where κi is a (perhaps psychological) cost drawn from a
distribution with CDF F ( x ) = P (κi ≤ x ). This implies that the mass n of financiers is
                                                   h               i 
                                        n = F E−1 Ω2 e0 var0 (e1 )−α /g .

The aggregate demand at time 0 is then:

                                                                           Ωe0
                                                       Q0 = nq0 = n                  .
                                                                       g var0 (e1 )α
                                  Ωe0
Hence, we have Q0 =            γ var0 (e1 )α
                                               with

                                                                       g
(A.12)                                                            γ=     ,
                                                                       n
so that
                                                                       g
(A.13)                                            γ=         h                i .
                                                       F E−1 Ω2 e0 var0 (e1 )−α /g

Hence, we have a fixed point determining γ, since e0 and e1 depend on γ.
    Starting after date 0, the analysis is exactly like in the paper, except that the value of γ is pinned down
by considerations at time −1.
                                                                                                     ( 1 + Γ ) ι 0 + E0 [ ι 1 ]
    For instance, take our baseline case, where R = R∗ = 1. From Proposition 1, e0 =                         2+ Γ               ,
       Γ(ι0 −E0 [ι1 ])
Ω=    (1+Γ)ι0 +E0 [ι1 ]
                        ,   and γ solves:
                                                                                    !
                                        Γ (γ)2 (ι0 − E0 [ι1 ])2 var0 (e1 )−α
(A.14)           g = γF        E−1 [                                           ]         with Γ (γ) = γ var0 (ι1 )α .
                                     [(1 + Γ (γ)) ι0 + E0 [ι1 ]] (2 + Γ (γ)) g




                                                                  A.7
We note that the government might wish to subsidize entry in the financial sector so to effectively remove
the financial constraint. This is a property common to many models of financial imperfections: for example
if the financiers had limited capital as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997); Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010); Brun-
nermeier and Sannikov (2014); He and Krishnamurthy (2013), the government would want to recapitalize
them in many states of the world.59 Like those papers, we do not consider the optimal subsidy to financiers.
One reason for this is that in practice, it is difficult as the government might be facing frictions with the fi-
nanciers such as moral hazard or adverse selection. For example, the government might want to screen for
“smart” FX traders that stabilize FX markets, and not subsidize noise traders, who might actually worsen
the situation (they would be creating f , f ∗ shocks in our model).60

A.2.C       A “Short-Run” Vs “Long-Run” Analysis
As in undergraduate textbooks, it is handy to have a notion of the “long run”. We develop here a way to
introduce it in our model. We have periods of unequal length: we say that period 0 is short, but period “1”
lasts for a length T. The equilibrium flow equations in the dollar-yen market become:

                                                          ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Q0 = 0,
(A.15)                                            T (ξ 1 e1 − ι1 ) − RQ0 = 0.

The reason for the “T” is that the imports and exports will occur over T periods. We assume a zero interest
rate “within period 1”. This already gives a good notion of the “long run”.61
     Some extra simplicity is obtained by taking the limit T → ∞. The interpretation is that period 1 is “very
long” and period 0 is “very short”. The flow equation (A.15) can be written: ξ 1 e1 − ι1 − RQ  0
                                                                                              T = 0. So in the
large T limit we obtain: ξ 1 e1 − ι1 = 0. Economically, it means the trades absorbed by the financiers are very
small compared to the trades in the goods markets in the long run. We summarize the environment and its
solution in the following proposition.62

Proposition A.2. Consider a model with a “long-run”       i Then, the flow equations become ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Q0 =
                                                h last period.        ∗
0 and ξ 1 e1 − ι1 = 0, while we still have Q0 = Γ1 E e0 − e1 RR . The exchange rates become:
                                                        h i
                                                  R∗
                                                  R E           + Γι0
                                                           ι1
                                                           ξ1                        ι1
                                           e0 =                           ;   e1 =      .
                                                      1 + Γξ 0                       ξ1

     In this view, the “long run” is determined by fundamentals e1 = ξι1 , while the “short run” is determined
                                                                       1
both by fundamentals and financial imperfections (Γ) with short-run considerations (ι0 , ξ 0 ). In the simple
                                          Γι +E[ι ]
case R = R∗ = ξ t = 1, we obtain: e0 = 0Γ+1 1 and e1 = ι1 .

Application to the carry trade with three periods. In the 3-period carry trade model of Section III.A,
we take period 2 to be the “long run”. We assume that in period t = 1 financiers only intermediate the new
flows; stocks arising from previous flows are held passively by the households (long term investors) until
t=2. That allows us to analyze more clearly the dynamic environment. Without the “long-run” period 2,
the expressions are less intelligible, but the economics is the same.
  59 We   thank a referee for remarks along these lines.
  60 With endogenous entry, the FX intervention considered in Section III.B will also ex ante affect entry, similarly to the

analysis in Jeanne and Rose (2002). We leave this interesting analysis to future research.
  61 The solution is simply obtained by Proposition 3, setting eι1 = Tι1 , ξe1 = Tξ 1 .
                                                           ι1 = Tι1 , ξe1 = Tξ 1 , and take the limit T → ∞.
  62 One derivation is as follows. Take Proposition 3, set e




                                                                A.8
A.2.D      The Fama Regression over Longer Horizons
We take the context of the Fama regresssion in the paper, and now consider the Fama regression over a
2-period horizon:
                                  1 e2 − e0
                                            = α + βU IP,2 ( R − R∗ ) + ε 1
                                  2 e0
i.e. regressing (normalized) the 2-period return on the interest rate differential. We assume that Γ1 is
deterministic.
                                                  1+Γ1 /2
Lemma A.2. The coefficient βU IP,2 =           (1+Γ0 )(1+Γ1 )
                                                              ,   while the UIP coefficient in a 1-period regression is βU IP,1 ≡
            1+ Γ1 − Γ0
βU IP =   (1+Γ0 )(1+Γ1 )
                         ,   as in the main text.

    Proof We evaluate the derivative at R = R∗ = 1, and for simplicity take the case Γ1 deterministic.
                            h         i
                              e2 − e0
                    −1   ∂E      e0       −1 ∂                  Γ0 + 1
          βU IP,2 =                     =
                            ∂R∗            2 ∂R∗ Γ ι + R∗ E Γ1 ι1 +R∗ ι2
                                                                    h         i
                     2
                                                        0 0            Γ1 +1
                    1 Γ0 + 1             Γ1 ι 1 + ι 2
                                                                                               
                                                                 ι2          1 1                   1
                  =                   E                 +  E             ] =            1 + E
                    2 ( Γ0 + 1)2          Γ1 + 1               Γ1 + 1        2 Γ0 + 1           Γ1 + 1
                             1       2 + Γ1              1 + Γ1 /2
                       =                           =                     .
                             2 ( Γ0 + 1) (1 + Γ1 )   (1 + Γ0 ) (1 + Γ1 )
     
     Hence, we have 1 ≥ βU IP,2 as often found empirically. Furthermore, we have βU IP,2 ≥ βU IP,1 if
and only if Γ1 ≤ 2Γ0 . For instance, suppose that Γ1 and Γ0 are drawn from the same distribution. Then,
E [ βU IP,2 ] ≥ E [ βU IP,1 ]: this means that as the horizon expands, the coefficient of the Fama regression is
closer to 1. This is consistent with the empirical evidence that the Fama regression coefficient is higher, and
closer to 1, at long horizons (Chinn and Meredith (2005)).


  A.3        M ODEL E XTENSIONS : M ULTI -C OUNTRY, M ULTI -A SSET M ODEL ,
                AND A DDITIONAL M ATERIAL ON THE VARIANCE IN THE
                                    C ONSTRAINT
We provide below generalizations of the model. In particular, we develop a multi-asset, multi-country
model.

A.3.A      Verification of the tractability of the model when the variance is in the constraint
In the paper, we propose a formulation of Γ = γvar (e1 )α . We verify that it leads to a tractable model in the
core parts of the paper. In this subsection of the appendix, we check that we also keep a tractable model in
a more general model with T periods.
     When ξ t is deterministic, the formulation remains tractable. We obtain each Γt in closed form.63 Let us
   63 However, when ξ is stochastic, the formulation is more complex. We obtain a fixed point problem not just in Γ
                       t                                                                                            0
(like in the 2-period model), but in (Γ0,..., Γ T −1 ).




                                                                   A.9
work out explicitly a 3-period example. We take ξ t = R = R∗ = 1 for simplicity. The equations are:

                                         e0 − ι0 + Q0 = 0,
                                   e1 − ι1 − Q0 + Q1 = 0,
                                         e2 − ι2 − Q1 = 0,
                                                                Et [ e t − e t +1 ]
                                                           Qt =                     for t = 0, 1,
                                                                        Γt
                                                           Γt = γ vart (et+1 )α .

 Notice that the model at t = 1, 2 is like the basic model with 2 periods, except for the pseudo-import term
eι1 = ι1 − Q1 . Hence, we have {e2 } = {ι2 }, and

(A.16)                                                       Γ1 = γσι2α
                                                                     2
                                                                        .

                                                                                                       1+ Γ1
This also implies that (by Proposition 3 applied to (e1 , e2 ) rather than (e0 , e1 )): {e1 } =        2+ Γ1   {ι1 }, which
gives:
                                                                                 2α
                                                                  1 + Γ1
                                                              
(A.17)                                         Γ0 = γ                    σι            ,
                                                                  2 + Γ1 1

so we endogenize Γ0 . Note that the σι1 is, in general, the variance of pseudo-imports, hence it would include
the volatility due to financial flows. Notice also that fundamental variance is endogenously amplified by the
imperfect financial market: var (e1 ) depends positively on Γ1 , that itself depends positively on fundamental
variance.
     The same idea and procedure applies to an arbitrary number of periods, and indeed to the infinite
period model. We could also have correlated innovations in ι t .

A.3.B     A tractable multi-country model
We call eit the exchange rate of country i at date t, with a high eit being an appreciation of country i’s currency
versus the USD. There is a central country 0, for which we normalize e0t = 1 at all dates t. As a short hand,
we call this country “the US”. For i 6= j, call ξ ij < 0 exports of country i to country j (minus the Cobb-
Douglas weight), and xi = −ξ i0 > 0 exports of country i to country 0. Define the import weight as:

                                              ξ ii ≡ −             ∑           ξ ji > 0,
                                                              j=0,...,n,j6=i

so that ξ ii equals total imports of country i. Call θi the holdings of country i’s bonds by financiers, expressed
in number of bonds: so, the dollar value of those bond holdings is qi ≡ θi ei0 .
     Hence, the net demand for currency i in the currency i / USD spot market, expressed in dollars, is:

(A.18)                                        −   ∑ ξ ij0 e0j + xi0 + θi ei0 , = 0,
                                                  j 6 =0


and has to be 0 in market equilibrium. Indeed, at time 0 the country imports a dollar value ξ ii0 ei0 , creating a
negative demand −ξ ii0 ei0 for the currency. It also exports a dollar value − ∑ j6=0 ξ ij0 e0j + xi0 (recall that ξ ij < 0
for i 6= j); as those exports are repatriated, they lead to a demand for the currency. Finally, financiers
demand a dollar value θi ei0 of the country’s bonds. Using qi ≡ θi ei0 , equation (A.18) can be rewritten in
vector form:

(A.19)                                             − ξ 0 e0 + x0 + q = 0.

The flow equation at time t = 1 is (again, net demand for currency i in the dollar-currency i market,



                                                                A.10
expressed in dollars):

(A.20)                                   −   ∑ ξ ij1 e1j + xi1 − θi ei1 + Πi = 0
                                             j 6 =0


where Πi is the time-1 rebate of financiers profits to country i. In the first equation, imports enter as −ξ ii0 ei0 <
0, creating a net negative demand for currency i, and exports to other countries enter as − ∑ j6=0,i ξ ij0 e0j > 0.
     Total financiers’ profit is: Π ≡ ∑i Πi = ∑i θi ei1 − ei0 . We posit the following rule for the rebate Πi to
                                                             

country i: Πi = θi ei1 − ei0 . Then, (A.20) becomes: − ∑ j6=0 ξ ij1 e1j + xi1 − θi ei0 = 0, i.e., in vector form:
                            


(A.21)                                                − ξ 1 e1 + x1 − q = 0.

Finally, we will have the generalized demand for assets:
                                                     h        i
(A.22)                                    q = Γ −1 E e 1 − e 0 ,

where q, et are vectors, and Γ is a matrix. We provide a derivation of this demand in section A.3.C. The
financiers buy a dollar value qi of country i’s bonds at time 0, and − ∑in=1 qi dollar bonds, so that the net
time-0 value of their initial position is 0. The correspondence with the basic Gamma model (with only 2
countries) is q = − Q, xit = ιit .
     We summarize the set-up below.
Lemma A.3. In the extended n-country model, the basic equations describing the vectors of exchange rates et are:

(A.23)                                                ξ 0 e0 − x0 − q = 0,
(A.24)                                                ξ 1 e1 − x1 + q = 0,
                                                            h       i
(A.25)                                                   E e1 − e0 = Γq.

    Those are exactly the equations of the 2−country model (with QGamma = −qhere ), and ιGamma = xhere ,
but with n countries (so et ∈ Rn−1 ). Hence the solution is the same (using matrices). We assume that ξ 1 is
deterministic.
Proposition A.3. The exchange rates in the n−country model are given by the following vectors:
                                              −1                  h i
(A.26)               e0 = ξ 0 + ξ 1 + ξ 1 Γξ 0         1 + ξ 1 Γ x0 + E x1 ,
                                               −1                h i  −1 n o
(A.27)               e1 = ξ 0 + ξ 1 + ξ 0 Γξ 1        x0 + 1 + ξ 0 Γ E x1 + ξ 1   x1 .

     Hence, the above model has networks of trade in goods, and multi-country asset demand.

A.3.C     Derivation of the multi-asset, multi-country demand
We derive the financiers’ demand function in a multi-asset case. We start with a general asset case, and then
specialize our results to exchange rates.

A.3.C.1    General asset pricing case
     Basic case We use notations that are valid in general asset pricing, as this makes the exposition
clearer and more general. We suppose that there are assets a = 1, . . . , A, with initial price p0 , and period 1
payoffs p1 (all in R A ). Suppose that the financiers hold a quantity position θ ∈ R A of those assets, so that
the terminal value is θ · p1 . We want to compute the equilibrium price at time 0.
     Let                                               h i
                                               π = E p1 − p0 ,


                                                             A.11
denote the expected gain (a vector), and                         
                                                         V = var p1 ,

denote the variance-covariance matrix of period 1 payoffs.
    Given a matrix G, our demand will generate the relation

(A.28)                                                      π = Gθ ∗ ,
                                                                                                             h        ∗
                                                                                                                        i
This is a generalization to an arbitrary number of assets of the basic demand of Lemma 2, Q0 = Γ1 E e0 − e1 RR .
The traditional mean-variance case is G = γV. The present machinery yields more general terms: for exam-
ple, we could have G = V H 0 , for a “twist” matrix H. The mean-variance case is H = γIn , for a risk-aversion
scalar γ. The H can, however, represent deviations from that benchmark, e.g. source-dependent risk aver-
sion (if H = diag (γ1 , ..., γ A ), we have a “risk aversion" scalar γa for source a), or tractability-inducing twists
(our main application here). Hence, the machinery we develop here will allow to go beyond the traditional
mean-variance setup.
     The financiers’ profits (in dollars) are: θ · p1 − p0 , and their expected value is θ 0 π, where π :=
                                                                

E p1 − p0 . We posit that financiers solve:
   


                                                 max θ 0 π s.t. θ 0 π ≥ θ 0 Sθ,
                                                 θ∈R A

where S is a symmetric, positive semi-definite matrix. This is a limited commitment constraint: the fi-
nanciers’ outside option is θ 0 Sθ. Hence, the incentive-compatibility condition is θ 0 π ≥ θ 0 Sθ. Again, this is a
generalization (to an arbitrary number of assets) of the constraint in the paper in Equation (8).
    The problem implies:
                                                    π = Sθ ∗ ,
where θ ∗ is the equilibrium θ.64
   Hence, we would deliver (A.28) if we could posit S = G. However, this is not exactly possible, because
S must be symmetric, and G is not necessarily symmetric.
   We posit that the outside option θ 0 Sθ equals:65

                                                                    1θi∗ 6=0
(A.29)                                           θ 0 Sθ ≡   ∑ θi2     θi∗
                                                                               Gij θ j∗ ,
                                                            i,j

where θ is chosen by the financier under consideration, and θ ∗ is the equilibrium demand of other financiers
(in equilibrium, θ = θ ∗ ). This functional form captures the fact that as the portfolio or balance sheet expands
(θi high), it is “more complex” and the outside option of the financiers increases. In addition (if say G = γV),
it captures that high variance assets tighten the constraint more (perhaps again because they are more
“complex” to monitor). The non-diagonal terms indicate that “similar” assets (as measured by covariance)
matter. Finally, the positions of other financiers matter. Mostly, this assumption is made for convenience.
However, it captures the idea (related to Basak and Pavlova (2013)) that the positions of other traders
influence the portfolio choice of a given trader. The influence here is mild: when G is diagonal, there is no
influence at all.
     We will make the assumption that

(A.30)                               ∀i, sign (πi∗ ) = sign (θi∗ ) , where π ∗ ≡ Gθ ∗ .

This implies that S is a positive semi-definite matrix: for instance, when θi∗ 6= 0, ∑ j θ1∗ Gij θ j∗ ≥ 0. Equation
                                                                                           i
(A.30) means that the sign of the position θi∗ is equal to the sign of the expected return πi . This is a mild
   64 The proof is as follows. Set up the Lagrangian L = θ 0 π + λ ( θ 0 π − θ 0 Sθ ). The first-order condition reads 0 = L 0 =
                                                                                                                            θ
( + λ) π − 2λSθ. So, π = 12λ                                           0    0      2λ 0              0      0
 1                                     +λ Sθ. Left-multiplying by θ yields θ π = 1+λ θ Sθ. Since θ π ≥ θ Sθ, we need λ ≥ 1.
Hence, π = Sθ.
   65 This is, S = 1       1         ∗     ∗                    ∗
                ij   i = j θ ∗ Gij θ j if θi 6 = 0, Sij = 0 if θi = 0.
                        i




                                                                  A.12
assumption that rules out situations where hedging terms are very large.
    We summarize the previous results. Recall that we assume (A.30).

Proposition A.4. (General asset pricing case: foundation for the financiers’ demand) With the above set-up, the
financiers’ equilibrium holdings θ ∗ satisfy:
                                               h        i
(A.31)                                        E p1 − p0 = Gθ ∗ ,

with G a matrix. When G is invertible, we obtain the demand θ ∗ = G −1 E p1 − p0 .
                                                                               


     Proof: First, take the case θi∗ 6= 0. Deriving (A.29) w.r.t. θi : 2 (Sθ )i = ∑ j 2θ        i     ∗               ∗
                                                                                            θi∗ Gij θ j , so that ( Sθ )i =
∑ j Gij θ j∗ = ( Gθ ∗ )i . When θi∗ = 0, assumption (A.30) implies again (Sθ ∗ )i = ∑ j Sij θ j∗ = 0 = πi∗ = ( Gθ ∗ )i .
     Thus, Sθ ∗ = Gθ ∗ . Hence, the set-up induces π = Sθ ∗ = Gθ ∗ . 

Proposition A.5. Suppose that we can write G = V H 0 , for some matrix H. Then, a riskless portfolio simply offers
the riskless US return, and in that sense the model is arbitrage-free.

    Proof: Suppose that you have a riskless, 0-investment portfolio κ: κ 0 V = 0. Given π = V H 0 θ ∗ , we have
κ0 π= κ 0 Gθ ∗ = κ 0 V H 0 θ ∗ = 0, i.e. the portfolio has 0 expected return, hence, as it is riskless, the portfolio
has 0 return. 
    Proposition A.7 offers a stronger statement that the model is arbitrage-free.

A.3.C.2        Extension with derivatives and other redundant assets
The reader may wish to initially skip the following extension. When there are redundant assets (like deriva-
tives), some care needs to be taken when handling indeterminacies (as many portfolios are functionally
equivalent). Call Θ the full portfolio, including redundant assets, and Pt the full price vector. We say that
assets a ≤ B are a basis, and we reduce the portfolio Θ into its “basis-equivalent” portfolio in the basis,
θ ∈ RB , with price pt , defined by:

                                        Θ · P1 = θ · p1 ,    for all states of the world.

For instance, if asset c is redundant and equal to asset a minus asset b (p1c = p1a − p1b ), then (θ a , θb ) =
( Θ a + Θ c , Θ b − Θ c ).
      More generally, partition the full portfolio into basis assets Θ B and derivative assets Θ D , Θ = (Θ B , Θ D ),
and similarly partition prices in P = ( p, p D ). We sometimes write p B rather than p when this clarifies
matters. As those assets are redundant, there is a matrix Z such that

                                                            p1D = Zp1 .

Then, the basis-equivalent portfolio is θ = Θ B + Z 0 Θ D .66
     Then, we proceed as above, with the “basis-equivalent portfolio”. This gives the equilibrium pricing
of the basis assets, p0B . Then, derivatives are priced by arbitrage:

                                                            p0D = Zp0 ,

A.3.C.3        Formulation with a Stochastic Discount Factor
The following section is more advanced, and may be skipped by the reader.
     It is often useful to represent pricing via a Stochastic Discount Factor (SDF). Let us see how to do that
here. Call w = P10 Θ = p10 θ the time-1 wealth of the financiers. Recall that we have π = Gθ ∗ , with G = V H 0 .
     If we had traditional mean-variance preferences, with π = γVθ ∗ , we could use a SDF: M = 1 − γ {w},
for a scalar γ. We want to generalize that idea.
  66 Proof:   the payoffs are Θ0 P1 = Θ0B p1 + Θ0D p1D = Θ0B p1 + Θ0D Zp1B = θ 0 p1B with θ 0 = Θ0B + Θ0D Z.


                                                               A.13
    As before, we define
                                                     { X } ≡ X − E[ X ]
to be the innovation to a random variable X.
     Recall that we are given B basis assets a = 1, . . . , B (i.e., p1a a=1,...,B are linearly independent), while
                                                                        

assets a = B + 1, ..., A are derivatives (e.g. forward contracts), and so their payoffs are spanned by the
vector p1a a≤ B .
     Next, we choose a linear operator Ψ for the basis assets that maps random variables into random
variables.67 It is characterized by:
                           n o             n o
                         Ψ p1a = ∑ Hab p1b for a = 1, . . . , B, and for b = 1, . . . , B,
                                     b

or, more compactly:                              n o    n o
                                                Ψ p1 = H p1 .

This is possible because p1a are linearly independent. The operator extends to the whole space S of traded
                        

assets (including redundant assets).

Proposition A.6. The pricing is given by the SDF:

(A.32)                                               M = 1 − Ψ {w} ,

where w = P10 Θ = p10 θ is the time-1 wealth of the financiers.

Proposition A.7. If the shocks p1 are bounded and the norm of matrix H, k H k, is small enough, then M > 0 and
                                 

the model is arbitrage-free.

     In addition, it shows that the SDF depends linearly on the agents’ total terminal wealth w, including
their proceeds from positions in derivatives.
     Proof. We need to check that this SDF generates: p0 = E Mp1 . Letting M = 1 − m with m = Ψ {w},
                                                                  

we need to check that p0 = E p1 − mp1 = E p1 − E mp1 , i.e. π := E p1 − p0 = E mp1 . Recall that
                                                                                     

we have π = Gθ = V H 0 θ.
     Hence, we compute:
                           h     i     h           i
                         E mp1a = E p1a (Ψ {w})
                                       "                 #
                                                    n o          h n oi
                                   = E p a ∑ θc Hcb pb
                                          1           1
                                                           = ∑ E p1a p1b Hcb θc
                                               b,c                       b,c
                                    = ∑ Vab H 0             θ = V H0 θ
                                                                        
                                                          bc c               a
                                         b,c

i.e., indeed, E mp1 = V H 0 θ = π. 
                  


A.3.C.4    Application to the FX case in a multi-country set-up
We now specialize the previous machinery to the FX case. In equilibrium, we will indeed have (with
q = (qi )i=1,...,n ):
                                                          h         i
(A.33)                                          q = Γ −1 E e 1 − e 0 ,

  67 Mathematically, call S the space of random payoffs spanned by (linear combinations of) the traded assets,

 p1a a=1,...,B . S is a subset of L2 (Ω), where Ω is the underlying probability space. Ψ: S → S is an operator from S
    

to S, while H is a B × B matrix.



                                                            A.14
and q0 = − ∑in=1 qi ensures ∑in=0 qi = 0. We endogenize this demand, with

(A.34)                                                Γ = γV α ,

where V = var e1 , and var ( x ) = E [ xx 0 ] − E [ x ] E [ x 0 ] is the variance-covariance matrix of a random
                       

vector x. Note that var e1 = var x1 is independent of e0 . Hence, with this endogenous demand, we
                                          

have a model that depends on variance, is arbitrage free, and (we believe) sensible.
    Let us see how the general asset pricing case applies to the FX case. The basis assets are the currencies,
with pt = et , θ a is the position in currency a, and q a = θ a e0a is the initial dollar value of the position. The
position held in dollars is q0 (and we still have e0t = 1 as a normalization). We define
                                                            
(A.35)                                           D = diag e0 ,

so that q = Dθ. We take the G matrix to be

(A.36)                                          G = γV α D,

for scalars γ > 0 and α ≥ 0. Recall that V = var e1 is a matrix. The reader is encouraged to consider
                                                       

the leading case where α = 1. In general, V α is the variance-covariance matrix to the power α: if we write
       0                                                                             0
V = U ΛU for U an orthogonal matrix and Λ = diag (λi ) a diagonal matrix, V α = U diag λiα U.
                                                                                             

Proposition A.8. (FX case: Foundation for the financiers’ demand (A.22)) With the above set-up, the financiers’
equilibrium holding q satisfies:
                                                h       i
(A.37)                                       E e1 − e0 = Γq,

with
                                                    Γ = γV α ,
where γ > 0 and α ≥ 0 are real numbers, and V = var e1 is the variance-covariance matrix of exchange rates. In
                                                          

other terms, when Γ is invertible, we obtain the Gamma demand (A.22), q = Γ−1 E e1 − e0 .
                                                                                      

       Proof. This is a simple correlate of Proposition A.4. This Proposition yields
                                                 h        i
                                                E p1 − p0 = Gθ ∗ ,

Using pt = et , Γ ≡ γV α , G ≡ ΓD, q = Dθ ∗ , we obtain
                                        h        i
                                      E e1 − e0 = Gθ ∗ = ΓDθ ∗ = Γq.


     It may be useful to check the logic by inspecting what this yields in the Basic Gamma model. There,
the outside option of the financiers is given by (A.29) (using θ = −q/e0 , since in the basic Gamma model
the dollar value of the yen position is −q)

                                                                                 q2
                                     θ 0 Sθ = γθ 2 var (e1 )α e0 = γvar (e1 )α      .
                                                                                 e0

The financiers’ maximization problem is thus:
                                                                 
                                                               e
                                       max V0 where V0 := E 1 − 1 q,
                                        q                      e0
                                                                 q2
                                        s.t. V0 ≥ γ var (e1 )α      ,
                                                                 e0


                                                        A.15
                                            q
i.e., the divertable fraction is γvar (e1 )α e0 . It is increasing in q and the variance of the trade (a “complexity”
effect).
       The constraint binds, and we obtain:

                                                                           q2
                                                         
                                                       e1
                                            E 1−            q = γvar (e1 )α ,
                                                       e0                  e0
or,

(A.38)                                      E [e0 − e1 ] = γvar (e1 )α q,

which confirms the intuitive properties of this derivation.

A.3.C.5    Application to the CIP and UIP trades
Suppose that the assets are: dollar bonds paying at time 1, yen bonds paying at time 1 (so that their payoff
is e1 ), and yen futures that pay e1 − F at time 1, where F is the futures’ price. The payoffs (expressed in
dollars) are:
                                              P1 = (1, e1 , e1 − F )0 ,
and the equilibrium time-0 price is:
                                                   P0 = (1, e0 , 0)0 ,
as a futures position requires 0 initial investment.
     Suppose that financiers undertake the CIP trade, i.e. they hold a position:

                                                ΘCIP = (e0 , −1, 1)0 ,

where they are long the dollar, short the yen, and long the future. To review elementary notions in this
language, the initial price is ΘCIP · P0 = 0. The terminal payoff is ΘCIP · P1 = e0 − F, hence, by no arbitrage,
we should have F = e0 .
    The financiers can also engage in the UIP trade; in the elementary UIP trade they are long 1 dollar, and
short the corresponding yen amount:
                                                                0
                                                          −1
                                                      
                                                U IP
                                              Θ      = 1,     ,0 .
                                                           e0
Assume that financiers’ portfolio is composed of C CIP trades, and q UIP trades:

                                                Θ = CΘCIP + qΘU IP .

We expect the risk premia in this economy to come just from the risk currency part (q), not the CIP position
(C ). Let us verify this.
      In terms of the reduced basis, we have

                                                θ CIP = (e0 − F, 0)0 ,
                                                            −1 0
                                                               
                                                θ U IP = 1,        ,
                                                             e0

so that
                                                θ = Cθ CIP + qθ U IP .
Hence, the model confirms that the financiers have 0 exposure to the yen coming from the CIP trade. We
then have
                                            E [e0 − e1 ] = Γq,
with Γ = γvar (e1 )α . The CIP trade, causing no risk, causes no risk premia. We summarize the results in the
following lemmas.


                                                         A.16
Lemma A.4. If the financiers undertake both CIP and UIP trades, only the net positions coming from the UIP trades
induce risk premia.

Lemma A.5. Assume that α ≥ 1, or that V = var x1 is invertible (and α ≥ 0). Then, in the FX model risk-less
                                                           

portfolios earn zero excess returns. In particular, CIP holds in the model, while UIP does not.

    Proof: Define W = γV α−1 D, which is well-defined under the lemma’s assumptions. Then, we can
write G = γV α D as G = VW, and apply Proposition A.5. 


                 A.4        N UMERICAL G ENERALIZATION OF THE M ODEL
We include here a generalization of the basic Gamma model of Section II that relaxes some of the assump-
tions imposed in the main body of the paper for tractability. The generalization of the model in Section
II has to be solved numerically. Our main aim is to verify, at least numerically, that all the core forces of
the basic model carry through to this more general environment. We provide a brief numerical simulation
and stress that this is only a numerical example without any pretense of being a full quantitative assess-
ment. A full quantitative assessment, with its need for further channels and numerical complications, while
interesting, is the domain of future research.

Model Equations Since the model is a generalization of the basic one, we do not restate, in the interest of
space, the entire structure of the economy. We only note here that the model has infinite horizon, symmetric
initial conditions (both countries start with zero bond positions), and report below the system of equations
needed to compute the solution.

                               χt /YNT,t
(A.39) Rt+1      =                                ,
                       β t Et [χt+1 /YNT,t+1 ]
                               χ∗t /YNT,t
                                       ∗
(A.40) R∗t+1     =                                ,
                       β t Et [χt+1 /YNT,t
                         ∗       ∗       ∗
                                             +1 ]
                                                                              ∗ /χ∗
                             "                                                           !                        #
                       1                  YNT,t /χt                   e t   YNT,t    t
                         Et                           + (1 − η ) β∗t                       et Rt+1 − R∗t+1 et+1
                                                                                                                
(A.41)      Qt   =                 ηβ t
                       Γ                YNT,t+1 /χt+1                      ∗
                                                                     et+1 YNT,t      ∗
                                                                                +1 /χt+1
(A.42)      Qt   =     f t et − f t∗ − Dt ,
                                                                      
                                                                  et         ξt ∗      ιt
(A.43)      Dt   =     Dt−1 Rt + (ηQt−1 − et−1 f t−1 ) Rt − R∗t          + et ∗ YNT,t − YNT,t ,
                                                                e t −1       χt        χt

where η is the share of financiers’ profits repatriated to the US, and D are the US net foreign assets. This is
a system of five nonlinear stochastic equations in five endogenous unknowns { R, R∗ , e, Q, D }. We solve the
system numerically by second order approximation. The exogenous variables evolve according to:

(A.44)            ln ι t = (1 − φι ) ln ι t−1 + σι ε ι,t ;            ln ξ t = (1 − φξ ) ln ξ t−1 + σξ ε ξ,t ,
(A.45)               f t = (1 − φ f ) f t−1 + σ f ε f ,t ;              f t∗ = (1 − φ f ) f t∗−1 + σ f ε f ∗ ,t ,
(A.46)               β t = β̄ exp ( xt );                               β∗t = β̄ exp ( xt∗ ),
(A.47)               xt = (1 − φx ) xt−1 + σx ε x,t ;                   xt∗ = (1 − φx ) xt∗−1 + σx ε x∗ ,t ,

where [ε ι , ε ξ , ε f , ε f ∗ , ε x , ε x∗ ] ∼ N (0, I ). We assume that all other processes, including the endowments, are
constant.
    The deterministic steady state is characterized by: {ē = 1, R̄ = R̄∗ = β̄−1 , Q̄ = D̄ = D̄ ∗ = 0}.68 In
order to provide a numerical example of the solution, we briefly report here the chosen parameter values.
We stress that this is not an estimation, but simply a numerical example of the solutions. We set β̄ = 0.985
  68 Note that the deterministic steady state is stationary whenever Γ > 0, which we always assume here (i.e α = 0
from the main text). Similarly the portfolio of the intermediary is determinate via the assumption that households only
actively save in domestic currency and via the limited commitment problem of the intermediary.


                                                             A.17
to imply a steady state annualized interest rate of 6%. We set the share of financiers’ payout to households
at η = 0.5, so that it is symmetric across countries. We set all constant output parameters at 1 (YH = YF =
a = a∗ = 1), except for the value of non-tradables set at 18 (YNT = YNT     ∗ = χ = χ∗ = 18), so that they

account for 90% of the consumption basket. We set Γ = 0.1.69 Finally, we set the shock parameters to:
φι = φξ = 0.018, σι = σξ = 0.037, φ f = 0.0001, σ f = 0.05, φx = 0.0491, σx = 0.0073.
     We report in Table A.1 below a short list of simulated moments.70 For a rough comparison, we also
provide data moments focusing on the GBP/USD exchange rate and US net exports.

                          Table A.1: Numerical Example of Simulated Moments
                                                  Moment                Data     Model
                                                                   
                                                      e
                                               SD te+t 1 − 1            0.1011   0.1269
                                                 φ ( e t +1 , e t )     0.2442   0.0831
                                                        R̄c             0.0300   0.0408
                                                  SD ( Rct )            0.1011   0.1269
                                                  SD (nxt )             0.0335   0.0143
                                               φ(nxt , nxt−1 )          0.0705   0.1438
                                                   SD ( Rt )            0.0479   0.0479
                                                φ ( R t +1 , R t )      0.1821   0.1824

Data and model-simulated moments. The first column reports the standard deviation (SD ( ete+t 1 − 1)) and (one minus) autocor-
relation (φ(et+1 , et )) of exchange rates, the average carry trade return ( R̄c ) and its standard deviation (SD ( Rct )), the standard
deviation (SD (nxt )) and (one minus) the autocorrelation coefficient (φ(nxt , nxt−1 )) of net exports over GDP for the US, and
the standard deviation (SD ( Rt )) and (one minus) autocorrelation of interest rates (φ( Rt+1 , Rt )). Data sources: exchange rate
moments are for the GBP/USD, the carry trade moments are based on Lettau, Maggiori and Weber (2014) assuming the interest
rate differential is 5%, the interest rate moments are based on the yield on the 6-month treasury bill minus a 6-year moving average
of the 6-month rate of change of the CPI. All data are quarterly 1975Q1-2012Q2 (150 observations). The reported moments are
annualized. Model implied moments are computed by simulating 500,000 periods (and dropping the first 100,000). The carry trade
moments are computed selecting periods in the simulation when the interest rate differential is between 4% and 6%.

    Finally, we provide a numerical example of classic UIP regressions. The regression specification fol-
lows:
                             ∆ ln(et+1 ) = α + βU IP [ln( Rt ) − ln( R∗t )] + ε t .
The above regression is the empirical analog to the theoretical results in Section III.A.71 We find a regression
coefficient well below one ( β̂ = 0.33), the level implied by UIP. Indeed, on average we strongly reject UIP
with an average standard error of 0.19. The regression adjusted R2 is also low at 0.018. The results are
broadly in line with the classic empirical literature on UIP.
  69 We   set this conservative value of Γ based on a thought experiment on the aggregate elasticity of the exchange
rate to capital flows. We suppose that an inelastic short-term flow to buy the Dollar, where the scale of the flow is
comparable to 1 year worth of US exports (i.e. f ∗ = 1), would induce the Dollar to appreciate 10%. The numbers
are simply illustrative, but are in broad congruence with the experience of Israel and Switzerland during the recent
financial crisis. Let us revert to the basic Gamma model. Suppose that period 1 is a “long run” during which inflows
have already mean-reverted (so that the model equations are: e0 − 1 + f ∗ + Q = 0, e1 = 1, Q = Γ1 (e0 − e1 )). Then, we
                   Γ    ∗                                         Γ
have e0 = 1 − 1+     Γ f . Hence, the price impact is e0 − 1 = − 1+Γ ' −0.1. This leads to Γ ' 0.1.
   70 The moments are computed by simulating 500,000 periods with pruning. We drop the first 100,000 observations

(burn-in period).
   71 To estimate the regression based on model-produced data, we simulate the model for 500,000 periods, dropping

the first 100,000, and then sample at random 10,000 data intervals of length 150. The length is chosen to reflect the data
span usually available for the modern period of floating currencies (150 quarters). On each data interval, we estimate
the above regression. Finally, we average across the regression output from the 10,000 samples.




                                                                    A.18
                 A.5       P ROOFS FOR THE M AIN B ODY OF THE PAPER
Proof of Proposition 3 The flow equilibrium conditions in the dollar-yen markets are:

(A.48)                                              ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Q0 = 0,
(A.49)                                           ξ 1 e1 − ι1 − RQ0 = 0.

Summing (A.48) and (A.49) gives the intertemporal budget constraint: R (ξ 0 e0 − ι0 ) + ξ 1 e1 − ι1 = 0. From
this, we obtain:

(A.50)                                 e1 = ξ 1−1 ( Rι0 + ι1 − Rξ 0 e0 ) .
                                                                   h                                    i
                                                                                                R∗
The market clearing in the Dollar / Yen market, ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Γ1 E e0 −                         R e1        = 0, gives:

                               R∗
(A.51)                            E [e1 ] = e0 + Γ (ξ 0 e0 − ι0 ) = (1 + Γξ 0 ) e0 − Γι0 .
                               R
Combining (A.50) and (A.51),
                              h                  i   h     i          R                  R
                   E [e1 ] = E ξ 1−1 ( Rι0 + ι1 ) − E ξ 1−1 ξ 0 Re0 = ∗ (1 + Γξ 0 ) e0 − ∗ Γι0 ,
                                                                     R                  R
i.e.
                                    h                   i    h        i         h ∗          i
                         R∗ Γι0
                         R
                                 + E ξ 1−1 ( Rι0 + ι1 )      E R∗ ξ 1−1 + Γ ι0 + E RR ξ 1−1 ι1
                   e0 =                      h    i       =      h        i    
                                               −1
                        R∗ (1 + Γξ 0 ) + E ξ 1
                        R
                                                    ξ0 R         E R∗ ξ 1−1 + Γ ξ 0 + 1
                           h ∗           i
                         E Rξ ι0 + ιR1 + Γι0
                               1
                      = h ∗              i         .
                        E ξ ξ 0 + Rξ 1∗
                            R
                                              + Γξ 0
                             1


We can now calculate e1 . We start from its expected value:
                                                          h ∗i                    h ∗ i
        R ∗                                                E   R
                                                               ξ1   +  Γ   ι 0 + E    R ι1
                                                                                      ξ1 R
            E [e1 ] = (1 + Γξ 0 ) e0 − Γι0 = (1 + Γξ 0 )      h ∗i                       − Γι0
        R                                                      E ξ + Γ ξ0 + 1
                                                                   R
                                                                     1
                      n               h ∗i             h h ∗ i                  io             h ∗                         i
                        (1 + Γξ 0 ) E ξ 1 + Γ − Γ E ξ 1 + Γ ξ 0 + 1 ι0 + (1 + Γξ 0 ) E Rξ 1
                                         R                      R                                                         ι1
                                                                                                                          R
                    =                                  h ∗i           
                                                         E Rξ + Γ ξ 0 + 1
                                                             1
                         h ∗i                   h ∗ i           h ∗             i         h ∗ i
                      E ξ ι0 + (1 + Γξ 0 ) E ξ R
                          R                       R ι1
                                                             E Rξ ι0 + ιR1 + Γξ 0 E Rξ ιR1
                           1                       1               1                          1
                    =        h ∗i                       =          h ∗             i         .
                             E ξ + Γ ξ0 + 1
                                   R
                                                                  E ξ ξ 0 + R∗
                                                                       R           ξ1
                                                                                         + Γξ 0
                                  1                                                1

                                                                    1
To obtain the time-1 innovation, we observe that e1 =               ξ1   ( Rι0 + ι1 − Rξ 0 e0 ) implies:
                                                                                             
                                                     ι1                                    1
                                      { e1 } =                + R ( ι 0 − ξ 0 e0 )                  .
                                                     ξ1                                    ξ1

As:                                          h ∗i         h ∗                    i             h           i
                                                                                                        ∗
                                             E Rξ + Γ ι0 + E Rξ               ι1
                                                                              R            ι0 − E ξ 0 Rξ ιR1
                   ι 0 − ξ 0 e0 = ι 0 − ξ 0    1h ∗i         1
                                                                                       =  h ∗i       1       ,
                                               E ξ + Γ ξ0 + 1
                                                   R
                                                                                          E ξ + Γ ξ0 + 1
                                                                                              R
                                                      1                                                 1




                                                                A.19
we obtain:                                                           h           i
                                                                            ∗
                                             
                                                 ι1
                                                              ι0 − E ξ 0 Rξ ιR1    
                                                                                    1
                                                                            1
                                  { e1 } =                + R h ∗ i                  .
                                                 ξ1           E Rξ + Γ ξ 0 + 1 ξ 1
                                                                      1

       We next derive the value of Γ. Notice that we can write the above equation as:

                                                        1
                                       { e1 } = ε +         η,
                                                     a+Γ
                                                 
                                                  ι1
                                            ε≡           ,
                                                  ξ1
                                                               R∗ ι1
                                                                          
                                                                         1    1
                                            η ≡ ι0 − E ξ 0                       ,
                                                                ξ1 R    ξ0 ξ1
                                                   ∗               
                                                    R             ξ     1
                                            a≡E            ξ 0 + 1∗        .
                                                     ξ1           R     ξ0

Then,
                                                                    2σεη      ση2
                                         var (e1 ) = σε2 +               +           .
                                                                    a + Γ ( a + Γ )2
Letting G (Γ) be
                                                                                              !α
                                                                     2σεη      ση2
(A.52)                              G (Γ) ≡ Γ − γ            σε2   +      +                        ,
                                                                     a + Γ ( a + Γ )2

then Γ is defined as

(A.53)                                                       G (Γ) = 0.

When α = 0, we get the basic Gamma model. When α = 1, we have a polynomial of degree 3 in Γ. When
there is no noise and α > 0, Γ = 0. In general, it is still amenable to computation: there is a unique positive
solution of G (Γ) (as G (Γ) is increasing in Γ, and G (0) < 0, limΓ→∞ G (Γ) = ∞).

Proof of Lemma 3 In the decentralized allocation, the consumer’s intra-period consumption, Equation
(5), gives the first order conditions:

                                                      χ                                χ∗
                                         p NT CNT =      ;                p∗NT CNT
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                   =      ;
                                                      λ                                λ∗
                                                      a                   pH ∗       ξ
(A.54)                                       p H CH = ;                        CH = ∗ ;
                                                      λ                    e         λ
                                                ∗      ι                    ∗ ∗    a∗
                                             ep F CF = ;                  p F CF = ∗ .
                                                      λ                            λ
so that                                                              ∗ λ∗
                                                                    CH
                                                                      ξ
                                                             e=     CH λ
                                                                            .
                                                                      a
Suppose that the Negishi weight is ν. The planner maximizes U + νU ∗ subject to the resource constraint;
                                                     ∗ , which gives the planner’s first order condition a =
hence, in particular maxCH +CH∗ ≤YH a ln CH + νξ ln CH                                                   CH
νξ
 ∗ .
CH     Hence, in the first best exchange rate satisfies:

                                                           λ∗t    p C         /χt
                                             etFB = ν          = ν ∗NT ∗NT, t ∗ .
                                                           λt     p NT CNT, t /χt



                                                                   A.20
In the basic case of Lemma 3, we have λt = λ∗t = 1, so etFB = ν. Note that this is derived under the
assumption of identical discount factor β = β∗ . 

Proof of Proposition 6
                                                     h                 i
                                                         R∗
                                           c
                                                 E       R e1   − e0
                                                                  −ΓQ0
                                       R =                                 =
                                                      e             e
                                                     0            0
                                                     ι 0 − e0
                                                                         
                                                                       ι0
                                               = −Γ             = Γ 1−      .
                                                         e0            e0

Recall that:                                                                   ∗
                                                         ( R∗ + Γ) ι0 + RR E [ι1 ]
                                               e0 =                                ,
                                                               R∗ + Γ + 1
so that we conclude:                                                                   !
                                       c                R∗ + Γ + 1
                                     R = Γ 1 − ι0                  ∗                       .
                                                  ( R∗ + Γ) ι0 + RR E [ι1 ]
which, rearranged, gives the announced expression.

Derivation of 3-period economy exchange rates We will use the notation:
                                                                       R∗
                                                             R∗ ≡         .
                                                                       R
Recall that we assume that in period t = 1 financiers only intermediate the new flows; stocks arising from
previous flows are held passively by the households (long term investors) until t=2. Therefore, from the
                                                                                     e −R∗ E[e ]
flow demand equation for t = 1, e1 − ι1 + Q1 = 0, and the financiers’ demand, Q1 = 1 Γ 2 , we get an
                                                                                          1
expression for e1 :
                                               Γ ι + R∗ E1 [e2 ]
                                          e1 = 1 1               .
                                                    Γ1 + 1
The flow demand equation for t = 2 gives e2 = ι2 , so we can rewrite e1 as:

                                                            Γ1 ι1 + R∗ E1 [ι2 ]
                                                  e1 =                          .
                                                                  Γ1 + 1

Similarly for e0 , we have
                                                            Γ0 ι0 + R∗ E0 [e1 ]
                                                  e0 =                          ,
                                                                  Γ0 + 1
and we can use our expression for e1 above to express e0 as:
                                                                    ∗ι
                                          Γ0 ι0 + R∗ E0 Γ1 ιΓ1 +R
                                                       h                 i
                                                                       2
                                                               1 + 1
                                     e0 =                                  .
                                                   Γ0 + 1

Proof of Proposition 7 We have already derived Claim 1. For Claim 2, we can calculate, from the
                                          ∗
definition of carry trade returns (Rc ≡ RR ee10 − 1) and equation (24):

                                 c                                 Γ1 + 1 + R ∗
                                R = (R∗ − 1) Γ0                                                > 0.
                                                          Γ1 (Γ0 + R∗ ) + Γ0 + (R∗ )2

Hence, the expected carry trade return is positive.




                                                                A.21
    For Claim 3, recall that a function              ax +b
                                                     cx +d   is increasing in x iff ∆ x ≡ ad − bc > 0. For Γ0 ,
                                                                                            
                                            ∆ Γ0 = 1 + Γ 1 + R ∗                Γ1 R∗ + (R∗ )2 > 0,

                    c
                ∂R
which proves    ∂Γ0> 0.
    For Γ1 , the discriminant is

                               ∆ Γ1
                                       = Γ0 + (R∗ )2 − (1 + R∗ ) (Γ0 + R∗ ) = −R∗ (1 + Γ0 ) < 0,
                         (R∗   − 1) Γ0
          c
so that ∂R
        ∂Γ1
            < 0.
     Finally, for R∗ , we simply compute:
                                              c
                                                  Γ0 (1 + Γ0 ) (1 + Γ1 ) 2R ∗ + Γ1
                                                                                   
                                           ∂R
                                                =                                 > 0.
                                           ∂R∗                                  2 2
                                                  
                                                    Γ0 1 + Γ1 + Γ1 R + (R )
                                                                        ∗     ∗
                                                               


                                                                                                     h    i
Proof of Proposition 8 The regression corresponds to: βUIP = ∂R    −∂ E e1 − 1 . For simplicity we calcu-
                                                                     ∗   e0
late this derivative at R = R∗ = Eι t = 1, and with deterministic Γ1 = Γ1 . Equation (24) yields, for those
values but keeping R∗ potentially different from 1:
                                                                       ∗
                                                     Γ0 + R∗ ΓΓ1 ++R1                       Γ1 + R ∗
                                              e0 =                1
                                                                           ;        Ee1 =            .
                                                         Γ0 + 1                              Γ1 + 1

                                                    −∂ Ee1
                                  h          i
                          −∂          e1
Calculating β UIP =       ∂R∗ E       e0   −1 =     ∂R∗ e0   gives:

                                                                     1 + Γ1 − Γ0
                                                       β UIP =                     .
                                                                  (1 + Γ0 ) 1 + Γ1

                       1+ Γ1                 1
Hence, β UIP ≤                         =   1+ Γ0   < 1. 
                  (1+ Γ0 ) ( 1+ Γ1 )


Proof of Proposition 9 Lemma 6 shows that the Yen (strictly) monotonically depreciates as a function
of the intervention q∗ . Let e0 (q∗ ) be the exchange rate as a function of the intervention. From Section II.E
and the assumption in this proposition that output is demand determined under PCP, we know that:
                                                                       1
                                                             1+    e0 ( q ∗ )
(A.55)                                              YF,0 =                        ∀q∗ ∈ [0, q∗ ),
                                                                  p∗F

so that Japanese tradable output increases monotonically as a function of the intervention. We define q∗ ≡
min{argmaxq∗ YF,0 (q∗ )} as the smallest intervention that achieves full employment. Strict monotonicity of
YF,0 (q∗ ) for all q∗ such that YF,0 < L and the fact that YF,0 is bounded above by L guarantee that q∗ exists
and is unique.
      The consumption shares are obtained from the household demand functions plus market clearing, so
that:

                                             CH,t = (1 − s∗t ) L;               CF,t = (1 − s∗t )YF,t ;
                                              ∗
                                             CH,t = s∗t L;                       ∗
                                                                                CF,t = s∗t YF,t ;
               et
where s∗t ≡   1+ e t .   To derive the solution for CF,t , recall that the US household demand function is given



                                                                       A.22
by CF,t =     ιt
             p F,t .   At time t = 0 we have ι0 = 1 and p F,0 = p∗F e0 , and substituting in the output expression
                                                                                                                          a1∗ +ι1 /e1       ι 1 ( 1 + e1 )
in (A.55), we obtain CF,0 =         1
                                   1+e0 YF,0 .   At time t = 1 we have p F,1 = e1 p∗F,1 = e1                                   L        =          L       ,   so that
          1
CF,1 =   1+e1 L.   The rest of the expressions can be derived by analogy. 

Proof of Proposition 12 We first prove a Lemma.

Lemma A.6. In the setup of Proposition 3, e0 is increasing in ι t and R∗ and decreasing in ξ t and R; ∂e     0
                                                                                                           ∂ι0 increases in
Γ. In addition, e0 increases in Γ if and only if the US is a natural net debtor at time 0 , i.e. N0+ ≡ ξ 0 e0 − ι0 < 0.
                                                                                         +


     Proof: The comparative statics with respect to ι t , ξ 0 , and R are simply by inspection. We report here
the less obvious ones:                           
                                               ι
                                       e ξ −ι − 1
                                    E 0 0 ξ 20 R
                                                                        h      i
                                                                            e1
                          ∂e0                1
                                                                   E      Rξ 1
                               =         ξ1
                                                     =−                ξ1
                                                                                     < 0,
                                  E 0 ξ R∗ + Γξ                                  Γξ 0
                          ∂ξ 1       ξ +                          ξ 0 + R∗
                                                  R
                                                    0
                                                    ∗          E      ξ        + R ∗
                                                     1                                    1


where we made use of the state-by-state budget constraint e0 ξ 0 − ι0 + e1 ξ 1R−ι1 = 0. To be very precise, a
              ∂e0
notation like ∂ξ  is the sensitivity of e0 to a small, deterministic increment to random variable ξ 1 .
                       1


                               ∂e0    1        e0 − ΓQ                           1                E [ e1 ]
                                  ∗
                                    = ∗2                                   =                                            > 0,
                                                                                RR∗
                                                                                                    
                               ∂R    R              ξ
                                              ξ 0 + R1∗             Γξ 0
                                                                                                   ξ
                                                                                              ξ 0 + R1∗          Γξ 0
                                            E     ξ       +         R∗                E           ξ1         +   R∗
                                                         1

                                                               h                                                          i
                                                                                                                   R∗
where we made use of the financiers’ demand equation, ΓQ0 = E e0 −                                                 R e1       , and the flow equation,
ξ 0 e0 − ι0 + Q0 = 0.
       We also have,
                               ∂e0                 1
                                    = − N0+        h i       < 0,
                                ∂Γ          1 + R E ξ0 + ξ Γ
                                                 ∗
                                                                                 ξ1           0

where we made use of the definition N0+ = e0 ξ 0 − ι0 . This implies:

                                          ∂ 2 e0                            1
                                                 =                 h i                   2 > 0.
                                         ∂Γ∂ι0
                                                             R∗ E    ξ0
                                                                     ξ1     + 1 + Γξ 0

This implies all the points of Proposition 12 with two exceptions. The effects with respect to interest rate
changes, both domestic and foreign, hold for f , f ∗ sufficiently small. Finally, we focus on the impact of f ∗ .
Simple calculations yield:
                                     ∂e0                 Γ
                                          =−                        < 0.
                                     ∂f∗
                                                     h i
                                              R E
                                                ∗     ξ0
                                                          + 1 + Γξ     ξ1                 0

We notice that the comparative statics with respect to f are less clear-cut, because f affects the value of Γξe1 ,
and hence affects risk-taking. However, we have ∂e  0                                     ∗
                                                  ∂ f > 0 for typical values (e.g. R = R = 1, ξ 0 = ξ 1 ). 
                                                                                                 e     e


                                            A PPENDIX R EFERENCES
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova. 2013. “Asset prices and institutional investors.” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 103(5): 1728–1758.
Chinn, Menzie D, and Guy Meredith. 2005. “Testing uncovered interest parity at short and long horizons
  during the post-Bretton Woods era.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lettau, Martin, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber. 2014. “Conditional risk premia in currency markets
  and other asset classes.” Journal of Financial Economics, 114(2): 197 – 225.


                                                                      A.23
