                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LOOSE KNOTS: STRONG VERSUS WEAK COMMITMENTS TO SAVE FOR EDUCATION
                            IN UGANDA

                                          Dean Karlan
                                         Leigh L. Linden

                                       Working Paper 19863
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19863


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2014




We are grateful for the assistance of a number of individuals and organizations without whom this
project could not have been successfully completed. Caton Brewster, Carl Brinton, Sarah Kabay,
Sana Khan, Selvan Kumar, Doug Parkerson, Pia Raffler, Elana Safran and Glynis Startz from
Innovations for Poverty Action all provided valuable assistance with the research or project
management. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Yale Savings and Payments
Research Fund at Innovations for Poverty Action, sponsored by a grant from the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation. The United States Agency for International Development (Development
Innovations Venture Award AID-OAA-G-12-00008) generously provided additional funding for
the project. All opinions are those of the authors, and not necessarily that of any of the funders or
collaborating institutions, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Dean Karlan and Leigh L. Linden. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Loose Knots: Strong versus Weak Commitments to Save for Education in Uganda
Dean Karlan and Leigh L. Linden
NBER Working Paper No. 19863
January 2014, Revised April 2016
JEL No. D12,D91,I21,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

Commitment devices offer an opportunity to restrict future choices. However, strict commitments
may deter participation. Using a school-based commitment savings program for educational
expenses in Uganda, we compare an account fully-committed to educational expenses to an
account with a weaker commitment (funds withdrawn in cash, rather than a voucher). The weaker
commitment generates higher account savings, and when combined with a parental outreach
generates higher educational supplies expenditures and 0.11 standard deviation higher math and
language test scores. We find no effect from the fully-committed account, and no effect for either
account on attendance, enrollment, or non-cognitive skills.


Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and CEPR
and also NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu

Leigh L. Linden
Department of Economics
The University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, Texas 78712
and NBER
leigh.linden@austin.utexas.edu
“Make it easy” – Richard Thaler, co-author of Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health,
Wealth, and Happiness (Clement 2013)
Section I. Introduction

Commitment devices offer individuals an opportunity to restrict future choices. Self-aware
individuals may prefer such restrictions in order to resist future temptations, or to deflect future
claims on assets from family or extended social networks. Indeed, prior research has found
demand for commitment savings accounts that restrict access to one’s money in order to help
with self-control issues (Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin 2006; Brune et al. 2016; Dupas and Robinson
2013; Gine et al. 2015), and other research has found demand for commitment devices in other
domains.

This project began after qualitative research on household finance in Uganda identified saving
for school fees and supply costs as a key barrier for families. 1 We tackle three primary questions
within the context of an educational savings intervention: Can a commitment savings device be
used to improve student performance through increased educational expenditures. How critical is
the ability to change one’s mind in the decision to engage in a commitment savings account?
And, do commitment devices to save merely get unwound through offsetting behavior, and thus
not change actual expenditures?

The specifics of what one means by “commitment” on a commitment savings account can vary
in critical ways, and accordingly have large differential impacts on whether an account is
opened, how much one deposits, when one withdraws, and perhaps most importantly, how
ultimate consumption and investment choices differ. We focus here on one key dimension:
whether the funds deposited are locked in for a specific “good” expenditure, or if individuals
have freedom to spend withdrawals as they wish, but the “good” item is made easily available. 2
Prior work has tested soft savings commitments versus control (Dupas and Robinson 2013) and
hard savings commitments versus control (Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson 2011), alas given the
changes in context (health to agriculture) it is nearly impossible to compare across studies in
order to assess the tradeoffs between soft versus hard commitment.

In theory the tradeoffs are clear: a strong commitment device may be more effective in enforcing
the behavior of the future self, but the current self may be less likely to participate in the contract
at all. An individual may want to commit in some, but not all, future states of the world, since
emergencies do happen. The challenge is designing a contract in which a third party has the right
level of enforcement discretion. If an individual cannot trust any third parties with that

1
  The initial role for the qualitative work was to collaborate with an insurance company, and identify missing
insurance products. Although the insurance work did not proceed, the dominance of low savings for school in the
focus groups on insurance led the researchers to engage in this project.
2
  Clearly in a perfect market, specifically one with zero transaction costs, this would make no difference: any items
purchased with the locked-in commitment account could simply be sold in exchange for the most desirable item for
the same value. In our market, supplies and services associated with primary education in Uganda, there are
significant enough transaction costs to make such an exchange quite costly, and thus the original expenditure sticky.



                                                         2
discretion, a self-enforcing commitment contract may work instead. In such a contract, the
increased price of vice is derived from psychic costs, i.e., disappointment with oneself and one’s
lack of adherence to a plan. This is akin to a model put forward by Benabou and Tirole (2004) on
how personal rules can shift later behavior, and also could be construed as a test of whether
“mental accounting” can be a policy instrument that induces behavior change (Shefrin and
Thaler 1992).

Our second question examines whether commitment devices get unwound through offsetting
behavior (Karlan, Ratan, and Zinman 2013). More money spent from a commitment account for
a particular purpose may simply crowdout spending for that same purpose with funds from other
sources. By examining how actual expenditures change for the particular purpose, rather than
merely observing whether savings increases, we are able to make stronger statements about
welfare outcomes, similar to Ashraf et al (2010) with respect to household durable goods
purchases and Dupas and Robinson (2013) with respect to health investments.

We examine these questions in the context of a school-based commitment savings account in
Uganda. Specifically, we test whether a strong versus weak savings commitment device helps
children and their families save more, spend more on educational expenses, and achieve higher
test scores. Relative to the economics of education literature, we thus gain a better understanding
of the education production process (Kremer and Holla 2009), building on a growing body of
evidence demonstrating the possibly significant effects of basic school supplies – notebooks,
uniforms, workbooks, etc. – on student performance (Das et al. 2013 and Hidalgo et al. 2013, in
contrast to Kremer and Holla 2009) and parental involvement (Avvisati et al. 2013). Second, the
results build on existing evidence of the importance of savings constraints for educational
expenses (Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011) as well as mechanisms for tying resources to educational
expenses (De Arcangelis et al. 2014). 3

We evaluate the intervention (“Supersavers”) as follows: working with a local nonprofit
organization Private Education Development Network (PEDN) in the Busoga sub-region of the
Eastern region of Uganda, and Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA), we randomly assigned 136
primary schools to one of three groups: a strong commitment savings account (funds could be
withdrawn no earlier than the end of the term, and had to be spent on educational items through a
voucher that we provided), a weak commitment savings account (funds could be withdrawn no
earlier than the end of the term, but were available in cash, to be spent as individuals wished) 4, or
control. For both treatments, students could deposit cash into an account. At the end of each
trimester they were able to use their cash or vouchers to purchase school supplies at a fair. This
3
  It is interesting to note that, while we find that relaxing savings constraints improves educational outcomes, we
find improvements in academic performance rather than participation. This contradicts the results of Barrera-Osorio
et al. (2011) which finds that distributing funds at the time that families have to pay enrollment expenses improves
enrollment rates. The difference may, in part, be due to the fact that unlike Uganda, Colombian schools still charged
official fees for enrollment.
4
  The weak commitment treatment arm is thus most similar to the SEED account in Ashraf et al (2006), i.e., a
commitment merely to not withdraw funds until a certain future point in time.



                                                         3
thus becomes a test between a stricter commitment device and a weaker “make it easy” nudge of
individuals towards a specific behavior (Thaler and Sunstein 2009). Although the accounts were
framed as their accounts, we cannot rule out that some of the funds were parent’s funds. 5 We
developed a brief teacher training component, and also coordinated the transfer of money from a
savings box held at the school to a local bank for safekeeping. One year into the implementation,
we implemented one sub-treatment in half of the treatment schools, a parental involvement
workshop.

The first stage is critical and revealing: students deposit significantly more money into the soft
commitment savings account than the hard commitment savings account. And, for those with the
parental outreach sub-treatment, the additional money deposited into the account leads to higher
investment in school supplies, which then in turn leads to higher test scores. We find a 0.11
standard deviation (se=0.04) improvement in overall scores; this includes effects on each of the
covered subjects: grammar (0.15 standard deviations, se=0.05), reading (0.11 standard
deviations, se=0.05), and math (0.00 standard deviation, se=0.04). The implication for the school
production function is simple: for a student to learn basic skills, having a pen, paper and
workbook matters. Furthermore, the treatment effect on educational outcomes is sizable, as large
as many direct educational interventions, and consistent with other estimates of the effects of
such supplies (Das et al. 2013) We find no effect on student participation (either attendance or
enrollment) or on a set of non-cognitive outcomes.

Section II. Background

    A. Ugandan Primary Education System

Uganda abolished most primary school fees in 1997. 6 In the same year, the gross primary
enrollment rate 7 ballooned from 87 percent in the early 1990s, to 123 percent in 1997. Between
1996 and 1997, 2.3 million children enrolled in primary school, increasing total enrollment to 5.7
million (Murphy, Bertoncino, and Wang 2002).

Unfortunately, while most children now enroll in primary school, the majority of them fail to
graduate. In 2008, for example, the gross enrollment rate 8 in lower secondary was 33 percent–11
percentage points below the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (UNESCO 2013). The transition
from primary to secondary is a challenge, as in many countries. However, the majority of
Ugandan students simply fail to complete primary school. As of 2010, only 32 percent of

5
  As we show below, both the children and other family members contribute to the accounts, raising the possibility
that multiple household mechanisms are involved.
6
  Initially, up to four children per family could attend school without paying tuition fees (Murphy, Bertoncino, and
Wang 2002).
7
  The gross primary school enrollment ratio is the ratio of the number of enrolled primary school children, regardless
of age, to the total number of primary school-aged children in the population.
8
  The gross enrollment rate for lower secondary school is the ratio of the number of children enrolled in lower
secondary school regardless of age relative to the total number of children in the population who are of age to attend
secondary school.



                                                          4
students entering primary school completed the seventh grade (“Opportunities Lost: The Impact
of Grade Repetition and Early School Leaving” 2012).

While the poor quality of primary education is a likely factor (Piper 2010), 9 students still face
financial barriers. Students no longer pay enrollment fees, but they face other expenses. Many
schools require uniforms, and families are responsible for providing food and school supplies,
such as paper, writing instruments, and workbooks. See Appendix Table 1 for a summary of
educational fees and expenses expected of households. With the approval of the parent-teacher
association and school management committee, schools can also charge fees for ancillary
services such as supplementary lessons, practice exams and feeding programs. Official policy
prohibits preventing a child from enrolling due to an inability to pay, but the majority of
dropouts cite financial concerns. In the baseline survey described below, families paid an
average of 5,790 UGX (2.30 USD) to send a child to school for a year, 0.5 percent of Uganda’s
per capita income in 2010 (UN data 2013).

Confusion and suspicion create additional complications. As we discovered through qualitative
interviews and feedback from parents, politicians try to drum up support by claiming school fees
are illegal. The terms “universal” and “free” education are sometimes used interchangeably.
Many parents do not understand the official financing rules. Some believe that the government
should provide for all school related expenses. Finally, rumors of corruption can make even
knowledgeable parents reluctant to pay.

    B. Description of the Intervention

To facilitate families’ and children’s saving for school, we evaluated four variations of a school-
based savings program. The intervention had two primary objectives. First, it sought to facilitate
and encourage the practice of children saving for education, and through saving, improve overall
academic performance and support students’ continued enrollment. The program targeted
students in grades five, six and seven, i.e. the last three years of primary school, in order to target
students at high risk for dropping out of school. 10 At baseline, the mean student age was 12 (sd
dev = 1.52).

We developed and implemented the programs in partnership with the Private Education
Development Network (PEDN). PEDN is a Ugandan non-profit organization focusing on youth
financial and entrepreneurial education. PEDN comprises five full and part time employees,




9
  The dramatic increases in enrollment have strained existing resources. In the average school in 2005, three children
had to share the same textbook and 94 children crammed into a single classroom (Independent Evaluation Group
(IEG) 2007).
10
   Uganda follows a 7+2+2 grade structure. Students attend primary school for seven years followed by two years
each of lower and then upper secondary school.



                                                          5
often supplemented by project specific staff hired as needed. For the savings programs, IPA
worked with PEDN to hire a local implementation team of about 10 people. 11

Each of the four treatment variations included the same core components: a savings account
administered through the school, and a program to support and encourage use of the accounts.
During an introductory meeting, the implementation team described the program to a joint
meeting of the Parent Teacher Associate, the School Management Committee, and other
interested parents. If they all voted to participate, we provided each school with metal lock
boxes. A designated teacher assisted by student-elected 12 representatives from each class then
managed the program. The implementation team conducted weekly visits to each school to
encourage saving and to assist with accounting procedures. Interested students received a
passbook in which their individual savings were recorded, and the designated teacher and the
implementation team maintained an official register. Depending on a school’s preference,
students then deposited money into the lockboxes on a daily or weekly basis.

To provide security and transparency, two padlocks secured each box. Parents elected a
representative to keep the key to one lock, while the bank held the other. At the end of each
trimester, 13 the two key holders opened the box. The bank representative provided a deposit slip
and deposited the funds into the school’s account. 14 The accounts did not earn interest. Inflation
varied but averaged around 10% in this time period, thus the accounts had a negative real interest
rate. After the break between trimesters, the implementation team and bank representatives
returned to the school for the payout of the funds. Two representatives signed a withdrawal slip
to confirm the withdrawal. The designated teacher, student representatives and our team then
distributed the money according to the savings register. At the same time, the implementation
team organized a small market at each school where students could purchase school supplies or
school services such as practice exams or tutoring sessions. 15

On top of the core components above, there were four treatment variations, a 2x2 design: “cash”
or “voucher” for the withdrawals, and “Parent Outreach” or “No Parent Outreach”. For the cash
treatment arm, students received, in cash, their savings from one trimester at the beginning of the
next trimester. They could then spend the funds at their discretion—at the markets provided on
the disbursement day (thus “making it easy” to spend on school supplies) or elsewhere. The

11
   This includes only those individuals hired to implement the described programs. It does not include the research
staff who conducted the surveys and monitoring visits described below.
12
   The Ugandan educational system classifies children enrolled in primary school as “pupils” and those in secondary
school as “students”. In this article, we refer to all enrolled children as students.
13
   The academic year starts in February and follows a trimester system. Schools run for 12 weeks at a time. Students
receive a three week break after the first and second terms, and schools are closed in December, January and
February.
14
   Working with the bank, FINCA Uganda, we designed an account for the intervention modeled on a traditional
group savings account. We also provided the minimum 5,000 UGX deposit and worked with the school’s elected
signatories to obtain the documentation required to open the accounts.
15
   Students were allowed to rollover vouchers to future terms, and upon completion of the final year (P7), were
allowed to withdraw any remaining balance in cash.



                                                         6
voucher treatment arm, on the other hand, employed a stronger commitment — students had to
buy educational products or services at the market, on the disbursement day. 16 In both variants,
children could also re-deposit their savings for the next trimester.

The Parent Outreach component provided a means of addressing misconceptions about school
fees and Universal Primary Education Policy. The implementation team hosted a meeting for
sixth and seventh grade parents. The meetings began by identifying the various stakeholders in
primary education, their roles and responsibilities. PEDN then discussed the various ways in
which parents could support their children’s education. In particular, PEDN explained that in
addition to providing a student learning experience, the savings program provided an opportunity
for the household. It could be a tool to help families finance their children’s education. A snack
and soda were provided to encourage attendance.

Section III. Design of the Evaluation

A.       Research Design

Figure 1, and Appendix Table 2, depicts the timeline and sample frame for the randomized trial
and data collection. We selected 136 primary schools from the Jinja, Iganga, Mayuge, and Luuka
districts of the Busoga Region because they predominantly comprised poor rural and peri-urban
schools. We then administered a baseline survey and test during the final trimester of 2009.
Finally, we randomly assigned schools to receive either the cash treatment (39 schools), voucher
treatment (39 schools), or no treatment (58 schools), stratifying by the total normalized score on
the baseline exam and by geographic regions call sub-counties. 17

Following the first randomization, school outreach began. It took two trimesters to recruit the
majority of schools, but by the beginning of the third trimester of 2010, 95 percent of the
treatment schools had agreed to participate. 18 In total, 77 schools joined and one school refused
to participate. The school that refused to participate did, however, permit data collection, and is
thus included for all analysis in the treatment group.


16
   Early in the intervention there was concern that the teachers and community members mobilized to manage the
supplies fair were marking up prices to take advantage of the situation. To avoid this, the supplies markets were
taken over as part of the intervention. In collaboration with a wholesale distributer, prices were set to match typical
alternative prices available to students, and the fairs were organized by the implementing NGOs directly. Managing
the fairs as part of the intervention also ensured the essentials supplies were there. This does have implications for
scale-up attempts, i.e., whether through explicit management or alternative approach, one likely needs to have a
competitive market for supplies available for the students.
17
   In 2010, Uganda included four major jurisdictions called “regions.” Spread across the four regions, were 111
“districts.” Each district was divided into urban areas known as “municipalities” or rural areas called “counties.”
Counties were further sub-divided into sub-counties. Depending on the population, a district could have as few as
three or as many as thirty or more sub-counties.
18
   When they were not canceled, meetings had to be held with school administrators, the school management
committee, and the parent-teacher association for each school. Many were initially reluctant to hold additional
meetings.



                                                          7
In 2011, we conducted a second randomization for the parent sensitization program. To isolate
the effect of the program while still treating all of the schools, we assigned schools either to the
Parent Outreach group who received the intervention in the first trimester of 2011 or to the No
Parent Outreach group who received the intervention too late to affect student behavior –
immediately before the endline survey in second trimester. Half of the schools in each treatment
were assigned to each group. We stratified assignment by the schools’ initial treatment group and
sub-county, and checked for balance using the demeaned savings rates from 2010.

Finally, we conducted the endline survey and exam during the beginning of the third trimester of
2011. 19

     B. Description of the Datasets

We utilize two samples of students, as well as data at both the classroom and student level. The
first sample for analysis includes all students present in class at baseline and then all students
present in class at endline. Thus this provides a sample frame of all students attending school.
Second, we created a representative, longitudinal sample of students identified prior to treatment
assignment. If the intervention affected attendance or enrollment, the first sample frame will be
subject to sample selection biases, both on entry and exit. Thus the second sample provides
information on a smaller subset of students that were tracked regardless of whether or not they
continued to be enrolled in the original schools.

The classroom-level data included all classes in grades five, six, and seven. Enumerators counted
the number of children present, enrolled and possessing notebooks, math set, uniform, or
shoes. 20,21 We conducted these monitoring visits prior to the randomization as part of the
baseline and at least once a trimester after the randomization.

The student-level data was created by selecting 4,716 students who then completed a baseline
survey and aptitude test prior to the randomization. To identify the students for the longitudinal
sample, we compiled a list of all students of the correct ages and grades who were on the
teachers’ rosters in September of 2009. 22 Teachers then classified each student using a five-point
scale to rate frequency of attendance. In particular, this allowed us to identify students on the
rosters who did not attend school. From the set of attending children, we randomly selected 35

19
   In 2012, we conducted a second, smaller experiment in which we randomly assigned a fraction of the original
control group to receive the cash with sensitization program. We also collected the classroom-level data described
below. However, the remaining control group proved too small. The point estimates are consistent with those
presented here, but the standard errors are too large to provide meaningful information. These results are available
upon request.
20
   The enumerator only counted a student as having each item if the enumerator could see it.
21
   Notebooks cost approximately 200 UGX (0.08 $USD) each. In Uganda, they are usually called “exercise books.”
A math set costs approximately 1,000 UGX (0.40 $USD) and includes such tools as a ruler, protractor and compass.
Uniform and shoes each cost about 6,000 UGX. (2.39 $USD) They are a traditional school requirement.
22
   For a small number of classes, rosters were unavailable. We had to create a list of students based on the students
present in class and information provided by the teacher.



                                                         8
students from each school in grades four and five, except for two schools in which we included
all students because fewer than 35 students had enrolled.

The baseline survey completed by the students in the longitudinal sample was a 40 minute
survey that included questions about their education history, experiences with saving, time
preferences, and demographic information. Students also completed an hour-long, 35-question
exam covering math, grammar, and reading comprehension. Students in each grade took separate
exams based on the national curriculum for their grade. 23

Students completed an endline survey about two years after the baseline survey. The 40 minute
survey included questions about saving behavior, possession of resources like those in the class-
level survey, such as uniforms, books, math sets, and shoes. It also included a 60 minute exam in
the same three subjects as the baseline exam. The grade level of the endline exam was based on
the students’ grade at baseline, and all baseline and endline scores are standardized within grade
and subject relative to the contemporaneous control distribution. We tracked students regardless
of their enrollment status, finding 3,838 of the original respondents.

Finally, we verified the presence of each student in the longitudinal sample during each class-
level monitoring visit. This provided an objective measure of students’ attendance rates as well
as whether students were still enrolled in school in the appropriate grade.

     C. Econometric Model

Since the random assignment should ensure the orthogonality of treatment assignment and other
student characteristics, we estimate the effects of the treatments via ordinary least squares using
the following specification:

        Yijk = α + τ’treatj + δ’Xik + εij.                                                   (1)

The variable Yijk is the dependent variable of interest. We perform estimates at the student and
class level. The index i then represents either the student or class in school j and sub-county k.
The vector treatj is a vector of indicator variables for each treatment, and Xik is a vector of
control variables. For each estimate, we control for baseline test scores, sub-county fixed effects
and the baseline value of the outcome if available. We cluster standard errors by the unit of
randomization, the school.

Section IV. Internal Validity

In Table 1, we verify the effectiveness of the randomization in creating observably similar
treatment and control groups on average. Each row presents estimates for the indicated baseline
characteristic. Columns 1-3 provide the sample size for each variable, 24 the pooled treatment
23
   For both the baseline and endline exams, all scores are normalized within grade and subject relative to the
contemporaneous control distribution.
24
   Sample sizes vary because subjects refused to respond to some questions.



                                                      9
mean and standard deviation, and the control mean and standard deviation. Column 4 provides
the regression estimates of the difference between the combined treatment group and control
group, while Columns 5-8 provide regression estimates of the difference between each treatment
group and the control group. All differences are estimated using equation (1), controlling for the
sub-counties in which the schools were stratified.

Overall, the differences are minimal, i.e., the assignment to each treatment is orthogonal to a
series of baseline variables. Of the 77 estimates presented, only eight are statistically significant:
one at the one-percent level, four at the five percent level, and three at the ten percent level. And
the overall joint test of significance presented in the bottom row is not significant for any
treatment group. Most importantly, the magnitudes of the estimated differences are also all
relatively small. Regardless, the main outcome tables are repeated in the appendix, including
controls for baseline value of the outcome variable.

Table 2 analyzes attrition. First, Row 1 presents the basic test for whether treatment led to
differential attrition rates overall. Columns 2 and 3 show that we have identical survey
completion rates in treatment and control (81 percent), and Row 1 Columns 5-8 show that we
also find no differences in attrition rates across the four treatment groups. However, even though
the overall attrition rate is not affected by assignment to treatment, differential attrition could
result in differences in the analysis sample frame (i.e., those who complete the endline survey, or
take the endline exams). 25 To test for this, we replicate Table 1 analysis on various baseline
measures (rows 2 onward). The table is organized similarly to Table 1 (except that the classroom
variables are omitted, since there is no attrition at the classroom level). Overall, we find no
evidence of compositional effects from differential attrition. Only five tests are statistically
significant (out of 63), and the only differences from Table 1 are the estimates for days missed
per school term and the time preference measures. As with Table 1, the final row shows the
aggregate tests, and we do not reject the null hypothesis of equality across treatment and control
groups. 26

Section V. Results

First, we assess students’ savings behavior. In Table 3, we provide two measures of total
program savings over the two years: the total per school and per student (using two measures of
the latter). Columns 1-4 provide the average for each research group. With a less restrictive
measure of the student body (attendance at any point during the two year study period), the two
cash payout treatment groups produce average per student savings of 2,196 UGX and 2,342
UGX in the parent outreach and no parent outreach groups, respectively. Using average
attendance, these results approximately double to 4,212 and 4,560, respectively. In comparison,
the two voucher treatments, with and without parent outreach, show average savings of 1,181


26
   Appendix Table 3 provides further analysis of attrition, examining similar questions in regression format, and
attrition on the endline test. No statistically significant differences are observed across treatment groups.



                                                       10
UGX and 1,118 UGX with a less restrictive measure of attendance, and 2,158 UGX and 2,167
UGX using average attendance. The differences between cash and voucher are statistically
significant at the 99% level (Column 5), whereas the differences between parent and no parent
outreach are not statistically significantly different from zero (Column 6).

We draw three conclusions from the savings data. First, the more restrictive savings vehicle, the
voucher treatment, generated significantly less savings than the less restrictive cash treatment.
Second, for those in either of the savings treatment groups, we find no additional effect of the
parent outreach on savings (and the parental outreach treatment was only implemented within the
treatment groups, not within the control group, thus we can estimate its treatment effect in an
environment with the savings treatments). Thus this supports the upcoming evidence that while
the cash treatment arm led to higher savings, the parent outreach component shifted how the
funds were spent. 27

Table 4 examines other key process and intermediate outcomes. First, in Panel A, we examine
process outcomes from the program itself, as reported by students in the endline survey. We find
that 79 percent of treatment students and only 11 percent of control students were familiar with
the Supersavers program. Similarly, 44 percent of treatment group students and only 3 percent of
control group students reported saving with Supersavers. There was little difference in program
awareness or self-reported participation on the extensive margin across treatment groups. This
thus supports the argument that the difference in outcomes is not due to differential marketing or
promotion of the program, or differential compliance to experimental protocols, but rather to the
attractiveness of the cash versus voucher condition and the parent outreach. 28

In Panel B and C, we then examine intermediate outcomes, i.e., the possession of school supplies
(measured both during classroom visits as well as in the endline survey 29), parental involvement,
savings attitudes, and payment of school fees. Analysis of these questions helps to understand the
mechanism through which the program worked. We present the results for each, but only find an
impact on the possession of school supplies, suggesting that the other mechanisms are not
responsible for the observed impacts, or are poorly measured.

As an indicator of general spending on school related expenses, we collect data on school
supplies observable to the survey both in the classroom and endline survey. Panel B presents the
results on school supplies that could be observed during classroom visits. The classroom visit
school supplies index is normalized with respect to the control group mean and standard
deviation, and takes the average of four proportions: proportion of students in the classroom

27
   Both parents and children contributed to the accounts. According to the endline survey, 57 percent of children
reported having earned the money that they deposited.
28
   We also included questions on dollar volume of savings, but concluded that the reliability of answers to these
questions, asked of children in this context, was too high for inclusion.
29
   If control group household were buying school supplies earlier than treatment schools, because of the savings
accounts and fairs, we would on average observe this because the classroom surveys were conducted during the
term, not merely at the end of the term.



                                                       11
possessing uniforms, notebooks, math sets, and shoes. 30 In 2010, none of the treatment groups
yields statistically significant increases relative to the control group. Relative to each other, the
cash parent group is statistically different than the other treatment groups (Column 8), but this is
partly the result of a decline in supplies experienced in two of the treatment groups. Relative to
the control group, the cash with Parent Outreach treatment only improves by 0.12 standard
deviations (se=0.13). Since the main difference between 2010 and 2011 is the addition of the
Parent Outreach, the ineffectiveness of the cash treatments provides supporting evidence that the
Parent Outreach is a necessary component to influence how the funds are spent.

For 2011, with an additional year of experience implementing the program and after the parent
outreach had been fully launched, the Cash with Parent Outreach treatment arm performs
considerably better than control, as well as the other three treatments (both when compared
individually, as well as when the other treatments are pooled with control). Column 4 shows a
0.32 standard deviation improvement (se=0.14) compared just to control. This result is then
reinforced by the endline survey, reported in Panel C: The school supplies index from the self-
reported survey also shows in Column 4 a 0.11 standard deviation improvement (se=0.06)
compared to control. We also find in Column 9, that the Cash with Parent Outreach is
statistically different from the other treatments. 31 We do not however observe any statistically
significant shifts in school fees expenditures (albeit with large standard errors), self-reported
absence because of failure to pay school fees, or amount paid for most recent tests. 32

Panel C reports on data from the endline survey on parental involvement and savings attitudes.
Although the school supplies and test score impacts are strongest on the Cash with Parent
Outreach treatment cell, we do not observe a direct impact on an index of three questions 33
regarding parental involvement in the child’s education (or the individual components, as
reported in Appendix Table 4b). Furthermore, we do not observe changes in a savings attitudes
index of seven questions. 34 This may have implications for long-term change in saving behavior,

30
   Appendix Table 4a presents the results for each of the components of this index.
31
   Appendix Tables 4a, 4b and 4c provide the details for each component of the supplies indexes in Panels B and C.
The differences seem to be driven primarily by exercise books, although the individual components analysis is less
robust statistically.
32
   This pattern of results is consistent with students’ reports on the endline survey regarding the disposition of the
saved funds. While the quality of the data are poor, we do observe that students in the cash treatment with the parent
sensitization report spending 3.63 percent more of the saved funds on school related expenses than students in the
cash treatment without the sensitization. We observe no differences in the amount of the savings used to purchase
food or clothing or given to other family members. The increase in school related expenditures primarily comes
from “other” expenses. This difference, however, is likely too small to explain all of the observed increase in school
supplies, suggesting that the parent sensitization functioned both to divert students’ savings and other unsaved
household resources towards school supplies.
33
   The three questions in the Parental Involvement Index are (1) Student thinks parents are responsible for children's
education (2) Has your parent come to your school in the past year? (3) Has your parent seen a report of yours from
school in the past year? Appendix Table 4b presents the results for each of the components in this index.
34
   Savings Attitude Index includes 7 statements each of which the student evaluated on a Likert scale, 1-5. All scales
were converted after the fact so that higher on the scale meant more positive attitude toward saving. (1) Saving
money is not necessary if you live at home with your family. (2) Saving is a good thing to do. (3) Saving is for



                                                         12
if one posits that these attitudinal shifts are a necessary component for long-term behavior
change, after the active involvement from the NGO and savings program. Alternatively, the
measures may be flawed, or the attitudinal changes may be unnecessary; the learned pattern of
savings may be possible to change without changing underlying savings attitudes.

Next we turn to test score results in Table 5. We put forward two basic mechanisms here: first,
the savings account enables the purchasing of school supplies that are necessary for learning;
second, the parental outreach leads the households and children to use the savings accounts to
actually spend the saved money on school supplies. This is consistent with the results in Table 4
on the impact on school supplies. And likewise, this mechanism predicts that the Cash with
Parent Outreach treatment group should generate the largest (or only) positive impacts. Column
4 indicates that Cash with Parent Outreach improves overall test scores by 0.11 standard
deviations (se=0.04). Looking at the components of the test, we find improvements in grammar
(0.15 standard deviations, se=0.05) and reading (0.11 standard deviation, se=0.05), but no effect
on math. None of the other three treatment groups generates statistically significant
improvements compared to the control group, either overall or for any subject. Interestingly,
these results are consistent with Das et al. (2013) who find similar effects resulting from a $3 per
student increase in student supplies. Both sets of results contrast with the traditional view that
resources have limited effects on learning (Kremer and Holla 2009). Appendix Table 6 repeats
Table 5, with the addition of a control for the baseline value of the outcome variable, and all
results hold.

We also examine whether the improved test scores arises through increased attendance or
enrollment, but find no evidence for either. Table 6 Panel A reports results on observed
attendance as well as an index of three self-reported questions on attendance, and Panel B reports
results on enrollment. None of the treatments generates statistically significant improvements
relative to the control group. 35

Last we examine several attitudinal indices, and child labor, in Table 7. Starting with the five
attitudinal indexes, we note caution in interpretation: in theory, these may be either intermediate
outcomes influenced directly by the treatment(s), or consequences of the shift in resources and
test scores. In practice, we observe only two statistically significant shifts out of 20 estimates. 36

In terms of child labor, critics of financial education for youth posit that introducing children to
savings and financial decision-making may have the unintended consequence of focusing their
attention on income, and then discourage school attendance in order to work (Varcoe et al.
2005). Berry, Karlan and Pradhan (2015) tests this in Ghana with students of similar age as this


adults only. (4) My parents or relatives would be proud of me for saving. (5) Managing to save makes me feel happy
with myself. (6) It's better to spend money today than to save it for use in the future. (7) Every time I get money I
put away some money for saving. Appendix Table 4b presents the results for each of the components in this index..
35
   Appendix Table 4d presents the results for the components of the index.
36
   Appendix Tables 4e – 4f present the results for the components of these indices.



                                                         13
study, and finds that a financial education curriculum along with a savings box (but no directive
or facilitation of using the savings for education expenses) did lead to higher child labor, whereas
if a social values component was added to the financial education curriculum, there was no
impact on child labor. In our setting, we find no impact from the program on child labor, either
hours worked or total wages. Overall, the estimates from Tables 6 and 7, combined with the
other outcomes, indicate that the observed effects on learning occur solely through changes in
available supplies rather than changes in attitude or participation.

To explore econometric robustness and robustness to risks of baseline imbalance, Appendix
Tables 5 and 6 present the core results (Tables 4 to 5), except with covariates for all baseline
values of outcome variables. We find no changes in the core results.

Section VI. Conclusion

Weaker rather than stronger commitments can, in some instances, prove more effective. In the
context of an educational savings program, we find that families and children save more under a
weaker savings strategy in which funds are not dedicated to educational expenses upon deposit
than they do under a strict commitment savings program in which all deposits are dedicated to
educational expenses. The purpose of commitment savings devices is to intentionally limit the
use of deposited funds. In some contexts, however, such services may need to strike a balance
between providing sufficient limitations to make the savings mechanisms useful while being
careful not to make the limitations so severe that they deter savings. The stricter limitations may
work worse for behavioral reasons (e.g., wanting option value or judgment to change own’s
mind) or for institutional reasons (e.g., not trusting the institution that is offering the commitment
device). In our setup, for example, the voucher treatment may work worse because individuals
do not trust that proper and fairly priced school supplies will be available. However, although
this seems plausible in the first year, we believe by the second year, after seeing the program
work for a year, households should have learned that the right school supplies would be available
at a reasonable price. Understanding the nature of this trade-off between strict and loose
commitment is an important direction for future research.

When combined with a parent sensitization program, we find that families and children in the
cash arm spend their savings on educational expenses (school supplies). 37 This does not,
however, alter school participation – we find no effects on enrollment or attendance – but does
improve students’ scores on a basic math and language test by 0.11 standard deviations. This
suggests that financial constraints may play an important role in students’ academic performance



37
  Although we find that the voucher treatment led to about half the deposits as that of the cash arm, we do not find
that school supplies increased by half. We posit two possible explanations. First, although the point estimate is close
to zero, we cannot reject, statistically, a point estimate of half of that of the cash treatment effect. Second, the
voucher treatment arm may have led to a reduction in school supplies through an anchoring effect (if the amount
saved in vouchers was smaller for some than they would have spent otherwise).



                                                          14
and that understanding the role of families’ financial decision process may be an important
element in understanding the overall production process of education.

On a practical level, several implementation issues are important to explore. As a program
designed to improve student learning, treatment effects of this magnitude are large compared to
other evaluations of interventions designed to provide resources to schools or directly to children
(Jameel Poverty Action Lab 2014), but they are small relative to many other types of programs
(most notably, for example, programs that provide additional resources while also changing
pedagogical strategies). Taking the programs relative low cost (2.24 USD per student per year)
into account using the methodology proposed by Dhaliwal et. al. (2014), however, the program
delivers learning gains at a cost of 1.49 USD per tenth of a standard deviation or 6.71 standard
deviations per 100 USD. 38 This is very competitive relative to other programs. Relative to the 27
studies compared by J-PAL (2014), only four produce improvements in test scores more cost-
effectively.

In terms of encouraging family savings, the program costs were high relative to the savings
generated. However, if the program generated long term savings behavior change, then between
the continued savings and the improvement in educational outcomes, it would surpass typical
cost benefit calculations. In addition, it may be possible to reduce costs, particularly with
implementation via mobile banking. This would obviate the need for physical transfer of cash to
a bank, and would lower the risk of theft from keeping cash in a (albeit locked) box at the school.
However, if the group nature of the intervention (i.e., the public and communal training) was an
important element for take-up (through mimicking of peers, or learning from peers) and
adherence (through monitoring and potential for social recognition), then a mobile banking
implementation may lose that visual classroom element. Although these peer mechanisms were
not emphasized in the training and implementation of the program, the fact that the savings were
done publicly may have had such an effect.

On a more theoretical level, these results open up many related questions. How does the
optimality of looser versus stricter commitments depend on whether savings is long term or
short-term? If one is saving for potentially short-run needs, such as a buffer stock, looser knots
may be optimal; whereas long-term savings, such as for retirement, may require tighter
commitments as the benefits from savings are too remote. Also with respect to timing, are
external interventions of this sort effective in changing long term behavior, i.e., does the psychic
cost of deviation persist, even without an outsider-led intervention?

Questions also persist regarding how such interventions influence intra-household dynamics. Did
the intervention shift the preferences of the child, or the parents, or both, and what does this
imply for intra-household cross-generational bargaining issues?



38
     Estimates are provided in 2011 USD.



                                                 15
Lastly, design issues may be critical for such a program to work. For example, how critical was
the timing element of the “soft” commitment device, i.e., the fact that the school supplies were
immediately available for purchase at the time of withdrawal? If that was critical, it is a ringing
endorsement for the “make it easy” mantra, and also implies that the soft commitment device
may have worked for reasons elaborated on in Mullainathan and Shafir (2013), because it
increased the attention of individuals to educational expenses at exactly the right moment, when
they had cash in their hands.




                                                16
Figure 1: Research Timeline
Data Collected




                                            Baseline                                                             Endline
                    Surveys:

                    Monitoring Visits:




                    Term 1      Term 2        Term 3   Term 1   Term 2     Term 3          Term 1     Term 2       Term 3

                                 2009                               2010                                  2011
 Program Activity




                                                                P          P               P          P            P
                                                                A          A               A          A            A
                                                                Y          Y               Y          Y            Y
                                                                O          O               O          O            O
                                                                U          U               U          U            U
                                                                T          T               T          T            T
                    Savings:
                                                                &          &               &          &            &

                                                                F          F               F          F            F
                                                                A          A               A          A            A
                                                                I          I               I          I            I
                                                                R          R               R          R            R
                    Parent Sensitization:
                                                                               Parent sensitization
                                                                                treatment group




                                                                      17
References

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from
        a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121
        (2): 673–97.
———. 2010. “Female Empowerment: Further Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product
        in the Philippines.” World Development 38 (3): 333–44.
Avvisati, Francesco, Marc Gurgand, Nina Guyon, and Eric Maurin. 2013. “Getting Parents
        Involved: A Field Experiment in Deprived Schools.” The Review of Economic Studies,
        August, rdt027. doi:10.1093/restud/rdt027.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle. 2011.
        “Improving the Design of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized
        Education Experiment in Colombia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3
        (2): 167–95.
Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2004. “Willpower and Personal Rules.” Journal of Political
        Economy 112 (4): 848–87.
Berry, James, Dean Karlan, and Menno Pradhan. 2015. “The Impact of Financial Education for
        Youth in Ghana.” Working Paper 21068. National Bureau of Economic Research.
        http://www.nber.org/papers/w21068.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2016. “Facilitating Savings for
        Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.” Economic Development and
        Cultural Change 64 (2): 187–220. doi:10.1086/684014.
Clement, Douglas. 2013. “Interview with Richard Thaler.” The Region, September.
Das, Jishnu, Stefan Dercon, James Habyarimana, Pramila Krishnan, Karthik Muralidharan, and
        Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2013. “School Inputs, Household Substitution, and Teset
        Scores.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (2): 29–57.
De Arcangelis, Giuseppe, Majlinda Joxhe, David McKenzie, Erwin Tiongson, and Dean Yang.
        2014. “Directing Remittances to Education with Soft and Hard Commitments: Evidence
        from a Lab-in-the-Field Experiment and New Product Take-up among Filipino Migrants
        in Rome.” The World Bank: Policy Research Working Paper, May.
Dhaliwal, Iqbal, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Caitlin Tulloch. 2014. “Comparative
        Cost-Effectiveness to Inform Policy in Developing Countries.” In Education Policy in
        Developing Countries, edited by Paul Glewwe. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. “Nudging Farmers to Use
        Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review
        101 (6): 2350–90. doi:10.1257/aer.101.6.2350.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence
        from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1138–71.
        doi:10.1257/aer.103.4.1138.
Gine, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg, Daniel Silverman, and Dean Yang. 2015. “Revising
        Commitments: Field Evidence on the Adjustment of Prior Choices.” Working paper. The
        World Bank, Washington, DC.
Hidalgo, Diana, Mercedes Onofa, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Juan Ponce. 2013. “Can Provision of
        Free School Uniforms Harm Attendance? Evidence from Ecuador.” Journal of
        Development Economics 103: 43–51.




                                              18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). 2007. “Fall out from the ‘Big Bang’ Approach to
        Universal Primary Education: The Case of Uganda.” World Bank.
        http://www.worldbank.org/oed/education/uganda.html.
Jameel Poverty Action Lab. 2014. “Student Learning.” M.I.T.
        http://www.povertyactionlab.org/policy-lessons/education/student-learning.
Karlan, Dean, Aishwarya Ratan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2013. “Savings by and for the Poor: A
        Research Review and Agenda.” Review of Income and Wealth, October.
Kremer, Michael, and Alaka Holla. 2009. “Pricing and Access: Lessons from Randomized
        Evaluations in Education and Health.” In What Works in Development? Thinking Big and
        Thinking Small, edited by Jessica Cohen and William Easterly. Brookings Institution
        Press.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. 2013. Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means so Much.
        New York: Times Books, Henry Holt and Company.
Murphy, Paul, Carla Bertoncino, and Lianqin Wang. 2002. “Achieving Universal Primary
        Education in Uganda: The ‘Big Bang’ Approach.” 24107. Education Notes. Washington,
        D.C.: The World Bank.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2002/04/12947917/achieving-universal-
        primary-education-uganda-big-bang-approach.
“Opportunities Lost: The Impact of Grade Repetition and Early School Leaving.” 2012. Global
        Education Digest 2012. UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
Piper, Benjamin. 2010. “Uganda Early Grade Reading Assessment Findings Report: Literacy
        Aquisition and Mother Tongue.” Makerere Institute for Social Research.
Shefrin, H., and R. Thaler. 1992. “Mental Accounting, Saving, and Self-Control.” In Choice
        Over Time. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Thaler, Richard H, and Cass R Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health,
        Wealth, and Happiness. New York: Penguin Books.
UN data. 2013. “Uganda.” United National Statistical Division.
        http://data.un.org/CountryProfile.aspx?crName=Uganda.
UNESCO. 2013. “Data Centre.” Institute for Statistics.
        http://www.uis.unesco.org/Pages/DataCentre.aspx.
Varcoe, Karen P., Allen Martin, Zana Devitto, and Charles Go. 2005. “Using a Financial
        Education Curriculum for Teens.” Journal of Financial Counseling and Planning 16 (1):
        63–71.




                                             19
                                Table 1: Summary Statistics and Orthogonality Verification of Random Assignment, Full Sample Frame from Baseline
                                                                          Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                                           OLS (one                                                            P-value for
                                                                         Number             Mean          specification                                                          test of
                                                                          of Obs.         (std dev)         per cell)              OLS (one specification per row)                Cash
                                                                                                                         Cash with Voucher           Cash w/o Voucher           Parent =
                                                                                       Any                     Any
                                                                                                 Control                    Parent     with Parent     Parent     w/o Parent      Other
                                                                                   Treatment               Treatment
                                                                                                                          Outreach Outreach Outreach Outreach                  Treatments
Dependent Variables                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)         (9)
Classroom Survey: % of students in attendance                               811       0.09         0.10       -0.01          -0.02        -0.01        -0.01          -0.01       0.55
                                                                                      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
Classroom Survey: Supplies Index                                            813       0.03         0.01        0.02          0.22*         0.04        -0.12          -0.05       0.02
                                                                                      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.10)        (0.11)        (0.15)       (0.19)        (0.14)
Normalized Test Score: Grammar                                             4710       0.08         0.00        0.11           0.12        -0.02        0.18*          0.14        0.87
                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.07)        (0.11)        (0.09)       (0.10)        (0.09)
Normalized Test Score: Reading                                             4713       0.00         0.00        0.01          -0.02        -0.00         0.02          0.05        0.59
                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.07)        (0.10)        (0.09)       (0.09)        (0.11)
Normalized Test Score: Math                                                4715       0.00         0.00        0.02          -0.01        -0.07         0.07          0.08        0.72
                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.06)        (0.09)        (0.08)       (0.10)        (0.10)
Normalized Test Score: Total                                               4716       0.03         0.00        0.06           0.04        -0.03         0.11          0.11        0.77
                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.07)        (0.11)        (0.09)       (0.10)        (0.11)
Student Survey: Attendance Code (lower = more attendance)                  4716       1.43         1.42        0.00          -0.07         0.10        -0.01          0.00        0.33
                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.07)        (0.11)        (0.12)       (0.11)        (0.10)
Student Survey: Days missed per school term                                3886       1.63         1.64       -0.02          -0.04        -0.06        -0.07         0.10*        0.57
                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.04)        (0.07)        (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.06)
Student Survey: Prefer 500 UGX today to 800 UGX tomorrow                   4702       0.65         0.64        0.01           0.02        -0.00        -0.04        0.07**        0.83
                                                                                      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)
Student Survey: Prefer 500 UGX today to 800 UGX next week                  4699       0.29         0.24      0.04**           0.06       0.07**        -0.02        0.07**        0.68
                                                                                      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)
Student Survey: Child receives pocket money from family                    4678       0.75         0.74        0.01          -0.02         0.03       0.07***         -0.02       0.04
                                                                                      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.03)
Student Survey: Amount received in pocket money (UGX)                      4698      204.20      214.45       -7.92         -17.84        -1.30         9.69        -21.83        0.30
                                                                                      (5.13)      (6.65)     (13.91)       (16.31)       (19.61)      (18.07)       (19.39)
Joint Significance Test F-stat, one regression per column with column                                          1.35           1.16         1.08         1.25          1.10
header as dep var (p-value)                                                                                   (0.21)        (0.32)        (0.38)       (0.27)        (0.37)
% of students in attendance: The enumerators count of the number of students present during a classroom visit, divided by the enrollment in the class as provided by the teacher. Supplies
Index: the normalized mean of 4 binary measures: whether a student has a uniform, notebook, mathset, and shoes. The coefficient is expressed as standard deviations from the control mean.
Attendance Code: A subjectively recorded code given with the enrollment data that indicates how frequently a student attends, from 1 (always attends) to 6 (never attends). OLS
specifications: Columns 4 and in Colums 5-8 include robust standard errors, clustered by school (the unit of randomization), and subcounty fixed effects (the stratification variable). *
p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<.01


                                                                                           20
                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics and Orthogonality Verification of Random Assignment, Post-Attrition Sample Frame
                                                                         Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                                      OLS (one                                                         P-value for
                                                                      Number            Mean         specification                                                        test of
                                                                      of Obs.         (std dev)        per cell)            OLS (one specification per row)                Cash
                                                                                                                   Cash with     Voucher      Cash w/o Voucher w/o Parent =
                                                                                   Any                    Any
                                                                                             Control                Parent     with Parent      Parent       Parent        Other
                                                                               Treatment              Treatment
                                                                                                                   Outreach     Outreach      Outreach     Outreach Treatment
Dependent Variables                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)
Endline survey completed (of baseline students)                        4716        0.81        0.81        0.00       0.01         0.00          -0.02        0.02         0.16
                                                                                  (0.39)      (0.39)     (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)
Normalized Test Score: Grammar                                         3832        0.09        0.01       0.06*     0.09**         0.00        0.10**         0.05         0.87
                                                                                  (0.99)      (1.00)     (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.04)
Normalized Test Score: Reading                                         3835        0.01        0.01       -0.03       -0.05        0.03          -0.07        -0.03        0.59
                                                                                  (1.02)      (1.00)     (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.04)
Normalized Test Score: Math                                            3837        0.00        0.01       -0.03       -0.04        -0.04         -0.03        -0.02        0.72
                                                                                  (0.98)      (0.98)     (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.06)       (0.06)
Normalized Test Score: Total                                           3837        0.04        0.01        0.00       0.00         0.00           0.00        0.00         0.77
                                                                                  (0.99)      (0.99)     (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)
Student Survey: Attendance Code (lower = more attendance)              3837        1.42        1.42       -0.01       -0.08        0.07          -0.03        -0.01        0.33
                                                                                  (0.94)      (0.90)     (0.07)      (0.12)       (0.13)        (0.10)       (0.10)
Student Survey: Days missed per school term                            3145        1.62        1.63       -0.01       -0.03        -0.05         -0.05        0.09         0.57
                                                                                  (0.91)      (0.93)     (0.05)      (0.07)       (0.08)        (0.07)       (0.06)
Student Survey: Prefer 500 UGX today to 800 UGX next week              3828        1.37        1.37        0.00       0.01         -0.01          0.01        -0.01        0.83
                                                                                  (0.48)      (0.48)     (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.02)
Student Survey: Prefer 500 UGX today to 1,000 UGX next week            2415        1.49        1.52       -0.03       -0.05        0.00          -0.01        -0.03        0.68
                                                                                  (0.50)      (0.50)     (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
Student Survey: Child receives pocket money from family                3805        0.75        0.74        0.01       -0.02        0.02        0.05**         -0.02        0.04
                                                                                  (0.43)      (0.44)     (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.02)       (0.03)
Student Survey: Amount received in pocket money (UGX)                  3821      199.30      217.59      -16.08     -19.38        -12.07          3.27      -34.54*        0.30
                                                                                (248.80) (303.02)       (15.17)     (18.37)      (21.01)       (18.98)      (18.34)
% of students in attendance: The enumerators count of the number of students present during a classroom visit, divided by the enrollment in the class as provided by the teacher.
Supplies Index: the normalized mean of 4 binary measures: whether a student has a uniform, notebook, mathset, and shoes. The coefficient is expressed as standard deviations from
the control mean. Attendance Code: A subjectively recorded code given with the enrollment data that indicates how frequently a student attends, from 1 (always attends) to 6 (never
attends). OLS specifications: Columns 4 and in Colums 5-8 include robust standard errors, clustered by school (the unit of randomization), and subcounty fixed effects (the
stratification variable). * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<.01




                                                                                        21
                                                          Table 3: Super Savers Program Savings by Treatment Group in '000 UGX
                                                                                   Mean (standard error)
                                                                                                                   Mean
                                                                                                              (standard error)                                   p-value from t-test
                                                                                             Cash          Cash           Voucher            Voucher
                                                                                             with           w/o             with               w/o            Cash           Outreach
                                                                                            Parent        Parent           Parent             Parent           vs.              vs.
                                                                                           Outreach      Outreach        Outreach            Outreach        Voucher        No Outreach
    Dependent Variables                                                                       (1)           (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)
Panel A: Both Years
    Average Cumulative Deposits Made per School                                               527.08          553.23          265.87          290.31         0.001***          0.761
                                                                                             (132.23)         (68.83)         (32.59)         (42.12)
     Average Cumulative Deposits Made per Student (any attendance)                             2.20             2.34            1.18            1.12         0.000***          0.985
                                                                                              (0.37)           (0.34)          (0.17)          (0.18)
     Average Cumulative Deposits Made per Student (avg attendance)                             4.21             4.56            2.16            2.17         0.000***          0.895
                                                                                              (0.76)           (0.69)          (0.29)          (0.38)
Panel B: 2010
    Average Cumulative Deposits Made per School (2010)                                           180.29       186.76          109.09          105.24          0.021**          0.969
                                                                                                 (53.34)      (28.26)         (19.46)         (19.33)
     Average Cumulative Deposits Made per Student in 2010 (any attendance)                         0.95         0.99            0.58            0.48         0.006***          0.746
                                                                                                  (0.20)       (0.18)          (0.13)          (0.09)
     Average Cumulative Deposits Made per Student in 2010 (avg attendance)                         1.28         1.43            0.78            0.69         0.005***          0.999
                                                                                                  (0.25)       (0.27)          (0.17)          (0.14)
Panel C: 2011
    Average Cumulative Deposits Made per School (2011)                                          346.78         366.47          156.78          185.07          0.000***          0.659
                                                                                                (81.99)        (50.49)         (16.30)         (28.77)
      Average Cumulative Deposits Made per Student in 2011 (any attendance)                       3.60           2.91            1.26            1.51           0.013**          0.688
                                                                                                 (1.29)         (0.54)          (0.15)          (0.32)
      Average Cumulative Deposits Made per Student in 2011 (avg attendance)                       4.41           3.67            1.60            1.77           0.014**          0.695
                                                                                                 (1.64)         (0.70)          (0.17)          (0.37)
      Observations (schools)                                                                       19             20              19              20
Results from bank administrative school-level data. Exchange rate 2815 Ugandan Shillings per US dollar. Cumulative savings deposits for full two years of the program. Note that these
data are collected at the school level, i.e., the Average Deposits per Student is the average across schools of the average deposits per student at each school. Number of students per
school is calculated attendance data from 8 visits over 2 years. The top specification counts any student who attended during any of these 8 visits; the bottom uses the average number of
students present over those 8 visits. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<.01.




                                                                                            22
                                                  Table 4: Process and Intermediate Outcomes, Intent to Treat Estimates
                                                                    Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                             OLS (one                                                    P-value for
                                                    Number                 Mean             specification                      OLS                       test of Cash
                                                    of Obs.              (std dev)            per cell)            (each row = one regression)             Parent =
                                                                                                          Cash with Voucher      Cash w/o      Voucher      Other
                                                                   Any                           Any        Parent   with Parent    Parent    w/o Parent Treatments
                                                                Treatment        Control     Treatment    Outreach Outreach       Outreach Outreach
Dependent Variables                                    (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)
Panel A: Process Outcomes (Endline Survey - 2011)
   Heard of Super Savers program                      3831          0.79           0.11        0.67***     0.69***     0.67***     0.68***      0.64***       0.23
                                                                  (0.41)          (0.32)        (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.03)
   Saved with Super Savers                            3832          0.44           0.03        0.40***     0.42***     0.39***     0.44***      0.35***       0.37
                                                                  (0.50)          (0.18)        (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.04)
   Ever Saves Money                                   3829          0.79           0.79           0.00        0.01        0.02        0.02        -0.02       0.86
                                                                  (0.40)          (0.41)        (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.02)
   Primary Source of Savings was Work                 3838         0.43            0.47         -0.04*     -0.06**       -0.04        0.00      -0.05**       0.24
                                                                  (0.50)          (0.50)        (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.02)
Panel B: Intermediate Outcomes (Classroom Visits)
   School Supplies Index 2010                          813         -0.23           -0.08         -0.08        0.12       -0.05       -0.17        -0.21       0.06
                                                                  (1.18)          (0.88)        (0.12)      (0.13)      (0.20)      (0.24)       (0.19)
   School Supplies Index 2011                          882          0.30           0.21           0.08      0.32**        0.04       -0.09         0.07       0.02
                                                                  (0.95)          (0.92)        (0.12)      (0.14)      (0.17)      (0.21)
Panel C: Student Survey (Endline Survey - 2011)
   School Supplies Index                              3838          0.01           0.00           0.01       0.11*        0.02       -0.06        -0.04       0.02
                                                                  (1.02)          (1.00)        (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.07)       (0.06)
   Parental Involvement Index                         3838          0.01           0.00           0.00        0.04       -0.01        0.00        -0.01       0.42
                                                                  (1.04)          (1.00)        (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.06)
   Savings Attitude Index                             3838          0.05           0.00           0.06        0.04        0.10        0.06         0.02       0.76
                                                                  (1.00)          (1.00)        (0.04)      (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.06)
   School Fees                                        3838       28,804.26 33,580.77          -4652.60    -6158.51    -6179.58    -3000.08     -3340.79       0.55
                                                               (64594.63) (76629.27)         (3802.75) (4445.07) (5017.89) (4698.29) (5229.41)
   Missed school because sent to look for fees or     3583              0.18           0.18      0.00        -0.01       -0.00       0.02         -0.01       0.67
   lack of scholastic materials                                   (0.38)          (0.39)        (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)
   Cost of most recent test                           2348       1506.71         1589.22        -57.27      -68.45      78.24      -318.33       55.89        0.95
                                                                (2658.92)       (2843.68)     (190.06)    (273.29)    (255.71)    (245.58)     (302.07)
See next page for notes.

                                                                                 23
Table 4 Notes:
Total Self Reported Savings (Endline Survey): sum of amount of money respondents reported savings in
each of a variety of locations (at home in local bank, hidden at home, give to a family member, savings
program at school -- which likely includes the savings held as part of the treatment, in a bank account of a
family member, other). School Supplies Index (Classroom Visits): Enumerators at several classroom visits
each term counted the number of students with school supplies then we divided that number by the number
of students in attendance. Components detailed in Appendix Table 3a. School Supplies Index (Endline
Survey): a standardized index of the count of categories for which at least one item is owned of the
following: uniforms, notebooks, mathsets, and shoes. Components detailed in Appendix Table 3b. Parental
Involvement Index includes 3 questions: 1) Student thinks parents are responsible for children's education.
2) Has your parent come to your school in the past year? 3) Has your parent seen a report of yours from
school in the past year? Components detailed in Appendix Table 3b. Savings Attitude Index includes 7
statements each of which the student evaluated on a Likert scale, 1-5. All scales were converted after the
fact so that higher on the scale meant more positive attitude toward saving. 1) Saving money is not
necessary if you live at home with your family. 2) Saving is a good thing to do. 3) Saving is for adults only.
4) My parents or relatives would be proud of me for saving. 5) Managing to save makes me feel happy with
myself. 6) It's better to spend money today than to save it for use in the future. 7) Every time I get money I
put away some money for saving. Components detailed in Appendix Table 3b. Column 5 compares the Cash
with Parent Outreach to the pool of the three other treatments and control group. OLS specifications:
Columns 4-8 include robust standard errors, clustered by school (the unit of randomization), a control for
children's mean testing score, and subcounty fixed effects (the stratification variables). *p<0.10 **p<0.05
***p<.01. Column 9 is the p-value of an F-test of sigificance on a regression of the cash parent treatment
against all other treatmnets and the same controls from Columns 4-7.




                                                      24
                                        Table 5: Effect of Super Savers on Normalized Test Scores, Endline 2011
                                                            Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                OLS (one                                                             P-value for test
                    Number of                 Mean            specification                            OLS                          of Cash Parent =
                       Obs.                 (std dev)            per cell)                  (each row = one regression)                  Other
                                                                               Cash with    Voucher with    Cash w/o    Voucher w/o    Treatments
                                       Any                         Any           Parent         Parent        Parent      Parent
                                                                Treatment
                                    Treatment       Control                    Outreach       Outreach       Outreach    Outreach
                        (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)          (7)         (8)            (9)
Grammar                3768            0.05           -0.01         0.05        0.15***           0.03         0.06        -0.05          0.01
                                      (1.05)         (0.99)       (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)      (0.07)
Reading                3765            0.02           0.00          0.01         0.11**           0.00         -0.03       -0.03          0.00
                                      (1.01)         (1.00)       (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)      (0.07)
Math                   3768            -0.04          0.00         -0.05          0.00         -0.11**         -0.01       -0.09          0.09
                                      (1.00)         (1.00)       (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.05)      (0.07)
Total                  3765            0.01           0.00          0.01         0.11**          -0.02         0.00        -0.06          0.00
                                      (1.02)         (1.00)       (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.05)        (0.04)      (0.07)
OLS specifications: Columns 4-7 include robust standard errors, clustered by school (the unit of randomization), a control for children's mean
testing score, and subcounty fixed effects (the stratification variables). *p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<.01. Column 9 is the p-value of an F-test of
sigificance on a regression of the cash parent treatment against all other treatmnets and the same controls from Columns 4-8.




                                                                         25
                                                         Table 6: Effect of Super Savers on School Participation
                                                                   Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                               OLS (one                                                             P-value for test
                                         Number              Mean             specification                           OLS                          of Cash Parent =
                                         of Obs.           (std dev)            per cell)                  (each row = one regression)                  Other
                                                                                             Cash with Voucher with Cash w/o           Voucher w/o    Treatments
                                                                                  Any
                                                       Any                                     Parent          Parent       Parent       Parent
                                                    Treatment      Control     Treatment      Outreach       Outreach      Outreach     Outreach
                                            (1)        (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)              (6)          (7)          (8)            (9)
Panel A: Attendance rate
  2010                                     4705        0.35          0.35          -0.02          -0.06          -0.02           -0.03           0.02            0.24
                                                      (0.42)        (0.42)        (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.04)         (0.04)
   2011                                    4705         0.20         0.17           0.00          -0.01           0.00            0.02           0.01            0.42
                                                      (0.38)        (0.35)        (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.02)
   Overall (2010 & 2011 combined)          4705         0.29         0.28          -0.01          -0.04          -0.01           -0.01           0.02            0.27
                                                      (0.37)        (0.36)        (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.03)
   Attendance Index                        3586        -0.02         0.00          -0.01           0.02          -0.00           -0.05          -0.03            0.23
                                                      (0.98)        (1.00)        (0.04)         (0.06)         (0.06)          (0.06)         (0.06)
Panel B: Enrollment rate
  2010                                     4716          0.44         0.44          -0.03         -0.08          -0.03          -0.02           0.03             0.15
                                                        (0.50)       (0.50)        (0.03)        (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)
   2011                                    4716          0.24         0.22          -0.00         -0.02          -0.00           0.02          -0.00             0.39
                                                        (0.43)       (0.41)        (0.02)        (0.04)         (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.03)
Attendance Rate: Based on a roll call of students on the official school enrollment list, counting only those students present in the class when roll call was done.
Attendance Index: includes 3 self-reported questions on student attendance: 1) Of the five school days of last week, how many were you absent? 2) Think of a normal
week from last term, of the five school days how many were you usually absent from school? 3) Think of a normal month from last term, how many days were you
usually absent? Components detailed in Appendix Table 3c. Enrollment Rate: Based on teacher responses as to whether a student on the official school enrollment list,
was still enrolled at that school. OLS specifications: Columns 4-8 include robust standard errors, clustered by school (the unit of randomization), a control for children's
mean testing score, and subcounty fixed effects (the stratification variables). *p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<.01. Column 9 is the p-value of an F-test of sigificance on a
regression of the cash parent treatment against all other treatmnets and the same controls from Columns 4-7.




                                                                                     26
                                                        Table 7: Effect of Super Savers on Student Attitudes, Endline 2011
                                                                        Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                                   OLS (one                                                             P-value for
                                                                 Number             Mean          specification                       OLS                              test of Cash
                                                                 of Obs.          (std dev)         per cell)              (each row = one regression)                   Parent =
                                                                                                                   Cash with Voucher          Cash w/o      Voucher        Other
                                                                               Any                      Any          Parent    with Parent     Parent      w/o Parent   Treatments
                                                                          Treatment Control         Treatment      Outreach Outreach          Outreach      Outreach
                                                                    (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)
Self Esteem Index                                                  3838       -0.02       0.00        -0.03         -0.05**        -0.03        -0.03          -0.01        0.23
                                                                             (0.44)      (0.44)       (0.02)         (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.03)
Time Preference Index                                              3838       -0.04       0.00        -0.04           -0.02        -0.05        -0.04          -0.06        0.55
                                                                             (1.01)      (1.00)       (0.04)         (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.06)        (0.06)
Locus of Control (binary)                                          3826       0.58        0.60         -0.02          -0.01        -0.02         -0.01         -0.03        0.75
                                                                             (0.49)      (0.49)       (0.02)         (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)
Financial Independence Index                                       3838       -0.04       0.00         -0.04          -0.06      -0.13**          0.05         -0.01        0.64
                                                                             (0.97)      (1.00)       (0.04)         (0.06)       (0.06)        (0.06)        (0.05)
Aspirations Index                                                  3838       -0.01       0.00         -0.02          -0.04        -0.03          0.03         -0.03        0.56
                                                                             (1.04)      (1.00)       (0.04)         (0.06)       (0.06)        (0.04)        (0.06)
Total annual hours worked, wins. 99%                               3838     295.33      294.96          3.43          -4.32       -32.83        29.91         20.04         0.69
                                                                           (461.85) (447.26)         (17.63)        (23.24)      (28.38)       (29.82)       (26.39)
Total annual income from work (10k UGX), wins. 99%                 3838      18.00       18.00        -0.05           -1.87        -2.91        3.59*          0.97         0.17
                                                                            (34.00)     (34.00)       (1.37)         (1.72)       (2.23)        (2.09)        (2.02)
Self Esteem Index: includes 10 statements each of which the student evaluated on a Likert scale, 1-5. All scales were converted after the fact so that higher on the scale meant
higher self esteem. 1) I am satisfied with myself. 2) Sometimes I think I am no good at all. 3) I believe I have a number of good qualities. 4) I am able to do things as well as
most children. 5) I do not have much to be proud of. 6) Sometimes I feel useless. 7) I believe I am a valuable person, at least as much as my classmates. 8) I wish I could have
more respect for myself 9) I sometimes think that I am a failure. 10) When I think of myself, I usually think good thoughts. In addition to those 10 statements, there is one
question: 11) Are you confident that you will be successful in the future? Components detailed in Appendix Table 3d. Time Preference Index: includes 2 hypothetical time
preference choices. 1) Would you rather receive 500 shillings today or 800 shillings next week? 2) Would you rather receive 500 shillings today or 1,000 shillings next week?
From these, respondents were split into low, medium, and high future preference groups. Components detailed in Appendix Table 3e. Locus of Control: If a person is successful
in life, is it because he or she was lucky or because he or she worked very hard? (1=worked hard, 0= lucky) Financial Independence Index: includes 3 questions: 1) How much
money do you think you will get in the next 7 days? 2) How much money did you get in the past 7 days? 3) How much pocket money are you given to spend as you wish?
Components detailed in Appendix Table 3e. Aspirations Index: includes 4 questions about academic and vocation aspirations: 1) If you graduate from primary school, will your
life be better than if you hadn’t graduated? 2) Do you think you will go to secondary school? 3) Do you think you will reach university? 4) What do you want to be when you
grow up? (student responded with career that requires higher education) Components detailed in Appendix Table 3e. Exchange rate: 2815 Ugandan Shillings per US dollar. OLS
specifications: Columns 4-8 include robust standard errors, clustered by school (the unit of randomization), a control for children's mean testing score, and subcounty fixed
effects (the stratification variables). *p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<.01. Column 9 is the p-value of an F-test of sigificance on a regression of the cash parent treatment against all other
treatmnets and the same controls from Columns 4-7.




                                                                                         27
                                Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics of Annual School Fees

                                                     Number                                25th               75th
                                                     of Obs. Mean Std Dev Min Percentile Median Percentile Max.
                                                       (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)
Panel A: Annual School Fees for Each Student (in USD), winsorized at 90%
    Total of All Fees                                    3585 13.02 13.387             0 2.664298 6.8206 20.62167 40.5
    General Fee                                          3583 7.013 11.051             0         0        0 11.72291 29.84
    Food Fees                                            3584 1.219 1.6512             0         0 0.0938 1.831972 4.902
                         Lunch Fee                       3584 0.884 1.4618             0         0        0 1.154529 4.263
                         Chef/Grinding Fee               3583 0.218 0.4175             0         0        0          0 1.066
    Testing Fees                                         3584 2.119 2.5043             0         0 1.0657 3.197158 7.46
                         Standardized Test Fee           3583 1.033 1.7081             0         0        0 1.278863 4.973
                         Practice Test Fee               3584 0.548 0.6559             0         0        0 1.065719 1.599
                         Test Paper Fee                  3583        0          0      0         0        0          0       0
    School Infrastructure Fees                           3584 0.156 0.3622             0         0        0          0 1.066
                         Development Fee                 3583 0.089 0.2578             0         0        0          0 0.853
                         School Necessities Fee          3584        0          0      0         0        0          0       0
    Extra Lessons Fee                                    3583 0.39 1.0173              0         0        0          0 3.197
Panel B: Average Annual School Fees per Student for Each School (in USD), winsorized at 90%
    Total of All Fees                                     136 16.18 10.215 2.9258 8.466267 13.352 20.74355 38.28
    General Fee                                           136 10.51 9.3212             0 3.803239 7.7982 12.5824 31.84
    Food Fees                                             136 2.159 1.8599             0 0.896198 1.556 2.667107 6.394
                         Lunch Fee                        136 1.875        1.949       0 0.620533 1.0214 2.184901 6.394
                         Chef/Grinding Fee                136 0.263 0.2627             0 0.015066 0.1599 0.467075 0.748
    Testing Fees                                          136 2.377        1.095 0.0082 1.541988 2.2421 3.262942 4.225
                         Standardized Test Fee            136 1.279 0.8392             0 0.615009 1.2006 1.875765 2.713
                         Practice Test Fee                136 0.703 0.4658             0 0.334472 0.7112 1.055194 1.476
                         Test Paper Fee                   136 0.311 0.4852             0         0        0 0.552975 1.426
    School Infrastructure Fees                            136 0.322 0.3467             0 0.036137 0.1694 0.498369 1.01
                         Development Fee                  136 0.226 0.2944             0         0 0.0627 0.372133 0.827
                         School Necessities Fee           136 0.065 0.0797             0         0 0.0265 0.12259 0.225
    Extra Lessons Fee                                     136 0.665 0.8273             0         0 0.2957 1.024521 2.453
The data here incorporate student-reported fees across three terms. Numbers are in USD, converted from UGX in Sept 2011
(when endline survey was conducted) at 2815UGX = 1USD. General Fee: A fee required to attend school. Because the
government discourages General Fees, most schools do not charge them, but some schools, especially in urban areas still do.
Food Fees: include lunch fees and chef/grinding fees. The chef/grinding fee can either be monetary or in-kind (e.g., maize).
We imputed the value of maize at 450 UGX/kg. Testing Fees: include standardized test fees, practice test fees, and test paper
fees. Practice test fee is often optional. School Infrastructure Fees: include Development Fee and School Necessities Fee. The
Development Fee is generally for infrastructure projects such as latrines, building repair, etc. The School Necessities Fee
includes recurring costs such as toilet paper (and other supplies) and utilities.




                                                              28
           Appendix Table 2: Data Collection Summary
                                2010         2011        2012
Student Survey
  Grades Covered              P5, P6        P6, P7
  Median age                   12, 13       13, 14
  Sample Size (Students)        4716         3838

Attendance Survey
 Grades Covered               P5, P6      P6, P7
 Median age                   12, 13      13, 14
 Sample Size (Students)       37797       29038

Classroom Survey
  Grades Covered            P5, P6, P7   P5, P6, P7    P5, P6, P7
  Median age                12, 13, 14   12, 13, 14    12, 13, 14
  Sample Size (Classes)        406          408           340




                              29
                                                  Appendix Table 3: Additional Attrition Analysis
                                                                      OLS
                                                 Endline Survey Endline Survey Endline Survey               Endline Test     Endline Test     Endline Test
                            Dependent variable:    Completed        Completed         Completed              Completed        Completed        Completed
                                                       (1)             (2)                (3)                   (4)              (5)              (6)
Cash with Parent Outreach                       0.00763         0.00281            -0.00315               0.00672          0.00298          -0.0256
                                                (0.0172)        (0.0205)           (0.0664)               (0.0189)         (0.0223)         (0.0817)
Cash w/o Parent Outreach                        -0.0118         -0.0117            0.0452                 0.000352         -0.00362         0.0204
                                                (0.0190)        (0.0202)           (0.0781)               (0.0185)         (0.0199)         (0.0814)
Voucher with Parent Outreach                    0.00254         0.00564            0.0524                 0.00624          0.00594          0.0293
                                                (0.0209)        (0.0236)           (0.0710)               (0.0208)         (0.0243)         (0.0734)
Voucher w/o Parent Outreach                     0.0185          0.0148             0.0596                 0.0161           0.00797          0.0181
                                                (0.0174)        (0.0193)           (0.0712)               (0.0179)         (0.0195)         (0.0649)
Constant                                        0.759***        0.707***           0.694***               0.746***         0.687***         0.690***
                                                (0.0233)        (0.0399)           (0.0536)               (0.0234)         (0.0430)         (0.0567)
Observations                                    4716            3832               3832                   4716             3832             3832

Covariates                                                 No                Yes               Yes               No              Yes               Yes
Interactions between each covariate and each
treatment variable                                          No                No               Yes               No               No              Yes
Control mean                                               0.81              0.81              0.81             0.80             0.80             0.80
(Control sd)                                              (0.39)            (0.39)            (0.39)           (0.40)           (0.40)           (0.40)
F-test (p-value) of joint significance of the four         0.68              0.36                               0.23             0.08
treatment assignments                                     (0.58)            (0.84)                             (0.92)           (0.99)
                                                                                              1.38*                                              1.51**
F-test (p-value) of joint significance of interaction                                         (0.07)                                             (0.04)
terms of each covariate with each treatment
All specifications are OLS, include subcounty (the stratification variable) fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by school. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***




                                                                             30
                             Appendix Table 4a: Components of Table 4, Panel B, School Supplies Index
                                                  Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                            OLS (one                                                        P-value for
                       Number of            Mean           specification                        OLS                         test of Cash
                          Obs.            (std dev)          per cell)             (each row = one regression)                Parent =
                                                                                       Voucher                                 Other
                                                                          Cash with      with      Cash w/o Voucher Treatments
                                        Any                     Any        Parent       Parent      Parent w/o Parent
                                   Treatment Control        Treatment Outreach Outreach Outreach Outreach
                           (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
Panel A: School Supplies Index & Components (Classroom Surveys 2010 and 2011)
   School Supplies        813         -0.161      -0.099       -0.08          0.12       -0.05        -0.17        -0.21        0.06
   Index (2010)                      (1.175)     (0.886)      (0.12)        (0.13)      (0.20)       (0.24)       (0.19)
   Shoes                  813          0.246      0.251         0.00          0.00       0.04*        -0.04        0.00         0.99
                                     (0.256)     (0.256)      (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.03)
   Uniform                813          0.847      0.839        -0.01         -0.00       0.01         -0.03        -0.01        0.70
                                     (0.108)     (0.118)      (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.04)       (0.03)
   Math Set               813          0.378      0.364         0.01          0.03       0.00         -0.01        0.01         0.24
                                     (0.113)     (0.097)      (0.01)        (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)
   Pencils                813          0.992      0.992         0.00          0.00       0.00         0.00         -0.00        0.35
                                     (0.029)     (0.038)      (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.01)
   Exercise Book          813          0.990      0.997        -0.00          0.00       -0.01        0.00         -0.01        0.10
                                     (0.043)     (0.017)      (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)       (0.01)
   School Supplies        882          0.370      0.254         0.08       0.32**        0.04         -0.09        0.07         0.02
   Index (2011)                      (0.914)     (0.892)      (0.12)        (0.14)      (0.17)       (0.21)       (0.16)
   Shoes                  882          0.349      0.319         0.04          0.05       0.05*        0.01                      0.59
                                     (0.264)     (0.242)      (0.02)        (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)
   Uniform                882          0.883      0.861        -0.00        0.03*        -0.01        -0.04        0.01         0.02
                                     (0.111)     (0.115)      (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.03)
   Math Set               882          0.440      0.437        -0.00          0.01       -0.00        0.00         -0.01        0.41
                                     (0.125)     (0.121)      (0.01)        (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)
   Exercise Book          882          0.903      0.902         0.02       0.05**        0.01         0.00         0.01         0.03
                                     (0.094)     (0.105)      (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)
Notes: All specifications are OLS, include subcounty (the stratification variable) fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by school.
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                  31
                                          Appendix Table 4b: Components of Table 4, Panel C, Student Survey Indices, Endline 2011
                                                                       Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                                   OLS (one                                                           P-value for
                                                               Number              Mean           specification                          OLS                         test of Cash
                                                                of Obs.          (std dev)          per cell)                (each row = one regression)               Parent =
                                                                                                                  Cash with     Voucher      Cash w/o Voucher w/o       Other
                                                                              Any                      Any         Parent      with Parent    Parent       Parent    Treatments
                                                                          Treatment Control Treatment             Outreach      Outreach     Outreach     Outreach
                                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)           (9)
School Supplies Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
  School Supplies Index                                          3838         0.01        0.00         0.01         0.11*         0.02          -0.06       -0.04         0.02
                                                                             (1.02)      (1.00)      (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.07)      (0.06)
  Shoes                                                          3838         0.20        0.19         0.01          0.02         0.02          0.00        0.00          0.72
                                                                             (0.40)      (0.39)      (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.02)
  Uniform                                                        3838         0.70        0.70        -0.00          0.04         0.01          -0.03       -0.02         0.05
                                                                             (0.46)      (0.46)      (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.03)
  Math Set                                                       3838         0.38        0.36         0.01          0.03         0.02          -0.01       0.01          0.55
                                                                             (0.49)      (0.48)      (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.03)      (0.03)
  Pencils                                                        3838         0.66        0.67        -0.01         -0.01         -0.02         -0.01       -0.01         0.98
                                                                             (0.47)      (0.47)      (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.02)
  Exercise Book                                                  3838         0.44        0.44        -0.00        0.07**         -0.02         -0.03       -0.04         0.00
                                                                             (0.50)      (0.50)      (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.04)      (0.04)
Parental Involvement Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
  Parental Involvement Index                                     3838         0.01        0.00         0.00          0.04         -0.01         0.00        -0.01         0.42
                                                                             (1.04)      (1.00)      (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.06)        (0.06)      (0.06)
  Has parent seen a report from school in the past year?         3838         0.90        0.90        -0.01          0.01         0.00          -0.02       -0.02         0.19
                                                                             (0.30)      (0.29)      (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.02)
  Has your parent come to your school in the past year?          3838         0.71        0.71        -0.00          0.00         -0.02         0.00        0.01          0.69
                                                                             (0.46)      (0.45)      (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.03)
  Student thinks parents are responsible for education.          3838         0.72        0.70         0.02          0.02         0.01          0.04        0.02          0.96
                                                                             (0.45)      (0.46)      (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)      (0.02)
Savings Attitude Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
  Savings Attitude Index                                         3838         0.05        0.00         0.06          0.04         0.10          0.06        0.02          0.76
                                                                             (1.00)      (1.00)      (0.04)        (0.08)        (0.07)        (0.07)      (0.06)
  Saving money is not necessary if you live at home with         3819         3.07        2.96      0.11***        0.14**        0.12**        0.11*        0.07          0.50
  your family.                                                               (0.81)      (0.85)      (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.06)      (0.05)
  Saving is a good thing to do.                                  3830         3.49        3.50        -0.01         -0.06         0.04          -0.04       0.00          0.09
                                                                             (0.54)      (0.54)      (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)
  Saving is for adults only.                                     3818         3.36        3.33         0.03          0.03         0.07*         0.00        0.01          0.95
                                                                             (0.64)      (0.65)      (0.03)        (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)
                                                                 3769         3.21        3.20         0.01          0.01         0.01          0.03        -0.02         0.97
  My parents or relatives would be proud of me for saving.                   (0.58)      (0.61)      (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.03)        (0.04)      (0.03)
                                                                 3819         3.38        3.35         0.03          0.04         0.05          0.01        0.03          0.81
  Managing to save makes me feel happy with myself.                          (0.58)      (0.61)      (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)
  It's better to spend money today than to save it for use in    3813         3.16        3.13         0.03          0.00         0.06        0.08**        0.00          0.30
  the future.                                                                (0.70)      (0.70)      (0.03)        (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)
  Every time I get money I put away some money for               3812         3.04        3.05        -0.01          0.01         -0.05         0.03                      0.63
  saving.                                                                    (0.68)      (0.71)      (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.05)      (0.05)
Notes: All specifications are OLS, include subcounty (the stratification variable) fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by school. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                                                                 32
                        Appendix Table 4c:Components of Table 4, Panel C, Individual School Supplies Items, Endline 2011
                                                     Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                            Number             Mean                                   OLS                                P-value for
                                             of Obs.         (std dev)                    (each row = one regression)                    test of Cash
                                                                                                                                           Parent =
                                                                                      Cash with Voucher          Cash w/o     Voucher       Other
                                                             Any                        Parent    with Parent     Parent     w/o Parent  Treatments
                                                          Treatment       Control     Outreach      Outreach     Outreach    Outreach
                                                (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
Reports owning at least 1 pair of shoes        3838          0.63           0.62         0.01         -0.02         0.00        0.02           0.89
                                                            (0.48)         (0.49)       (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.03)      (0.03)
Student wearing shoes during survey            3838          0.20           0.19         0.02         0.02          0.00        0.00           0.72
                                                            (0.40)         (0.39)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.02)
Reports owning at least 1 uniform              3837          0.84           0.86         0.01          0.00        -0.05*       -0.04          0.09
                                                            (0.36)         (0.35)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.02)
Child wearing uniform during interview         3838          0.70           0.70          0.04         0.01         -0.03       -0.02          0.05
                                                            (0.46)         (0.46)       (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.03)
Reports owning a math set                      3838          0.38           0.36          0.03         0.02         -0.01        0.01          0.55
                                                            (0.49)         (0.48)       (0.02)       (0.04)        (0.03)      (0.03)
Shows enumerator math set                      3838          0.24           0.21        0.04**         0.04         -0.01        0.02          0.18
                                                            (0.42)         (0.41)       (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.02)      (0.03)
Reports owning at least 1 pen or pencil        3838          0.93           0.94         -0.01        -0.01         -0.03       -0.01          0.55
                                                            (0.25)         (0.23)       (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.02)      (0.01)
Shows enumerator at least 1 pen or pencil      3838          0.82           0.82         -0.00         0.00         -0.03        0.00          0.80
                                                            (0.38)         (0.38)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.02)
Student Survey: Prefer 500 UGX today to 800    3838          0.91           0.93         0.00         -0.01        -0.04*       -0.00          0.24
                                                            (0.28)         (0.26)       (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.02)      (0.01)
Shows enumerator at least 1 exercise book      3838          0.73           0.73         -0.01        0.03          -0.04       -0.00          0.82
                                                            (0.45)         (0.44)       (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)      (0.03)
Notes: All specifications are OLS, include subcounty   (the stratification variable) fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by school. *   p<0.10 **
p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                         33
                                              Appendix Table 4d: Components of Table 6, Attendence Index, Endline 2011
                                                                 Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                        OLS (one                                                             P-value for
                                                         Number           Mean         specification                     OLS                                 test of Cash
                                                          of Obs.       (std dev)        per cell)            (each row = one regression)                      Parent =
                                                                                                                                                                Other
                                                                                                         Cash with Voucher     Cash w/o          Voucher     Treatments
                                                                        Any                   Any         Parent   with Parent  Parent          w/o Parent
                                                                     Treatment Control     Treatment     Outreach Outreach     Outreach         Outreach
                                                              (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)              (8)            (9)
Attendance Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
 Attendance Index                                   3586                  -0.02      0.00        -0.01         0.02         0.00         -0.05        -0.03       0.23
                                                                         (0.98)     (1.00)      (0.04)        (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)
 Of five school days of last week, was absent for            3585         0.75       0.70        0.05          0.13         0.07          0.04        -0.02       0.33
                                                                         (1.33)     (1.27)      (0.06)        (0.11)       (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.09)
 In normal week from last term, how many days were           3586          1.27      1.31        -0.02         0.00         -0.01        -0.04        -0.02       0.44
 you usually absent from school?                                         (1.48)     (1.54)      (0.07)        (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.10)       (0.10)
 Think of a normal month from last term, how many            3463          3.34      3.59       -0.24*         -0.27        -0.18      -0.37**        -0.16       0.80
 days were you usually absent?                                           (3.13)     (3.55)      (0.13)        (0.17)       (0.21)       (0.17)       (0.19)
Notes: All specifications are OLS, include subcounty (the stratification variable) fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by school. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                                    34
                                                 Appendix Table 4e: Components of Table 7, Self Esteem Index, Endline 2011
                                                                      Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                            OLS (one                                                              P-value for
                                                      Number               Mean            specification                            OLS                          test of Cash
                                                      of Obs.            (std dev)           per cell)                  (each row = one regression)             Parent = Other
                                                                                                            Cash with Voucher with Cash w/o           Voucher     Treatments
                                                                     Any                        Any           Parent         Parent        Parent   w/o Parent
                                                                 Treatment Control          Treatment       Outreach       Outreach      Outreach    Outreach
                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)              (5)            (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
Self Esteem Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
   Self Esteem Index                                   3838         -0.02         0.00         -0.03         -0.05**          -0.03         -0.03       -0.01        0.23
                                                                   (0.44)        (0.44)       (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.03)
   I am satisfied with myself.                         3812          3.20         3.21         -0.01           -0.01          -0.01         -0.01       -0.02        0.98
                                                                   (0.67)        (0.64)       (0.03)          (0.05)         (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.05)
   Sometimes I think I am no good at all.              3817          2.55         2.54         0.00            -0.05           0.01         0.01        0.03         0.09
                                                                   (0.79)        (0.77)       (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.05)        (0.04)      (0.05)
   I believe I have a number of good qualities.        3800          3.14         3.19       -0.05**           -0.07         -0.08*         -0.03       -0.04        0.68
                                                                   (0.71)        (0.69)       (0.03)          (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.03)      (0.05)
                                                       3822          3.31         3.33         -0.03           -0.05          -0.01         -0.03       -0.04        0.38
   I am able to do things as well as most children.                (0.62)        (0.62)       (0.02)          (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.04)      (0.04)
   I do not have much to be proud of.                  3777          2.42         2.43         -0.01            0.03          -0.07         -0.02       0.01         0.23
                                                                   (0.77)        (0.78)       (0.03)          (0.05)         (0.04)        (0.05)      (0.05)
   Sometimes I feel useless.                           3816          3.08         3.08         -0.01           -0.05          -0.01         0.05        -0.02        0.05
                                                                   (0.80)        (0.81)       (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)
   I believe I am a valuable person, at least as       3808          3.25         3.28         -0.04          -0.07*           0.01         -0.06                    0.34
   much as my classmates.                                          (0.62)        (0.64)       (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)
   I wish I could have more respect for myself.        3755          1.96         1.94         0.01             0.03          -0.06         0.05        0.02         0.61
                                                                   (0.62)        (0.61)       (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.05)        (0.04)      (0.04)
   I sometimes think that I am a failure.              3814          2.98         2.96         0.02            -0.03           0.04         -0.04      0.09**        0.11
                                                                   (0.84)        (0.86)       (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.04)      (0.04)
   When I think of myself, I usually think good        3828          2.96         2.98         -0.03           -0.04           0.02       -0.10**       0.01         0.83
   thoughts.                                                       (0.81)        (0.82)       (0.03)          (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.04)      (0.05)
   Are you confident that you will be successful in    3652          0.96         0.97        -0.01*           -0.01        -0.02**         -0.01       -0.01        0.91
   the future ?                                                    (0.21)        (0.18)       (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)
Notes: All specifications are OLS, include subcounty (the stratification variable) fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by school. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                                      35
                          Appendix Table 4f: Components of Table 7, Time Preference, Financial Independence, and Aspirations Indices, Endline 2011
                                                                         Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                                                                  OLS (one                                                            P-value for
                                                         Number                  Mean           specification                            OLS                          test of Cash
                                                         of Obs.               (std dev)           per cell)                 (each row = one regression)            Parent = Other
                                                                                                                 Cash with Voucher with Cash w/o          Voucher     Treatments
                                                                          Any                          Any          Parent        Parent      Parent     w/o Parent
                                                                     Treatment Control            Treatment       Outreach      Outreach     Outreach     Outreach
                                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)        (8)           (9)
Time Preference Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
   Time Preference Index                                  3828            2.05          2.07          -0.02          -0.02         -0.02        0.00        -0.03         0.96
                                                                        (0.83)         (0.82)        (0.03)         (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)
   Would you rather receive 500 UGX today or 800          3828            0.37          0.37          -0.00           0.01         -0.01        0.01        -0.01         0.44
   UGX next week?                                                       (0.48)         (0.48)        (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.02)
   Would you rather receive 500 UGX today or 1,000        2415            0.49          0.52          -0.03          -0.05          0.00        -0.01       -0.03         0.31
   UGX next week?                                                       (0.50)         (0.50)        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)
Financial Independence Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
   Financial Independence Index                           3838           -0.04          0.00          -0.04          -0.06       -0.13**         0.05       -0.01         0.64
                                                                        (0.97)         (1.00)        (0.04)         (0.06)        (0.06)       (0.06)      (0.05)
   How much money do you think you will get in the        3650         2245.60        2399.59       -129.85        -229.96      -447.79*      201.19       -40.54         0.53
   next 7 days? winsorized at 99%                                     (4225.71) (4587.07)          (167.64)       (213.72)      (252.52)     (250.32)     (243.15)
   How much money did you get in the past 7 days?         3838         1957.95        2038.95        -71.56        -125.25     -412.22**      269.55       -18.67         0.69
   winsorized at 99%                                                  (3332.84) (3464.53)          (119.46)       (191.67)      (189.24)     (187.60)     (154.55)
   How much pocket money are you given to spend as        3838         4394.88        4584.16       -205.17        -336.91       -436.43        -4.05      -51.66         0.78
   you wish? winsorized at 99%                                        (7170.65) (7246.93)          (284.54)       (357.98)      (413.56)     (534.25)     (428.97)
Aspirations Index & Components (Endline Survey - 2011)
   Aspirations Index                                      3838           -0.01          0.00          -0.02          -0.04         -0.03         0.03       -0.03         0.56
                                                                        (1.04)         (1.00)        (0.04)         (0.06)        (0.06)       (0.04)      (0.06)
   Do you think you will go to secondary school?          3699           -0.05          0.00          -0.05          -0.10         -0.03         0.00       -0.09         0.39
                                                                        (1.11)         (1.00)        (0.04)         (0.06)        (0.06)       (0.04)      (0.06)
   Do you think you will reach university?                3057           -0.05          0.00          -0.06          -0.05        -0.10*         0.00       -0.09         0.95
                                                                        (1.04)         (1.00)        (0.04)         (0.06)        (0.06)       (0.06)
   If you graduate from primary school, will your life    3838            0.05          0.00          0.04            0.08          0.00        0.06        0.04          0.26
   be better than if you hadn’t graduated?                              (0.94)         (1.00)        (0.03)         (0.05)        (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.05)
   What do you want to be when you grow up?               3838            0.02          0.00          0.01           -0.04          0.05        0.01        0.02          0.09
   (student responded with career that requires higher                  (0.98)         (1.00)        (0.03)         (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.04)
   education)
Notes: All specifications are OLS, include subcounty (the stratification variable) fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by school. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01


                                                                                        36
                      Appendix Table 5: Repeat of Table 4, with Control for Baseline Values of Outcome Variables
                                                 Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                                             OLS (one                                                       P-value for
                                                Number specification                            OLS                         test of Cash
                                                 of Obs.      per cell)              (each row = one regression)              Parent =
                                                                                                                               Other
                                                               Any       Cash with Voucher        Cash w/o     Voucher      Treatments
                                                            Treatment     Parent with Parent       Parent     w/o Parent
                                                                         Outreach Outreach        Outreach    Outreach
Dependent Variables                               (1)           (2)         (3)      (4)             (5)         (6)            (7)
Panel A: Process Outcomes (Endline Survey - 2011)
   Heard of Super Savers program                3831         0.67***      0.69***     0.67***      0.68***     0.64***         0.25
                                                              (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.02)      (0.03)
   Saved with Super Savers                          3832     0.40***      0.42***     0.39***      0.44***     0.35***         0.37
                                                              (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.04)
   Ever Saves Money                                 3829       0.00         0.01        0.02         0.02        -0.03         0.84
                                                              (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.02)
   Primary Source of Savings was Work               3838     -0.04**      -0.07**       -0.04        0.00      -0.05***        0.22
                                                              (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.02)
Panel B: Intermediate Outcomes (Classroom Visits)
   School Supplies Index 2010                   3838          -0.14         0.05        -0.13       -0.17          -0.30       0.07
                                                              (0.11)       (0.12)      (0.19)       (0.16)         (0.19)
   School Supplies Index 2011                       3827       0.11        0.31**       0.09         0.02           0.01       0.05
                                                              (0.10)       (0.13)      (0.17)       (0.13)         (0.14)
Panel C: Student Survey (Endline Survey - 2011)
   School Supplies Index                        3838            0.01       0.13**        0.02        -0.06       -0.04         0.01
                                                              (0.04)        (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.07)      (0.05)
   Parental Involvement Index                       3838        0.01         0.04        -0.01       -0.00       -0.00         0.41
                                                              (0.04)        (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)
   Savings Attitude Index                           3838        0.06         0.04        0.11         0.06        0.02         0.74
                                                              (0.05)        (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.06)
   School Fees                                      3838    -3025.50      -2646.68    -4111.25    -2683.96    -2686.69         0.65
                                                            (2938.08)    (3085.51)   (4097.93)    (3961.09)   (4257.45)
   Missed school because sent to look for fees or   3583       -0.00         -0.01       -0.00        0.02       -0.01         0.69
   lack of scholastic materials                               (0.01)        (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
   Cost of most recent test                         2348      -55.76       -62.25       75.97      -319.41      60.32          0.95
                                                             (189.42)     (269.44)    (253.89)     (247.78)    (303.43)
Outcomes from main Table 4 estimated with the addition of controls for the baseline values that exist for all outcome variables in the
table. These baseline controls include baseline value of school fees and baseline value of whether student missed school because sent
to look for fees or lack of sholastic materials.




                                                                                         37
                Appendix Table 6: Repeat of Table 5, with Control for Baseline Values of Outcome Variables
                                             Mean (standard deviation) and OLS
                                    OLS (one                                                                 P-value for test
                     Number of specification                                OLS                             of Cash Parent =
                        Obs.         per cell)                   (each row = one regression)                     Other
                                                    Cash with   Voucher with     Cash w/o    Voucher w/o       Treatments
                                       Any            Parent         Parent        Parent        Parent
                                    Treatment       Outreach       Outreach       Outreach     Outreach
                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)          (6)             (7)
Grammar                 3761            0.03         0.13***           0.02          0.04         -0.05           0.00
                                      (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.06)
Reading                 3758            0.01         0.11**           0.00          -0.04         -0.04           0.00
                                      (0.04)          (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.07)
Math                    3761           -0.05           0.01         -0.10**         -0.01         -0.08           0.10
                                      (0.04)          (0.05)         (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.07)
Total                   3758            0.00         0.10**           -0.02         -0.00         -0.06           0.00
                                      (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.07)
Outcomes from main Table 5 estimated with the addition of controls for the baseline values that exist for all outcome
variables in the table. These baseline controls include baseline value of school fees and baseline value of whether student
missed school because sent to look for fees or lack of sholastic materials. Robust standard errors, clustered by school (the
unit of randomization), controls for the baseline values of all outcome variables, and subcounty fixed effects (the
stratification variables). *p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<.01. Column 7 is the p-value of an F-test of sigificance on a regression
of the cash parent treatment against all other treatmnets and the same controls from Columns 3-6.




                                                                              38
