                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 AGE AND SCIENTIFIC GENIUS

                                          Benjamin Jones
                                             E.J. Reedy
                                         Bruce A. Weinberg

                                        Working Paper 19866
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19866


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




This manuscript was prepared for the forthcoming Handbook of Genius (Dean K. Simonton, editor).
Weinberg acknowledges support from NSF #1064220 and # 1348691 and NIA P01 AG039347. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Benjamin Jones, E.J. Reedy, and Bruce A. Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Age and Scientific Genius
Benjamin Jones, E.J. Reedy, and Bruce A. Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19866
January 2014
JEL No. J11,O31

                                               ABSTRACT

Great scientific output typically peaks in middle age. A classic literature has emphasized comparisons
across fields in the age of peak performance. More recent work highlights large underlying variation
in age and creativity patterns, where the average age of great scientific contributions has risen substantially
since the early 20th Century and some scientists make pioneering contributions much earlier or later
in their life-cycle than others. We review these literatures and show how the nexus between age and
great scientific insight can inform the nature of creativity, the mechanisms of scientific progress, and
the design of institutions that support scientists, while providing further insights about the implications
of aging populations, education policies, and economic growth.


Benjamin Jones                                         Bruce A. Weinberg
Northwestern University                                Department of Economics
Kellogg School of Management                           Ohio State University
Department of Management and Strategy                  410 Arps Hall
2001 Sheridan Road                                     1945 North High Street
Evanston, IL 60208                                     Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER                                               and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu                        weinberg.27@osu.edu

E.J. Reedy
4801 Rockhill Road
Kansas City, MO 64110
ereedy@kauffman.org
                                                                  Age and Scientific Genius           2




I.      Introduction


        What is the relationship between age and scientific genius? This question has long

fascinated scientists, the institutions that support scientific research, and the public at large.

Understanding the nexus between age and great scientific insight can inform the nature of

creativity, the mechanisms of scientific progress, and the design of institutions that support

scientists. It can also shed light on subjects that at first blush seem farther afield, such as the

implications of aging populations, education policies, and economic growth. The role of age in

science has attracted the interest of both scientific greats and science policy leaders. Albert

Einstein once quipped that “a person who has not made his great contribution to science before

the age of thirty will never do so.” Meanwhile, a recent director of the National Institutes of

Health declared the advancing age at which investigators receive their first NIH grant as “the

greatest problem facing U.S. science”.


        In this chapter we review empirical evidence on the relationship between age and great

scientific output, discuss mechanisms at work, and consider the implications. Studies of age and

scientific output have a long pedigree, dating at least from Beard (1874), who estimated that

peak performance in science and creative arts typically occurred between the ages of 35 and 40.

A large research enterprise has since charted how scientific output varies over the life-cycle,

often with an emphasis on cross-field comparisons. This research consistently finds that

performance peaks in middle age: the life-cycle begins with a training period in which major

creative output is absent, followed by a rapid rise in output to a peak, often in the late 30s or 40s,

and a subsequent slow decline in output through later years. These patterns appear when looking

both within individual histories and when looking at peak performance across individuals. Figure
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius            3


1 considers the age distribution of signature achievements, looking across Nobel Prize winners

and great technological innovators in the 20th Century. For both samples, we see that the

scientific or technological breakthroughs most typically come in the late 30s. At the same time, a

number of scientists make pioneering contributions before reaching 30 or in their 60s and

beyond. The rapid rise and later slow decline in life-cycle output help in positing hypotheses

about key ingredients to great scientific contributions, including training in the early life-cycle

and institutional and/or health effects in the later life cycle that influence productivity.
                .05
                .04.03
            Frequency
           .02  .01
                0




                         20    30          40         50          60          70          80
                                                     Age

                                    Nobel Prize Winners             Great Inventors



 Figure 1: An Age Distribution for Scientific Genius. The Ages at which Individuals Produced
  Nobel-Prize Winning Insights and Great Technological Contributions over the 20th Century
                                    (Source: Jones 2010).

        The literature on age and scientific genius has classically emphasized the peak age of

contributions. The expansive work of Lehman (1953), like other major contributions such as

Zuckerman (1977) and Simonton (1991), estimated the age of peak performance in various fields
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius             4


and then emphasized cross-field comparisons, where the age-output profile was considered fixed

within a particular field. A classic finding is that peak performance has come earlier on average

in mathematics and the physical sciences than in fields like medicine. This cross-field variation

can then be used to make distinctions in the nature of creativity across fields and further inform

theories relating age and genius.


       A more recent literature emphasizes other variation in the data, including changes over

time and variation across individuals within a field. One finding is that the age-output profile

within fields is not fixed but actually changes quite dramatically over time. For example, Nobel

Prize winning research is performed at an average age that is 6 years older at the end of the 20th

century than it was at the beginning (Jones, 2010). Figure 2 reconsiders the data from Figure 1

in three different periods and shows this effect, where the tendency for great scientific or

technological contributions has been shifting toward later ages. A second type of analysis

emphasizes variation across individuals within fields, where despite a broad tendency for

peaking in middle age, many researchers do produce their signature contributions either early in

life or at advanced ages. This new literature exploits these time dynamics and the individual

level variation to further inform theories of creativity and scientific progress that emphasize both

(a) training requirements in various fields and (b) cognitive theory where the nature of creativity

varies across researchers. This new literature provides additional evidence about underlying

mechanisms in understanding the relationship between age and great scientific output, although

many other mechanisms, including institutional and sociological mechanisms, remain less

explored.
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius          5




                .05
                .04.03
            Frequency
           .02  .01
                0




                         20     30        40          50        60           70         80
                                         Age at Noted Achievement

                                         Before 1935             1935-1965
                                         After 1965


Figure 2: A Shifting Age Distribution for Scientific Genius. Nobel-Prize Winning Insights and
        Great Technological Contributions over the 20th Century (Source: Jones 2010).

       This chapter proceeds as follows. Section II provides an overview of the classic

literature, emphasizing the finding that great scientific contributions are especially likely in

middle age and considering various mechanisms posited that may explain this broad life-cycle

pattern. Section III reviews the more recent literature, emphasizing substantial variations across

individuals and over time, which introduce new first-order facts about the link between age and

scientific genius while further informing mechanisms. Section IV discusses the broader

implications of the findings for understanding scientific progress, the design of science

institutions, and aging populations, and also considers important outstanding research questions

for further work. Section V concludes.
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius              6


II.    Basic Life-Cycle Patterns and Classic Views


       Interest in the relationship between age and scientific genius stems partly from prominent

examples of individuals who make breathtaking breakthroughs early in life. Einstein, for

instance, had his annus mirabilis in 1905 at the tender age of 26, when he made separate

contributions regarding the photoelectric effect, Brownian motion, and his special theory of

relativity. Newton’s annus mirabilis came in 1666 at the age of just 23, developing calculus and

his theories of gravitation and optics. Heisenberg developed matrix mechanics and the

uncertainty principle by the ages of 23 and 25 respectively. Steve Jobs co-founded Apple

Computer at age 21. In music, Mozart’s renown in his own lifetime was built initially on his

precocity. Indeed, early contributions are sometimes taken as the hallmark of genius. Of course,

defining geniuses as people who make great early contributions essentially eviscerates the

question of the relationship between age and genius. Moreover, focusing on young people turns

out to miss most great contributions. For example, in contrast to Einstein, 93% of Nobel Prize

winning scientific breakthroughs have come from individuals beyond age 26, and even geniuses

who emerge early may bloom more fully at more advanced ages. Einstein’s theory of general

relativity, perhaps his greatest contribution, came largely in his early to mid-30s. Copernicus

completed his revolutionary theory of planetary motion around age 60. Mozart’s most famous

operas came in his 30s, and Steve Jobs produced by far his most commercially successful

innovations in his late 40s and early 50s.


       To understand the link between age and scientific genius, the literature steps away from a

focus on youth per se and examines great contributions across the whole life cycle. Estimating

the life cycle of scientific genius requires one to identify a sample of scientific geniuses directly

and/or a sample of unusually important contributions and then determine when the research
                                                                          Age and Scientific Genius                7


underneath these contributions began and ended in a scientist’s life. As a practical matter, much

of the literature identifies important contributions using prizes, frequently the Nobel Prize, which

provides a sample of important scientists whose contributions can then be identified from

biographies. Focusing on the Nobel Prize, for instance, tends to limit analysis to a relatively

small number of fields.1 Others have used dictionaries of scientists or membership in elite

societies such as the Royal Society or the National Academies, typically identifying important

works from biographies. In either case, assessments of importance are determined after the fact.

The assessment of genius thus reflects judgments at a point in time, often closely

contemporaneous to the scientists life (such as a prize, or membership in an elite society) or

possibly in the distant future (such as dictionaries recording key breakthroughs through history).2


         In analyzing age and scientific genius, the classic literature has typically viewed fields as

the unit of analysis assuming that, for a given field, the relationship between age and scientific

genius is fixed. Observations within a field are then pooled, and a life-cycle pattern (albeit

across different individuals) is established for that field. Comparisons across fields may then

also be made.




1
  Some other prizes, such as the Fields Medal in mathematics, are only awarded to people who are under a given age
or who make their prize-winning contribution before a given age, essentially truncating the sample. To some extent
these restrictions may tell us something about the age at which important work is done in those fields, but there are
fields where there are prominent prizes for people who do important work before a given age as well as at any age.
In Economics, for instance, the John Bates Clark Medal is awarded to people under age 40, but the Nobel Prize is
awarded to people for contributions made at any age, and there are many Nobel Laureates who did their Nobel Prize
winning work after 40 and did not receive the Clark Medal despite being eligible for it.
2
  One should of course interpret results conditional on the sample used, noting that certain samples may reflect
social context or temporal preferences that conflate “genius” with other selection considerations. We are not aware
of work that has attempted to adjust for changes in the assessments of important research contributions over time or
made strong arguments about important selection biases in the samples used, so such concerns remain theoretical.
Indeed, the patterns revealed tend to show substantial similarities despite very different sampling mechanisms and
populations. For example, Figure 1 shows extremely similar age distributions for both the Nobel Prize sample and
the great technological contributions sample, which are produced by very different selection procedures.
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius           8


       Table 1 summarizes the findings of this classic literature. In constructing this table, we

have focused on studies of great scientific contributions (as opposed to normal science). We

have also sought to emphasize lines of research rather than each individual study. At the

broadest level, the table shows that while many scientists make fundamental contributions very

early or very late in their careers, such contributions are typically far less common than

contributions in middle age. Most studies show age of great scientific contribution peaking in the

30s or 40s. For example, Simonton (1991) studies 2,026 notable scientists and inventors from

antiquity to the 20th century and finds that contributions peak on average at age 39.


       Table 1 also shows that there appear to be systematic differences across fields, with

creativity tending to peak earlier in the most abstract fields and later in fields with greater

context, such as history.   Although the specific results vary considerably from study to study,

Zuckerman’s classic work (1977) is broadly representative, finding that Americans receiving the

Nobel Prize before 1972 did their prize winning work at 36 in physics, 39 in chemistry, and 41 in

medicine / physiology. Lehman (1953) similarly finds that physicists appear younger when

looking at dictionaries of signature contributions, as opposed to the Nobel Prize.


       The tendency for genius to peak, broadly, in middle age, and some noted cross-field

differences, can motivate a wide class of theories for the witnessed patterns. While there is much

other variation in the data to usefully explore (see Section III), an initial focus on the peak in

middle age suggests several natural hypotheses for the life-cycle pattern, and the classic literature

tends to focus on this peaking phenomenon as an empirical regularity. Theories may be most

easily organized by asking the following questions. First, why does creativity rise so rapidly

during the 20s and early 30s? Second, why does it decline, albeit much more gradually, from the

40s and beyond? We introduce here a wide variety of mechanisms proposed in the literature,
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius            9


based on these classic studies, but note that many of these theories are theories of scientific

productivity in general rather than theories of “genius” in particular. Section III will present a

different empirical perspective, emphasizing the substantial variation in the data both over time

and across individuals within fields, which establishes additional empirical regularities and

develops core theories governing the relationship between age and scientific genius.


       The Early Life Cycle


       A remarkable feature of age and scientific genius is the rarity of contributions at the

beginning of life. The early life-cycle period is of course coincident with schooling, suggesting

that training mechanisms may be important for understanding the life-cycle patterns.

Economists have viewed the age-contribution relationship in terms of their workhorse human

capital model (Becker, 1964; Ben Porath, 1967; McDowell, 1982; Levin and Stephan, 1991;

Stephan and Levin, 1993; and Oster and Hamermesh, 1998). In this view, geniuses, like other

researchers, invest in human capital at early ages and, in so doing, spend less time in active

scientific production. Consequently skill is increasing sharply over time but is, initially, not

directed toward output. Eventually, researchers transition toward active innovative careers,

perhaps quite discontinuously. (One could think of people exclusively accumulating human

capital through most of their education, then going through a period mixing further investment

and active research after leaving fulltime coursework, especially during the Ph.D., before

transitioning to a primary research orientation.) Both because human capital has accumulated

during the training phase and because researchers may transition relatively quickly towards

active production, productivity may naturally increase rapidly at the beginning off the career, and

especially around the ages people transition from formal training to active research. In addition
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius            10


to active investments in human capital, researchers also surely benefit from learning-by-doing

(Arrow, 1962), which provides another source of increase in output.


       This mechanism appears broadly consistent with the steepness of the rise in output (see,

e.g., Figure 1) and its timing during the life-cycle, so that training appears to provide a natural

candidate explanation for the early life-cycle pattern, even among scientific geniuses, who form

the sample. Underlying theories of creativity may provide deeper explanations along these lines.

Longstanding conceptions of creativity define a cognitive process where new ideas are seen as

novel combinations of existing material (Usher, 1954; Becker, 1982; Weitzman, 1998).

Although training is multi-faceted, this view can be used to connect creativity to existing ideas

by thinking of training as the act of acquiring existing ideas (facts, theories, tools, methods) upon

which the individual genius makes novel and effective combinations. Thomas Edison’s light

bulb, which he called the “electric candle”, is a classic example, where Edison combined an old

technology, the candle, with a new technology, electricity, to make a signature technological

advance. Another example is Kary Mullis’s polymerase chain reaction – a Nobel Prize winning

breakthrough at the heart of all modern genomics and biotechnology. Mullis’s creative insight

drew together knowledge of the structure of DNA with knowledge of a newly discovered

“extremophile” bacterium called thermus aquaticus, allowing him to develop the technology of

DNA replication. If creativity is seen as new combinations of extant knowledge, and extant

knowledge is acquired through training (whether formal training or experience), then the relative

dearth of great early-life cycle scientific contributions may naturally mirror the initial training

phase. Psychologists have emphasized that a minimum of ten years is required to master training
                                                                        Age and Scientific Genius              11


in many fields (Ericsson and Lehmann, 1996). Indeed, while Nobel Prize winning contributions

before age 26 are extremely rare, they are non-existent before the age of 19.3


        Other, albeit related, theories of the creative process can provide further inroads to

understanding the early-life cycle patterns. One aspect is the rate at which ideas can be initially

identified and elaborated (Simonton, 1997, 2009). Another aspect distinguishes different types

of reasoning that favor young minds versus older researchers (Weinberg and Galenson, 2005).

Thus, the link between creativity and extant knowledge may depend not just on the acquisition of

extant knowledge via training, but may depend on the nature and difficulty of the cognitive

processes involved in drawing together and extending sets of extant knowledge, including the

research processes themselves. These issues will be further elaborated below.


        Separate classes of mechanisms are institutional and sociological, rather than cognitive.

Training itself, occurring initially through formal educational institutions, introduces institutional

norms and standards around preparation that may have their own effects (Wray, 2009). Research

funding can also play a role, with the early careers of researchers in fields with large equipment

or personnel needs potentially less productive while they build up the necessary resources and

reputations to direct their own research agendas. Sociological biases that favor established

scholars, as gatekeepers of a field, may also obstruct younger scholars and possibly even

geniuses in making early contributions. To the extent that the power structure of scientists

privileges established scientists, or that eminence begets greater eminence as in Merton’s

Matthew Effect (Merton, 1968) the career process in science may further constrain the capacity

for contributions among the very young. An interesting and related empirical observation is

3
  Even the creativity of youthful genius can be seen to rely on extant knowledge. For example, Heisenberg’s matrix
mechanics (age 22) and uncertainty principle (age 25) were a matter of combining extant mathematical tools with
recently generated empirical puzzles, both of which he by necessity learned prior to creating his solution.
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius          12


Zuckerman’s (1977) finding that Nobel laureates whose work was done under another laureate

were younger than those working outside that circle.


       The Middle and Late Life-Cycle


       The second major observation about age, as a starting point, is that the frequency of great

scientific breakthroughs tends to wane in middle age and continues to decline thereafter. In

contrast to the rapid rise in productivity in the early life cycle, this decline appears to occur

slowly. The decline might be explained on various grounds, including institutional factors,

health, and shifting investment-work-leisure choices as the life-cycle advances. These

mechanisms are typically explanations for why scientists may spend less time on research as they

age. They may also suggest lower creative capacity.


       Standard human capital theories in economics may provide an explanation for a decline

in important contributions towards the end the career. In this approach, both active investments

in human capital and learning-by-doing drive increasing productivity, while depreciation,

including the obsolescence of skill (e.g. as frontier questions and methods shift) drive declines in

productivity. As the end of the career approaches, the incentive to invest in new human capital

declines, leaving the forces of depreciation and obsolescence to reduce output. While this

approach can generate a decline in productivity near the end of the career, it seems inconsistent,

or at least incomplete, as an explanation for the much earlier declines seen in the data, with

peaking frequently as early as the 30s and 40s.


       A range of less-formal “institutional” or “career” explanations have less to do with the

life-cycle of creativity per se and more to do with the realities of research lives, which may help

explain peaks in early middle age. For example, family responsibilities may play an important
                                                                          Age and Scientific Genius                 13


role in shaping life-cycle creativity for geniuses and others alike and especially for women, an

issue that is taking on increasing importance as more women enter the scientific enterprise.

Administrative demands tend to increase as the career progresses. Thus, the genius may remain,

yet the time available for research may decline. Institutional roles, from running laboratories,

applying for grants, reviewing tenure cases, editing journals, et cetera, may reduce the frequency

of contributions. Geniuses may especially face increasing institutional demands as leaders of

their fields or, more broadly, as public intellectuals expected to weigh in on science issues.


         In later life, the decline in output may also increasingly reflect preferences toward

retirement or declines in health. Consistent with standard life-cycle theories in other settings,

choices may shift more or less toward leisure at the end of life.4 Meanwhile, health effects may

increasingly limit productivity. Health challenges may be directly cognitive in nature or reflect

broader physical health declines, especially in the late life cycle. Direct cognitive decline may

reflect reduced processing capacity and/or memory associated with aging (Deary et al. 2009);

laboratory experiments suggest that creative thinking in general populations becomes more

difficult with age (e.g. Reese et al., 2001). General physical health declines may limit effort

generally, reducing the time spent on work tasks (Currie and Madrian, 1999).


         Cross-Field Comparisons


         An over-arching theme of the classic literature reviewed in Table 1 is a tendency to

further examine and posit explanations for cross-field differences in peak creativity (Adams,

1946; Lehman, 1953; Zuckerman, 1977; Simonton, 1991; Stephan and Levin, 1993). Positive

theories for cross-field difference have traditionally taken a cognitive character. Adams (1946)

4
 Some researchers note that individual scientists can present a “second peak” just prior to retirement, which has
been interpreted as a rush to get final remaining ideas and unpublished research out into the world (Pelz and
Andrews, 1966; Bayer and Dutton, 1977; Blackburn et. al, 1978).
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius           14


finds that peak age varies between 37 and 47, depending on the scientific discipline, and argues

that disciplines that emphasize mathematical/deductive reasoning tend to display younger peak

ages of great achievement. Simonton (1997, 2009) presents a model focusing on the rate at

which ideas can be identified and elaborated, which varies across fields, so that fields where

ideas can be identified and elaborated earlier show a tendency for research to make contributions

at earlier ages.


        A challenge for theories focusing on static differences across fields is that these static

differences appear to be both less robust and to mask considerable systematic variations in light

of new analyses. While peaks in middle age are a broadly robust phenomenon, the ordering of

fields in terms of the prevalence of young peaks is not, rejecting a “static” cross-field view as the

basis for understanding the link between age and scientific genius. Moreover, field-level

averages mask large and instructive variation across individuals. Greater empirical purchase can

be found by emphasizing variations within fields in the data.


III.    The New Literature: Variation over Time and Across Individuals


        Having reviewed broad classes of hypotheses surrounding training, creativity, and

institutions in light of the broad tendency for great contributions to come in middle age, we now

turn to other variation in the age-genius relationship. This variation presents a series of

additional first-order facts that inform richer theories of the relationship between age and

scientific genius while providing a range of important applications to understanding creativity,

the progress of science, and other issues.
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius            15


       Variation over Time


       Inklings of a more dynamic view of the relationship between age and great contributions

appear in some of the classic literature, but without consistent evidence or clear hypotheses.

Raskin (1936) finds no evidence of changes within the age and great achievement patterns for

scientists during the 19th century. Adams (1946) comments that peak ages were broadly steady

through the 17th through 19th centuries but may have risen early in the 20th century. Roe (1972)

studies 53 scientists and finds, by contrast, that those active in the 20th century appeared to be

productive earlier than those active in the 19th century. Looking at the year in which Americans

received Nobel prizes Zuckerman (1977) finds a rise in age, with a U-shape for physics.

Although these results are not entirely consistent, and the last only indirectly informs the age-

genius relationship due to lags in the award process, these studies and those summarized in Table

2 suggest that there may be value in thinking systematically about how the age-creativity

relationship varies over time.


       Jones (2003, 2010) focuses on age dynamics over the 20th Century for all Nobel Prize

winning research (544 individuals) and for great technological inventions as listed in scientific

and technological almanacs (286 individuals). He uncovers a large shift in the mean age of great

achievement, which rises 6 years over the course of the 20th century in both samples (Figure 2).

Looking within fields, and controlling for country of birth, the increase in mean age is larger in

both samples, rising by 8 years over the century.


       A methodological contribution of this study is to address a broad demographic issue

when sampling signature achievements from a population of scientists, as is the usual practice.

This approach, as in the classic literature, means that the ages witnessed will depend not just on
                                                                          Age and Scientific Genius           16


the life-cycle productivity of the individual scientists, but also on the age distribution of the

underling population. For example, if scientists tend to be old, then more great achievements

will tend to come from older people. This issue can be important to confront when estimating

peak achievement, and especially so when looking at dynamics, because people live longer over

time and populations have correspondingly gotten older on average over time.5 When

controlling for population dynamics, Jones (2010) uncovers a more precise shift in the

underlying life-cycle productivity of great achievement. In particular, recall from Figure 2 that

the age distribution at great achievement has become systematically older over time, with fewer

contributions at young ages and more at older ages. However, the increasing rate of later life-

cycle achievements shown in Figure 2appears to be a demographic effect, driven by an aging

population, as opposed to reflecting increased productivity at later ages. By contrast, the decline

in the frequency of great achievements among younger scientists, as shown in Figure 2, is not

demographic, but reflects an especially sharp decline in early life-cycle productivity.


           This empirical finding calls for further reasoning about the mechanisms at work in the

early life cycle. Jones (2009, 2010, 2011) develops a “burden of knowledge” theory to explain

these and other facts, linking the creative process to requisite training and the observation that

the quantity of precursor scientific and technological knowledge has expanded substantially with

time. As one measure of knowledge, consider that John Harvard earned the naming rights to

Harvard University in 1639 largely due to his bequest of his private library, which amounted to

320 volumes. By contrast, the U.S. Library of Congress today houses 35 million books, and the

Web of Science indexed 2.18 million new journal articles published in 2012 alone. To the

extent that expertise over some range of existing knowledge is an essential input to the creative


5
    Populations also become younger over periods of time in the 20th century; namely, following baby booms.
                                                                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius            17


process in science, the expansion of extant theories, facts, methods, et cetera, can create a rising

“burden of knowledge” on successive generations of scientists who, correspondingly, may both

extend their training phase and become more narrowly specialized along the knowledge frontier

(Jones, 2009).



                                                   Physics                                                             Chemistry
            20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                            36



                                                                                 20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                                                                                                 36
                                                                                                                                                 32
                                                                            32
                    Age




                                                                                         Age




                                                                                                                                                 28
                                                                            28




                                                                                                                                                 24
                                                                            24




                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                            20


                                   1870     1900     1930     1960   1990                                1870   1900      1930     1960   1990
                                                     Year                                                                 Year


                                                   Medicine                                                        Economics
            20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                            36



                                                                                 20 25 30 35 40 45 50




                                                                                                                                                 36
                                                                            32




                                                                                                                                                 32
                    Age




                                                                                         Age
                                                                            28




                                                                                                                                                 28
                                                                            24




                                                                                                                                                 24
                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                 20
                                     1870    1900     1930    1960   1990                               1870    1900     1930      1960   1990
                                                     Year                                                                Year



         Figure 3: Mean Age at Ph.D. and Nobel Prize Winning Achievement, by Field
                                   (Source: Jones 2010).

       This theory can be further explored using data directly on the educational attainment of

geniuses. There is substantial evidence for rising educational duration among scientists and

engineers in general (NRC, 1990, Tilghman et al., 1998), and Jones (2010) establishes an

increase in the age at Ph.D. among Nobel Prize winners. This study further shows that variation

in the age at Ph.D. can explain variation in the age at great achievement across fields and over

time. Figure 3 provides one view of these relationships. Stepping away from the time dynamics

per se, information directly on the educational attainment of geniuses can help assess the role of
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius         18


training more generally and suggests that time devoted to training is an important aspect in

understanding why contributions early in the life-cycle are rare.


       The 20th century aging phenomenon, associated with training dynamics, can be informed

by a “burden of knowledge” mechanism rooted in the accumulation of scientific and

technological knowledge. This accumulation has become especially rapid in the modern era,

triggered in the Enlightenment and accelerating through the Industrial Revolution and beyond.

Interestingly, however, the Enlightenment initially may have influenced the relationship between

age and scientific genius through other mechanisms. In particular, the Enlightenment was

initially associated less with a jump in knowledge than with a slow cultural, political, and

institutional shift that defined “science” in modern terms, complete with the scientific method

and the professionalization of science institutions. This professionalization of science may in

turn have reshaped the life-cycle of scientific careers.


       Wray (2009) explores age dynamics between 1600 and 1899 and interprets dynamics in

this period through this lens. Noting that scholars in earlier periods worked in institutional

contexts where direct routes into science were scarce – Lavoisier first trained in law, Copernicus

helped manage a cathedral, and Galileo engaged in a set of secondary careers for financial

support – the rise of science as a recognized profession, increasingly integrated into universities,

may have allowed faster routes into the field. Studying 136 great scientists drawn from B.

Dibner’s Heralds of Science collection, Wray finds a statistically significant decline in age over

the 1600-1899 period, from a median age of 47 in the 1600s to a median age of 38 in the 1800s,
                                                                           Age and Scientific Genius       19


and argues that this pattern is consistent with the institutional hypothesis, where barriers to entry

for the young are reduced over time.6


           Variation across Individuals


           Although genius clearly peaks in the mid-career, Figure 1 is striking for the variations

around the peak. Indeed, exceptionally early work does occur and is often viewed as a hallmark

of genius itself. While the classic literature has marveled over these dramatic early contributions

and also commented on contributions made much later in lives, it does not provide a clear set of

theories to inform the dramatic variations in the age at which innovators make important

contributions within fields. More recent work has shown that age variation across individuals in

the same field have systematic features (Table 3).


           In the classic literature, fields have been viewed as the unit of analysis, but truly

understanding variations in creativity across scientists in the same field working at a given point

in time requires that we shift from fields as the unit of analysis to the innovators themselves.

Work by Galenson (2001) and Galenson and Weinberg (2000, 2001) and Weinberg and

Galenson (2005), initially focusing on the arts, provides a reconceptualization that has proven

useful across a wide range of innovative domains. This work posits that there are two polar

extremes in creativity – “conceptual” innovators who work deductively and whose work is

abstract, on the one hand, and “experimental” innovators, who work inductively and whose work

is concrete on the other. Deductive work derives from a priori logic and tends to be more

theoretical, while inductive work derives from accumulation of knowledge and tends to be more

empirical.


6
    By contrast, Adams (1946) and others do not find a time dynamic between the 17th and 19th centuries.
                                                                          Age and Scientific Genius               20


         This conceptual-experimental distinction has important implications for the timing of

great innovations. Specifically, experimental work builds on accumulated knowledge, so it is

natural that great experimental innovators would tend to do their most important work toward the

end of their careers.


         There are a number of reasons why great conceptual work is more likely to be done at the

outset of the career. First, because conceptual innovators do not need to accumulate large

amounts of experience in order to make their contributions, conceptual innovators can produce

great contributions early in their careers. Second, the most important conceptual work typically

involve radical departures from existing paradigms, and the ability to identify and appreciate

these radical departures may be greatest shortly after initial exposure to a paradigm, before it has

been fully assimilated and before the individual has produced a large body of work that either

rests upon or contributes to that paradigm.


         The idea that younger researchers are more willing and/or able to make radical departures

from convention is widely held. Perhaps most vividly, Max Planck wrote in his Scientific

Autobiography, “A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and

making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation

grows up that is familiar with it.” Sigmund Freud echoes this point in his Civilization and its

Discontents saying, “the conceptions I have summarized here I first put forward only tentatively,

but in the course of time they have won such a hold over me that I can no longer think in any

other way.”7 Dietrich and Srinivasan (2007) provide interesting cognitive evidence along these

lines; however, evidence for Planck’s Principle is more generally mixed. Weinberg (2007) finds


7
 In addition to these cognitive arguments, there are also obvious institutional reasons why an older researcher
whose previous work may have contributed to or rely upon a paradigm may be reluctant to its overthrow.
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius         21


that the researchers who made important contributions to the development of the human capital

paradigm in labor economics were more likely to have been exposed to it as graduate students,

but that their contributions are not necessarily at young ages. A small literature also studies the

related question of how age predicts the adoption of revolutionary scientific ideas. The few

studies looking at this topic tend to find mixed evidence, which also may call into question

Planck’s Principle. Hull, Tessner, and Diamond (1978) found older scientists as fast to accept

Darwin’s evolutionary theory as younger scientists. Messeri (1988) in studying the adoption of

plate tectonics found that first adopters were primarily older scientists. Diamond (1980) found a

minor role of age in explaining the adoption of cliometrics in economics.


       While the evidence on Planck’s Principle is mixed, there does to appear to be a more

basic and robust tendency for conceptual innovators to make their most important contributions

quite early in their careers. To examine how the nature of work is related to the age of

contributions, one can classify researchers based on whether their work is empirical or

theoretical. This split is quite crude because conceptual innovators can do empirical work

(empirical work by conceptual innovators frequently takes the form of highly-structured tests of

theories) and experimental innovators can make important theoretical innovations (typically

deriving from empirical work they or others have done), but can still provide some information.

Figure 4A presents separate profiles for Nobel laureates whose Prize-winning work was

theoretical compared to those whose Prize-winning work was empirical. The differences are

considerable, with the empirical researchers doing their Prize-winning work 4.6 years later (at

39.9 years of age compared to 35.3 years). Theoretical work is more common in physics than in

chemistry or in, in turn, medicine / physiology and these differences may account for some of the

differences between the fields. To address this issue, Figure 4 panels B, C, and D report
                                                                         Age and Scientific Genius               22


estimates for each of the fields. The gaps for chemistry and physics are quite large, but few

medical / physiological scientists receive the Prize for theoretical work. Thus, we find substantial

differences between theorists and empiricists within the same field.8


        Weinberg and Galenson (2005) identify conceptual and experimental innovators in

economics using a richer, continuous index. Economics is an attractive discipline for this sort of

analysis because publications vary widely, from conceptual work involving formal statements of

theorems and their proof to experimental work involving detailed analysis of industries, markets,

or countries. Nobel laureate economists were classified on a continuous scale based on the

presence and frequency of these (and other) elements in the text of their primary publication(s).

This analysis showed that the most conceptual laureate did his most important work at 32.5 years

of age compared to 53.2 for the most experimental, a difference of 20.7 years. Thus, rich

classifications can generate very large differences in the age at which people make important

scientific breakthroughs.


        This line of work has a number of other implications, which are consistent with empirical

observation. “One hit wonders” who make dramatic contributions at the outset of their careers,

not reaching that level ever again are typically conceptual (Galenson, 2005). Because the most

conceptual innovators do their most important work shortly after being exposed to a paradigm,

they have an incentive to shift their focus across lines of work (Weinberg and Galenson, 2005).

Moreover, within each line of work, their early works will tend to be more important than later

works. On the other hand, experimental innovators should tend to work on related questions for




8
 Jones and Weinberg (2011) further show that these differences are robust to controls for the time that the work was
done.
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius          23


the extended periods of time necessary to accumulate the knowledge necessary to do important

work.


        While this approach places individual innovators at the forefront, it can also help inform

differences in the central tendencies across fields. The earlier peaks in the average age at which

work is done in abstract fields such as mathematics of physics are consistent with these fields

favoring conceptual innovators, who tend to do their best work at earlier ages compared to more

concrete fields such as medicine or history, which tend to favor late-peaking experimental

innovators. At the same time, looking at 23 creative writers, Simonton [2007] shows that

domains are an important independent determinant of age at best work even controlling for

whether a writer was conceptual or experimental. This approach based on individual patterns of

creativity can also illuminate the field-level dynamics discussed above. Thus, the development of

a new scientific paradigm is largely theoretical while building the body of empirical work to

refine and test a paradigm is more experimental. So, as knowledge accumulates in the wake of a

paradigm shift, we expect ages to increase. Thus, there are reasons to believe the emphasis

placed on the different types of work will vary over time and do so both systematically and in a

way that is distinct from yet highly complementary to that implied by knowledge accumulation.
                                                                                                               Age and Scientific Genius            24

                                                                                                                                   B. Chemistry




                                                                                                                        .06
                                              A. All Fields
     .05




                                                                                                            Frequency
                                                                                                                        .04
                                                                                                                        .02
     .04




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                              20    40         60   80
                                                                                                                                         Age
       .03
 Frequency




                                                                                                                                   C. Medicine




                                                                                                                        .06
                                                                                                            Frequency
                                                                                                                        .04
.02




                                                                                                                        .02
     .01




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                              20    40         60   80
                                                                                                                                         Age


                                                                                                                                    D. Physics
     0




                                                                                                                        .06
             20                         40                            60                            80




                                                                                                            Frequency
                                                                                                                        .04
                                                      Age




                                                                                                                        .02
                                      Theorists                  Experimentalists




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                              20    40         60   80
                                                                                                                                         Age




                  Figure 4. Differences in Lifecycle Creativity between Theorists and Experimentalists among Nobel Laureates

                                                       (Source: Authors’ Calculations).
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius           25


        Field Differences, Reconsidered

        Given that the relationship between age and great contributions varies substantially over

time and across individuals, it is worth reconsidering whether there truly are persistently

“younger” versus “older” fields, and whether field differences can be more closely mapped into

underlying theories of age and creativity.


        Jones and Weinberg (2011) re-examine the age-achievement relationship across fields,

looking again at all Nobel Prize winning contributions. This study finds that variation in the

mean age of great achievement is five times greater over time than across fields. Moreover, the

dynamics within fields are so large that the “classic” ordering -- where physics laureates appear

younger at the time of their breakthrough than laureates in chemistry or medicine – is unstable.

Since 1985, physics laureates are actually the oldest in making contributions compared to the

other fields.


        Jones and Weinberg (2011) focus particularly on 20th century physics. Due to the

development of quantum physics, the centerpiece of Kuhn’s well-known work on revolutions,

20th century physics provides a useful laboratory for studying how innovation varies over the

life-cycle. Starting with Planck’s introduction of quanta in 1900, physics experienced a period

where a small number of existing empirical puzzles appeared to both reject classical physics yet

remain beyond any satisfying alternative theory, a tension not resolved until the formulation of

consistent theoretical foundations in 1925-1927. The theories presented in Section III provide

distinct but complementary lenses through which to view how a scientific revolution will affect

the age-creativity relationship.
                                                                                                            Age and Scientific Genius                                                                              26




                                                                                         PHYSICS




                                                                                                                                                                             1
 Frequency of Great Achivements by Ages 30 & 40



                                                                                                     A                                                                                                    B




                                                                                                               Frequency Theoretical
                                                                                                                                                                             .8
                                                                                                                                                                             .6
                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                   1875 1900 1925 1950 1975 2000




                                                                                                              Mean Citation Age, Deviation Frequency High Degree by Age 25
                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          C



                                                                                                                                                                             .8
                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                             .6
                                                                                                                                                                             .4
                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                   1875 1900 1925 1950 1975 2000
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                             -.8




                                                       1875       1900      1925      1950   1975     2000                                                                                                D
                                                               Year of Great Achievement
                                                                                                                                                                             -.4
                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                         Age 30    Age 40    Theory      Ph.D.   Citation
                                                                                                                                                                             .4




                                                           (A)       (A)       (B)        (C)       (D)
                                                          1923      1934      1933       1911      1935
Year of
                                                                                                                                                                             .8




                                                         (1905-    (1924-    (1925-     (1886-    (1930-
 Peak
                                                          1942)     1944)     1942)      1936)     1940)
                                                                                                                                                                             1.2




                                                                                                                                                                               1875 1900 1925 1950 1975 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                   Year of Great Achievement




                                                              Figure 5. Age Dynamics in Physics and Underlying Correlates
                                                                              (Source: Jones and Weinberg 2011)
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius            27


       First, the quantum mechanics revolution rendered large portions of physics less relevant.

From the perspective of “burden of knowledge” theory, this shock allowed earlier-career

contributions during the revolutionary period, after which knowledge accumulated within the

new paradigm and the burden of knowledge rose again (Jones, 2003, 2009, 2010). Second, Kuhn

also posits a novel interplay between empirical and theoretical work during revolutions.

Specifically, he sees revolutions being precipitated by a mounting body of empirical anomalies

that are not explicable in the prevailing paradigm. In Kuhn’s formulation, a revolution takes

place only when the theoretical work that can accommodates the accumulated anomalies is done.

The revolution is then followed by empirical work elaborating the new framework. Thus, over

the course of a revolution, focus shifts from relatively experimental empirical work to relatively

conceptual theory and ultimately back to relatively experimental empirical work, which would

imply an increase and then a decrease in the share of young contributions. Lastly, Planck’s

principle would indicate that people making contributions to the revolution should be relatively

young, so the share of early-career contributions should have increased and then decreased.


       The case of Werner Heisenberg illustrates the interplay of these factors. His

contributions of matrix mechanics and the uncertainty principle, both coming by age 25, were

conceptual in nature and, further, did not build from long training in classical physics. Indeed,

Heisenberg famously almost failed his Ph.D. exams because he had little knowledge of classical

electromagnetism (Cassidy, 1992).


       As shown in Figure 5 Panel A, Jones and Weinberg (2011) show the expected initial

increase in early-career contributions and subsequent decline looking at Nobel Laureates in

physics over the course of the revolution. The study further relates these dynamics within fields

to measures of the “burden of knowledge” and the prevalence of conceptual versus experimental
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius          28


work. As suggested in Figure 5, empirical proxies for these drivers are closely coincident with

changes in achievement age. Namely, there are strong relationships between achievement age

dynamics within fields and field-specific dynamics in (1) whether contributions are theoretical or

empirical in nature (Fig. 5B), (2) Ph.D. age (Fig. 5C), and (3) backward citation age (Fig. 5D).

The first measure operationalizes the distinction between conceptual and experimental work in

creative-cognitive theory, and the latter two measures can proxy for training requirements and

the stock of prior knowledge, as emphasized by burden of knowledge theory.


IV.    Discussion


       The relationship between age and scientific genius can also inform underlying

mechanisms of creativity and scientific progress, which in turn raise a number of policy-relevant

issues. These issues include the design of institutions that support scientists, the implications of

aging populations, and the link between models of scientific discovery and economic growth.

This section considers such implications in light of the facts and theories discussed above, and

closes by considering important new avenues for research.


       Scientific and Technological Progress


       Consider scientific progress, taking Kuhn’s classic description of scientific progress that

emphasizes periods of normal science, featuring the accumulation and refinement of ideas,

punctuated by occasional paradigm-shifting revolutions (Kuhn 1962). Interestingly, the facts

and theories about age and creativity have several implications for these perspectives on

scientific progress.


       First, the burden of knowledge theory appears broadly consistent with a conception of

normal science, where scientific and technical knowledge expands and deepens, raising the
                                                                         Age and Scientific Genius                 29


educational burden on successive generations of scientists. Empirically, the broad tendency

toward extending training phases and the commensurate decline in early life-cycle output over

the 20th Century may indicate that science is mostly “normal” in the Kuhnian sense. From the

perspective of Kuhn, however, perhaps more interesting is the behavior of age and creativity

during the quantum mechanics revolution (Jones and Weinberg, 2011). The marked decline in

age at achievement and age at Ph.D. during this revolutionary period are consistent with a “reset”

to the fundamental knowledge of the field, allowing easier access to the frontier by young

people. Using the age at great scientific contribution (and high degree) to quantify the burden of

knowledge, a reduction in relevant, extant knowledge appears to be hallmark of revolutions. In

this sense, the age at great contribution may support a Kuhnian description of science and

provide a valuable marker for identifying revolutions. But, as indicated, field-level revolutions

appear rare based on these metrics.


        A second application of age and creativity analysis bears on the overall rate of scientific

and technological progress. Given the increasingly delayed start to the active innovative career,

spending more time in training and less time being creative over the life cycle will limit the

expected contributions of the individual, other things equal. There is, in effect, less time for the

genius to act like one. This tendency thus suggests a truncation in innovative capacity.9 Other

things equal, the contributions of a given set of scientists would decline.


        More subtly, the link between age and creativity may also affect the direction of

scientific progress. Linking the conceptual versus experimental analysis of the age-achievement

relationship with the burden of knowledge theory may have implications for the nature of great


9
 This early life-cycle truncation also generalizes beyond geniuses, extending to more ordinary innovators (Jones
2009).
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius           30


achievements. In particular, if early life-cycle innovative capacity is increasingly truncated by

training demands, then it is possible that the nature of achievements would shift from conceptual

toward experimental reasoning. Thus contributions may become increasingly biased against

deep, conceptual novelty. To the extent that youth, conceptual achievement, and revolutions are

linked (see Section III), then the probability of revolutions may also be increasingly limited.


       Demographics


       Related issues involve demographics. The aging of populations in many countries,

especially in countries that are traditional drivers of scientific advance, may also shift the mass of

scientific effort increasingly away from conceptual contributions. This can happen naturally

through the cognitive-creative mechanism of Weinberg and Galenson (2005) and also through

sociological and political mechanisms that reinforce the interests of expanding numbers of older

individuals at the expense of younger scientists. Thus, a similar shift in the direction of scientific

progress, and the contributions of geniuses, may come from demographic change.


       Significant effects may appear in the rate of scientific advance. Taking the tendency for

great achievements to decline after middle age (Figure 1), a shift toward an older population may

mean, most simply, fewer great contributions. Indeed, one of the salient features of Nobel Prize

winners and great technological innovators over the 20th century is that, while contributions at

young ages have become increasingly rare, the rate of decline in innovation potential later in life

has remained steep, offering no apparent compensation for the early life-cycle effect (Figure 1).


       Such demographic trends, like the truncation in the early life-cycle, auger a decline in

innovative output. That said, the number of minds engaged in scientific and technological

advance continues to increase. Population increases globally, and the economic development of
                                                                          Age and Scientific Genius                  31


many countries, such as China or India, bring increasing numbers of people into the collective

scientific enterprise (Jones and Romer, 2010). On net, therefore, more minds may compensate

for underlying challenges and actually serve to increase the rate of scientific and technological

progress in the century ahead.


         Lastly, a related aspect concerns centers of scientific advance around the world. Other

things equal, countries with population distributions that center on middle age naturally become

richer sources of active geniuses driving forward science and technology.10 Of course, the

phrase “other things equal” incorporates many things, including educational systems, population

size, economic investments, political freedom, and the broader institutional support that provides

the appropriate foundations for genius to appear and shine.


         Science Institutions


         A wide range of institutions interface with the age-creativity relationship. Given the

extending training phase and delay to the start of innovative careers, one natural area of focus is

education. One policy might simply encourage apparent geniuses to leave formal education

behind.11 This idea might seem well motivated if educational institutions were seen as

inefficient, at least for geniuses. On the other hand, such a policy works against the mass of data

showing that great innovations are rare at very young ages (even in antiquity and in

environments where formal schooling was less developed), and it does not solve the underlying

burden of knowledge problem, where creativity relies on combinations of extant knowledge that

is increasingly profound. In this view, the appropriate response is not less education, but more



10
  See Hongzhou and Guohua (1985) for a historical analysis of national scientific leadership built on these lines.
11
  For example, the Thiel Fellows program, where promising undergraduates are given $100,000 to leave college
and undertake active creative projects, rather than study, works on this margin.
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius          32


efficient education – more knowledge acquisition per unit of training time -- throughout the early

life cycle (Jones, 2011).


       Moving beyond the full-time training phase, additional institutions come into play. If

researchers spend more time reaching the research frontier even after completing their training,

short tenure clocks may be less desirable. Short tenure clocks would also seem to favor fields

where research can be performed more quickly and researchers whose work is more conceptual

and abstract. In these ways, institutions may shape the research that is done and the researchers

performing it. There has been some movement away from habilitation requirements and the chair

system in the countries where they have existed. We suspect that this movement away from these

institutions will allow greater creative freedom earlier in the career but note that people whose

work is more experimental and those working in areas with greater knowledge burdens may

derive less benefit from elimination of these institutions. Even in the US, where these

institutions are not present, postdoctoral training periods are long in many fields. While we

caution against attributing long postdocs exclusively to the increased knowledge burden and

extended training requirements (for instance, post-doctorates may reflect the rise of big science

and hierarchical research teams in some fields), slow early careers and long postdocs may not

only limit early life-cycle autonomy and creativity, they may discourage potential students from

entering the sciences in the first place (Jones, 2011).


       New research directions


       There are many open avenues in studying age and scientific genius. The shift from

studies of the scientific enterprise as a whole or of entire fields to studies of individual

researchers and the factors that govern their productivity marks a substantial break in approach
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius          33


that presents many new opportunities. Considerably more work is required to measure

knowledge stocks, to identify revolutions, and to quantify the nature of individuals’ research.

Rapid improvements in information and computing tools may advance our understanding of the

age-genius relationship and its implications. For instance, natural language processing algorithms

can help quantify features of scientific publications (e.g. the vintage, novelty, and/or

combinations of ideas in an article) to assess the nature of research contributions and how they

vary over the life-cycle. Indeed, "big data" has great potential to greatly improve our

understanding of many aspects of the careers of scientists.


       More fundamentally, when one begins to think about creativity and genius as dynamic,

individual processes rather than static aggregate processes, a wide range of additional topics

emerge, including the implications of major life events. For instance, we know frustratingly little

about how gender mediates the age-creativity relationship, nor how lifecycle events such as

childbirth affect the age-creativity relationship for women or men. Nor do we understand the

implications of formal retirement. A related, broader set of questions surround the

socioeconomic and institutional contexts in which genius is most likely to emerge. For example,

since 1965, two-thirds of all Nobel Prize winning research has been performed in the United

States, yet only 5% of the world’s population resides in the United States, which points strongly

to context in understanding when and where genius is likely to express itself.


       The decline of innovation potential in the later life-cycle remains an open question with

many possible explanations (Section II) but currently no clear adjudication between them. Given

the ever-growing population of older researchers, it is increasingly important to understand

creativity and genius at the end of the research career.
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius         34


V.     Conclusion


       Exploring the links between age and scientific genius is a subject of enduring fascination

to scholars and the public alike. Formal studies are often surprising, both in their findings and in

their broader implications. In contrast to common perceptions, most great scientific

contributions are not the product of precocious youngsters but rather come disproportionately in

middle age. Moreover, perceptions that some fields, such as physics, feature systematically

younger contributions than others do not stand up to empirical scrutiny.


       Age and scientific genius are empirically characterized by great variation across

individuals and over time. This variation, increasingly emphasized in more recent scholarship,

can be related to specific underlying theories of creativity and the progress of knowledge,

including both the ‘burden of knowledge’ theory of Jones (2009) and the conceptual-

experimental theory of Weinberg and Galenson (2005). Tests of additional theories, and

increasingly detailed investigations of specific theories, await further scholarship. As discussed

above, opportunities for new analyses abound.


       The implications of these studies can step well beyond intrinsic interest in genius per se.

The intersection of age and great achievements sheds light on a rich landscape, where creativity,

knowledge, scientific progress, economic growth, demographics, and science institutions all

intersect. As studies continue to reveal the forces at work in the age-creativity relationship, this

broader landscape will continue to come into sharper focus.
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius       35


Acknowledgements


Weinberg acknowledges support from NSF #1064220 and # 1348691 and NIA P01 AG039347.



References


Adams, C. W. (1946). The age at which scientists do their best work. Isis, 166-169.


Arrow, K. J. (1962). The economic implications of learning by doing. The Review of Economic

       Studies, 29(3), 155-173.


Bayer, A. E., & Dutton, J. E. (1977). Career age and research-professional activities of academic

       scientists: Tests of alternative nonlinear models and some implications for higher

       education faculty policies. The Journal of Higher Education, 48(3), 259-282.


Beard, G. M. (1874, 1979). Legal responsibility in old age: based on researches into the relation

       of age to work; reprinted in The “Fixed Period” Controversy: Prelude to Ageism, Gerald

       J. Gruman, Ed. New York: Arno Press.


Becker, G. S. (1964). Human capital: a theoretical analysis with special reference to

       education. National Bureau for Economic Research, Columbia University Press, New

       York and London.


Becker, H.S. (1982). Art Worlds. Univ. of California Press, California.


Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings. The

       Journal of Political Economy, 75(4), 352-365.


Blackburn, R. T., Behymer, C. E., & Hall, D. E. (1978). Research note: Correlates of faculty

       publications. Sociology of Education, 51(2): 132-141.
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius              36


Cassidy, D. C. (1992). Uncertainty: The Life and Times of Werner Heisenberg. Freeman, New

        York.


Currie, J., & Madrian, B. C. (1999). Health, health insurance and the labor market. Handbook of

        Labor Economics, 3, 3309-3416.


Dennis, W. (1956). Age and productivity among scientists. Science, 123(1956): 724-725.


Diamond Jr, A. M. (1980). Age and the Acceptance of Cliometrics. Journal of Economic

        History, 40(4), 838-841.


Diamond, A. M. (1986). The life-cycle research productivity of mathematicians and scientists.

        Journal of Gerontology, 41(4), 520-525.


Dietrich, A., & Srinivasan, N. (2007). The optimal age to start a revolution. The Journal of

        Creative Behavior, 41(1), 54-74.


Deary, I. J., Corley, J., Gow, A. J., Harris, S. E., Houlihan, L. M., Marioni, R. E., ... & Starr, J.

        M. (2009). Age-associated cognitive decline. British medical bulletin, 92(1), 135-152.


Ericsson, Karl A., and Andreas C. Lehmann (1996). Expert and Exceptional Performance:

        Evidence of Maximal Adaptation to Task Constraints. Annual Review of Psychology 47,

        273–305.


Feist, G. J. (2006). The development of scientific talent in Westinghouse finalists and members

        of the National Academy of Sciences. Journal of Adult Development, 13(1), 23-35.


Freud, S. 1929. Civilization and its Discontents. London: Hogarth Press.


Galenson, D. W. (2001). Painting outside the Lines. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
                                                              Age and Scientific Genius           37


Galenson, D. W., & Weinberg, B. A. (2000). Age and the quality of work: the case of modern

       American painters. Journal of Political Economy, 108(4), 761-777.


Galenson, D. W., & Weinberg, B. A. (2001). Creating modern art: The changing careers of

       painters in France from impressionism to cubism. The American Economic

       Review, 91(4), 1063-1071.


Galenson, D. W. (2005). One hit wonders: why some of the most important works of modern art

       are not by important artists. Historical Methods, 38(3), 101–117.


Hoisl, K. (2007). A closer look at inventive output-The role of age and career paths. Munich

       School of Management Discussion Paper, (2007-12).


Hongzhou, Z., & Guohua, J. (1985). Shifting of World's scientific center and scientists' social

       ages. Scientometrics, 8(1), 59-80.


Hull, D. L., Tessner, P. D., & Diamond, A. M. (1978). Planck’s principle. Science, 202(717),

       295.


Jones, B. F. (2003). Essays on Innovation, Leadership, and Growth. Ph.D. Thesis,

       Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Jones, B. F. (2009). The Burden of Knowledge and the Death of the Renaissance Man: Is

       Innovation Getting Harder? The Review of Economic Studies, 76(1), 283-317.


Jones, B. F. (2010). Age and great invention. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(1), 1-

       14.


Jones, B. F. (2011). As Science Evolves, How Can Science Policy? Innovation Policy and the

       Economy, 11, 103-131.
                                                              Age and Scientific Genius          38


Jones, B. F., & Weinberg, B. A. (2011). Age dynamics in scientific creativity. Proceedings of the

       National Academy of Sciences, 108(47), 18910-18914.


Jones, C. I., & Romer, P. M. (2010). “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and

       Human Capital.” American Economics Journal: Macroeconomics. 2(1): 224-245.


Kanazawa, S. (2003). Why productivity fades with age: The crime–genius connection. Journal of

       Research in Personality, 37(4), 257-272.


Kellner, D. (1940), Redders der Meschheid, doktoren als Nobelprijswinnaars, Amsterdam. (as

       referenced in Moulin 1955)


Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Lehman, H. C. (1953). Age and Achievement. Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Lehman, H. C. (1966). The psychologist's most creative years. The American

       Psychologist, 21(4), 363.


Levin, S. G., & Stephan, P. E. (1991). Research productivity over the life cycle: Evidence for

       academic scientists. The American Economic Review, 81(1), 114-132.


Lyons, J. (1968). Chronological age, professional age, and eminence in psychology. The

       American Psychologist, 23(5), 371.


Matthews, K. R., Calhoun, K. M., Lo, N., & Ho, V. (2011). The aging of biomedical research in

       the United States. PloS one, 6(12), e29738.
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius         39


McDowell, J. M. (1982). Obsolescence of knowledge and career publication profiles: Some

       evidence of differences among fields in costs of interrupted careers. The American

       Economic Review, 72(4), 752-768.


Merton, R. K. (1968). The Matthew effect in science. Science, 159(Jan. 5), 56-63.


Messeri, P. (1988). Age differences in the reception of new scientific theories: The case of plate

       tectonics theory. Social Studies of Science, 18(1), 91-112.


Moulin, L. (1955). The Nobel Prizes for the Sciences from 1901-1950--An Essay in Sociological

       Analysis. The British Journal of Sociology, 6(3), 246-263.


National Research Council (1990). On Time to the Doctorate: A Study of the Lengthening Time

       to Completion for Doctorates in Science and Engineering. Washington, DC: National

       Academy Press.


Oster, S. M., & Hamermesh, D. S. (1998). Aging and productivity among economists. Review of

       Economics and Statistics, 80(1), 154-156.


Pelz, D., & Andrews, F. M. (1966). Scientists in organizations Productive climates for research

       and development. New York: Wiley.


Raskin, E. (1936). Comparison of scientific and literary ability: a biographical study of eminent

       scientists and men of letters of the nineteenth century. The Journal of Abnormal and

       Social Psychology, 31(1), 20-35.


Reese, H. W., Lee, L. J., Cohen, S. H., & Puckett Jr, J. M. (2001). Effects of intellectual

       variables, age, and gender on divergent thinking in adulthood. International Journal of

       Behavioral Development, 25(6), 491-500.
                                                              Age and Scientific Genius          40


Roe, A. (1972). Patterns in productivity of scientists. Science, 176(4037), 940-941.


Simonton, D. K. (1988). Scientific genius: A psychology of science. Cambridge University Press.


Simonton, D. K. (1997). Creative Productivity: A Predictive and Explanatory Model of Career

       Trajectories and Landmarks. Psychological Review 104(1), 66-89.


Simonton, D. K. (1999). Origins of Genius. Oxford University Press. 308 pgs.


Simonton, D. K. (1991). Career landmarks in science: Individual differences and

       interdisciplinary contrasts. Developmental Psychology, 27(1), 119-130.


Simonton, D. K. (2007). Creative Life Cycles in Literature; Poets versus Novelists or

       Conceptualists versus Experimentalists? Psychology of Ethics, Creativity, and the Arts,

       1(3), 133-139.


Simonton, D. K. (2009). Varieties of (Scientific) Creativity A Hierarchical Model of Domain-

       Specific Disposition, Development, and Achievement. Perspectives on Psychological

       Science, 4(5), 441-452.


Stephan, P. E., & Levin, S. G. (1993). Age and the Nobel Prize revisited. Scientometrics, 28(3),

       387-399.


Tilghman, S. (chair), et al. (1998). Trends in the Early Careers of Life Sciences. Washington,

       DC: National Academy Press.


Usher, A. P. (1954). A History of Mechanical Invention. Cambridge, MA.


Van Dalen, H. (1999). The golden age of Nobel economists. The American Economist, 43(2), 17-

       35.
                                                             Age and Scientific Genius         41


Weinberg, B. A., & Galenson, D. W. (2005). Creative careers: The life cycles of Nobel laureates

       in economics (No. w11799). National Bureau of Economic Research.


Weinberg, B. A. (2006). Which labor economists invested in human capital? Geography,

       vintage, and participation in scientific revolutions. working paper, Ohio State University

       mimeo.


Weitzman, M. L. (1998). Recombinant growth, Q. J. Econ. 331-360.


Wray, K. B. (2003). Is science really a young man's game?. Social Studies of Science, 33(1),

       137-149.


Wray, K. B. (2004). An Examination of the Contributions of Young Scientists in New Fields.

       Scientometrics, 61(1), 117-128.


Wray, K. B. (2009). Did professionalization afford better opportunities for young

       scientists?. Scientometrics, 81(3), 757-764.


Zuckerman, H. (1977). Scientific elite: Nobel laureates in the United States. New Jersey:

       Transaction Pub.


Zuckerman, H. & Merton, R. (1973). Age, aging, and age structure in science. In Robert Merton

       (Ed.) The Sociology of Science (497-559), Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Zusne, L. (1976). Age and achievement in psychology: The harmonic mean as a

       model. American Psychologist, 31(11), 805.
                                                              Age and Scientific Genius         42


                          Table 1: Classic Perspectives on Age and Genius

   Population                   Discipline(s)             Period   Sample Size       Measures

Beard, 1874 (The “Fixed Period” Controversy)

   "Great achievers"            Multiple scientific and   Pre-     N = ~400          Age at
                                creative arts fields      1870s                      accomplishment

   Peak performance found between ages 35 and 40.

Adams, 1946 (Isis)

   Scientists post 1600         Mathematics,              1600-    N = 4,204         Age at big
                                Bacteriology,             1944                       achievement
                                Chemistry, Physiology,
                                Physics, Engineering,
                                Pathology, Astronomy,
                                Surgery, Psychology,
                                Geology, Botany,
                                Zoology, and
                                Anthropology

   Median age of great achievement by discipline was found to be: Mathematics (37), Bacteriology
   (38), Chemistry (38), Physiology (40), Physics (40), Engineering (43), Pathology (44), Astronomy
   (45), Surgery (45), Psychology (45), Geology (46), Botany (46), Zoology (46), and Anthropology
   (47). Disciplines focused on deduction/intuition had great achievements younger.
                                                                         Age and Scientific Genius               43


Lehman, 1953 (Age and Achievement)

   Great contributors from a         Chemistry,                    Misc.       N = 244             Age at big
   variety of disciplines-           Mathematics, Physics,                     (Chemistry);        achievement
   specific sources12                Astronomy,                                163 (Math);
                                     Entomology, Genetics,                     90 (Physics);
                                     Agricultural                              63
                                     Chemistry; and                            (Astronomy);
                                     Psychology; Inventors                     402
                                                                               (inventors); 86
                                                                               (Entomology);
                                                                               94 (Genetics);
                                                                               36 (Ag.
                                                                               Chemistry);
                                                                               50
                                                                               (Psychology)

   Notable inventions occurred most frequently from ages 30 to 40. Great achievement peaks differed
   across fields, at ages 25-30 in chemistry, 30-40 in mathematics, 40-45 in astronomy, and 30-35 in
   agricultural chemistry, entomology, genetics, physics, and psychology.

Moulin, 1955 (The British Journal of Sociology)

   American Nobel Prize              Physics, Chemistry,           1901-       N = 33              Age at award
   winners                           and Medicine                  1950

   The average age at receiving award ranged from 55 (Medicine) to 50 (Chemistry) and 45 (Physics).

Dennis, 1956 (Science)

   "Eminent scientists"              Astronomy, Chemistry,         1800-       N = 156             Age at
   reaching age 70 with              Geology, Mathematics,         1900                            publication
   adulthoods from 1800-             Naturalists,
   1900 from Webster's New           Psychology, and
   International                     Physics
   Encyclopedia




   12
     Chemistry – Hilditch’s A Concise History of Chemistry; Mathematics - Cajori’s A History of Mathematics;
   Physics – A Source Book in Physics; Astronomy – A Source Book in Astronomy; Inventors – Scientific American
   Reference Book, The World Almanac and Book of Facts for 1938, Lincoln Library of Essential Information,
   Standard Dictionary of Facts; Entomology, Genetics, Agricultural Chemistry, and Psychology – N/A
                                                                 Age and Scientific Genius       44


   High productivity rate reached and maintained by 30s. Publications decreased 20 percent beginning
   in 60s with further decline in the 70s.

Lehman, 1966 (American Psychologist)

   Superior contributors from    Psychology                1700-      Several          Age at
   disciplinary reviews                                    2000       hundred          publication

   Significant contributions in psychology came primarily from authors age 25 - 40.

Lyons, 1968 (American Psychologist)

   "Eminence" and                Psychology                N/A        Several          Age at award
   publication in top journals                                        hundred

   Field recognized big achievements at least 16 years after occurrence, with peak in contributions
   similar to Lehman's (1966) findings.

Roe, 1972 (Science)

   "Eminent" scientists          Biology, Physical         mid-       N = 53           Age at
                                 Sciences, and Social      20th                        publication
                                 Sciences                  century

   Productivity persistence was norm across disciplines; however, physicists peaked earlier and left
   often for administration. Attempted comparison with 19th century scientists indicates more
   publications in the 20th century with the age at first publication decreasing with time.

Simonton, 1991 (Developmental Psychology)

   Scientists and inventors      Mathematics,              ~1500-     N = 2,026        Age at
   included in three selective   Astronomy, Physics,       1980                        publication
   biographical dictionaries     Chemistry, Biology,
                                 Medicine, Technology,
                                 Earth Sciences, and
                                 Other

   Age-productivity curves vary across disciplines. Mathematicians were youngest in publishing first
   works. For best works, peak age averaged 39 across fields, with contributions in earth sciences,
   medicine, astronomy, and biology peaking at later ages.
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius          45


Stephan and Levin, 1993 (Scientometrics)

   Nobel Prize winners          Chemistry, Physics,        1901-     N = 412            Age at winning
                                and Medicine               1992                         research

   Physics laureates were the youngest to complete prize-winning research, due largely to shorter work
   spans in physics. Approximately eighty percent of chemists, and two-thirds of laureates in physics
   and medicine began winning work before age 35. Only eight percent of laureates began prize
   winning work after age 45.

Van Dalen, 1999 (The American Economist)

   Nobel Prize winners          Economics                  1969-     N = 43             Age at winning
                                                           1998                         research and
                                                                                        publication

   Nobel laureates in economics typically started their winning work at 29 and had their "mother lode
   publication" at 38. These laureates tended to have early first publications (3 years prior to PhD
   completion) with their last big contribution by 62.

Kanazawa, 2003 (Journal of Research in Personality)

   Scientists from the          Mathematics, Physics,      ~1700-    N = 280            Age at big
   Biographical Dictionary      Chemists, Biologists       2000                         achievement
   of Scientists

   Approximately one quarter of scientists made discoveries during the five years around age 30.

Wray, 2004 (Scientometrics)

   Significant discoveries in   Bacteriology               1877-     N = 23             Age at big
   Hughes' The Virus                                       1898      (scientists), 28   achievement
                                                                     (discoveries)

   Middle-aged scientists disproportionately contributed significant discoveries, providing more than
   50% of discoveries while they were approximately a quarter of the workforce.
                                                                Age and Scientific Genius          46


Feist, 2006 (Journal of Adult Development)

   National Academy of           Cellular and              early     N = 97            Age at big
   Sciences-elected scientists   Developmental             2000s                       achievement
                                 Biology, Physics,
                                 Astronomy, Chemistry,
                                 Anthropology, and
                                 Psychology

   Peak age and plateau found at 40 followed by potential second acceleration toward end of career.

Matthews, Calhoun, Lo, and Ho, 2011 (PLoS ONE)

   Nobel Prize winners; NIH      Medicine, Physiology,     1980-     N = 96            Age at award
   principal investigators       and Chemistry (DNA,       2010
                                 RNA, or proteins only)

   On average prize-winning laureates in biomedical-related areas were 41 at the time they first
   published on their prize-winning research.
                                                                    Age and Scientific Genius         47


                           Table 2: Dynamic Perspectives on Age and Genius

    Population                       Discipline(s)               Period    Sample Size        Measures

Post 1900 data

Zuckerman, 1977 (Scientific Elite)

    American Nobel Prize             Physics, Chemistry,         1901-     N = 92             Age at
    winners                          Physiology/Medicine,        72                           winning
                                     and Economics                                            research

    Age at winning work for prize winners fluctuates in Medicine, Physics, and Chemistry when dividing
    U.S. laureate sample into three approximately 25 year periods.

Jones, 2003 (Ph.D. thesis) and 2010 (Review of Economics and Statistics)

    Nobel Prize winners;             Physics, Chemistry,         1873-     N = 830            Age at big
    Inventors from almanacs of       Medicine, and               1998                         achievement
    the history of technology        Economics; Inventors

    Mean age of great achievement increased 6 years during the 20th century for both Nobel Prize
    winners and great inventors. Demographic shifts account for reductions in productivity after middle
    age while a productivity shift associated with longer training accounts for a sharp decline in
    innovation potential before age 30.

Jones and Weinberg, 2011 (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences)

    Nobel prize winners              Physics, Chemistry,         1900-     N = 525            Age at
    (primarily)                      and Medicine                2008                         winning
                                                                                              research

    Variation in the age-creativity relationship is five times larger over time than across fields. Classic
    cross-field comparisons of age and achievement are unstable. Age dynamics within fields closely
    mirror field-specific changes in (1) training patterns and (2) the frequency of theoretical contributions.
                                                                    Age and Scientific Genius         48


Earlier data

Raskin, 1936 (The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology)

    Male scientists and “literary   Biology, Physical          Produced      N = 120            Age at
    men” listed in multiple         Sciences, Mathematics,     during the    (scientists),      first/last
    histories                       Poets, Novelists, and      Nineteenth    123 (literary      publication
                                    Dramatists                 Century       men)               and big
                                                                                                achievement

    Great contributions came at about 35 for both scientists and literary men. No evidence was found of time
    trends in the sample as related to age at first, greatest, or last achievement.

Zusne, 1976 (American Psychologist)

    Psychologists/psychoanalysts    Psychology                 1840-1900     N = 213            Age at
    from Annin, Boring, and                                                                     publication
    Watson history                                                                              and big
                                                                                                achievement

    Great contributions came consistently from age 35-40 consistently, while age at first publication fell from
    33 to upper-20s. Age at last publication and death decreased from 75 (1840s) to 60 (1900).

Hongzhou and Guohua, 1985 (Scientometrics)

    Chronological Table of          General                    1500-1960     N = 1,249          Age at big
    Natural Scientific Events                                                (scientists),      achievement
    published by Shanghai                                                    1,928
    Fudan University                                                         (achievements)

    Age at outstanding achievement shifted upwards from 1500-1960, not controlling for increasing life
    expectancy, with peak ages occurring before age 30 prior to 1700.

Wray, 2009 (Scientometrics)

    Dibner Library's 200 epochal    General                    1600-         N = 136            Age at big
    books/pamphlets                                            1899                             achievement

    The median age at discovery dropped 9 years from the 1600s to the 1800s, with younger scientists
    making more big discoveries and older scientists making fewer.
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius          49




                   Table 3: Intradisciplinary Perspectives on Age and Genius

   Population                   Discipline(s)              Period   Sample Size        Measures

Zuckerman, 1977 (Scientific Elite)

   American Nobel prize         Physics, Chemistry,        1901-    N = 92             Age at award
   winners                      Physiology or              1972
                                Medicine, and
                                Economics

   American Nobel laureates who trained with other laureates received the Nobel Prize seven years
   earlier than others. Prize-winning work was completed at age 38 for laureates apprenticing under
   another laureate (vs. age 41 for others).

Weinberg and Galenson, 2005 (National Bureau of Economic Research)

   Nobel Prize winners          Economics                  1980-    N = 31             Age at
                                                           1999     (scientists), 78   winning
                                                                    (important         research;
                                                                    articles)          theory vs.
                                                                                       empiricism

   Experimental innovators, those economists working inductively, tended to have peak scholarly
   achievements in their mid-50s while conceptual innovators, economists working deductively, had
   their single best work at age 25.

Dietrich and Srinivasan, 2007 (The Journal of Creative Behavior)

   Nobel Prize winners          Physics, Chemistry,        1901-    N = 493            Age and career
                                and Physiology/            2003                        age at big
                                Medicine                                               discovery

   Revolutionary discoveries, as opposed to within-paradigm discoveries, are especially likely in the
   20s and early 30s. Argue for a neurological mechanism, where prefrontal cortex function
   declines with age and limits creative thinking.
                                                               Age and Scientific Genius         50


Jones and Weinberg, 2011 (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences)

   Nobel prize winners; 100     Physics, Chemistry, and    1900-     N = 525          Age at
   most cited papers,           Medicine                   2008                       winning
   annually                                                                           research;
                                                                                      theory vs.
                                                                                      empiricism

   Theorists made their great achievements an average of 4 years earlier than empiricists. The
   quantum mechanics revolution in physics was associated with a decline in both training
   requirements and a shift toward conceptual contributions, both of which can statistically explain
   rapid decline in achievement age during this period. (See also Table 2.)
