                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DIVORCE RISK, WAGES, AND WORKING WIVES:
A QUANTITATIVE LIFE-CYCLE ANALYSIS OF FEMALE LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION

                                          Raquel Fernández
                                           Joyce C. Wong

                                        Working Paper 19869
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19869


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




 We thank Meta Brown, Jeremy Greenwood, and Gianluca Violante for helpful comments on an earlier
 version as well as seminar audiences at Mannheim University, University of Zurich, Paris School of
 Economics, Oslo University, IIES at Stockholm University, the NY Federal Reserve, Georgetown
 University, Hunter College, the World Bank, the IMF, and at various conferences including the 2012
 SED annual meetings, LACEA-LAMES, and the Human Capital Conference at the Bank of Italy.
 The research was supported by the NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
 not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2014 by Raquel Fernández and Joyce C. Wong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
Divorce Risk, Wages, and Working Wives: A Quantitative Life-Cycle Analysis of Female
Labor Force Participation
Raquel Fernández and Joyce C. Wong
NBER Working Paper No. 19869
January 2014
JEL No. I3,J12,J13,J16,K36

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper develops a quantitative life-cycle model to study the increase in married women's labor
force participation (LFP). We calibrate the model to match key life-cycle statistics for the 1935 cohort
and use it to assess the changed environment faced by the 1955 cohort. We find that a higher divorce
probability and changes in wage structure are each able to explain a large proportion of the LFP increase.
Higher divorce risk increases LFP not because the latter contributes to higher marital assets or greater
labor market experience, however. Instead, it is the result of conflicting spousal preferences towards
the adjustment of marital consumption in the face of increased divorce risk.


Raquel Fernández
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu

Joyce C. Wong
IMF
Washington, DC
jwong2@imf.org




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19869
                                                    Abstract

            This paper develops a quantitative life-cycle model to study the increase in married women’s
        labor force participation (LFP). We calibrate the model to match key life-cycle statistics for
        the 1935 cohort and use it to assess the changed environment faced by the 1955 cohort. We
        find that a higher divorce probability and changes in wage structure are each able to explain a
        large proportion of the LFP increase. Higher divorce risk increases LFP not because the latter
        contributes to higher marital assets or greater labor market experience, however. Instead, it is
        the result of conflicting spousal preferences towards the adjustment of marital consumption in
        the face of increased divorce risk.




             Divorce Risk, Wages, and Working Wives: A Quantitative

               Life-Cycle Analysis of Female Labor Force Participation∗
                               Raquel Fernández and Joyce Cheng Wong



1       Introduction

The dramatic increase in the second half of the twentieth century in married women’s labor force

participation (LFP) has given rise to a large and growing literature that explores the roles of the

multiple forces that led to this evolution. Some explanations have emphasized technological change

in the household (e.g. Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorukoglu (2005)) or in medical/contraceptive

technology (e.g., Goldin and Katz (2002), Albanesi and Olivetti (2009a,b), and Knowles (2007)).

Other explanations have emphasized changes in the wage structure such as in the skill premium, the

gender wage gap, or in the returns to labor market experience (e.g., Jones, Manuelli, and McGrattan

(2003), Gayle and Golan (2012), Olivetti (2006), and Knowles (2013)). Yet others have focused

on changes in culture (Fernández, Fogli, and Olivetti (2004), Fernández (2013)), changes in the
    ∗
    Corresponding author: Raquel Fernández, 19 W 4th St, New York, NY 10012. We thank Meta Brown, Jeremy
Greenwood, and Gianluca Violante for helpful comments on an earlier version as well as seminar audiences at
Mannheim University, University of Zurich, Paris School of Economics, Oslo University, IIES at Stockholm University,
the NY Federal Reserve, Georgetown University, Hunter College, the World Bank, the IMF, and at various conferences
including the 2012 SED annual meetings, LACEA-LAMES, and the Human Capital Conference at the Bank of Italy.
.



                                                         1
structure of the economy (Galor and Weil (1996), Rendall (2010), Goldin (1990), and changes in

child-care costs (Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008)).

    Although several regression-based analyses have examined the relationship between divorce

risk and women’s work by exploiting time differences in the introduction of unilateral divorce laws

across US states (see, e.g., Peters (1986), Gray (1998), Stevenson (2008)), the dynamic quantitative

literature has (with a few recent notable exceptions discussed in the next section) mostly ignored

this issue.1 This is understandable as this strategy allows the researcher to focus on other factors

without the burden of the considerable computational complexity inherent in models with multiple

marital states.      Nonetheless, we believe that the parallel increase in divorce rates and married

women’s LFP across many countries, as well as the compelling intuition for why greater divorce

risk should lead to higher married women’s LFP (discussed below), warrants a deeper look at this

topic.

    The goal of our paper is to delve more deeply into the link between married women’s LFP and

marital instability using a dynamic quantitative model in a life-cycle framework. This framework

allows for clear conditioning of behavior by gender, education, marital status, and age which allows

one to disentangle the differences across those groups which is evident in the data. To this end,

we chose to focus on two cohorts for which there is (almost) complete data: the 1935 and the 1955

cohorts.

    The 1935 and 1955 cohorts experienced the largest increase in married women’s LFP over any

twenty year period. Whereas only 40% of white women from the 1935 cohort worked during the

ages of thirty to forty, for the 1955 cohort this proportion increased to 70%.2 Over the life spans of
    1
      Other econometric models have used proxies for individual variation in divorce risk to study the link between
marital instability and divorce risk (see, e.g., Johnson and Skinner (1986), Papps (2006), Kneip and Bauer (2007)).
There is also evidence that the anticipation of divorce is positively correlated with increased labor supply by marrried
women (see, e.g., Lundberg and Rose (1999)). Overall, the econometric literature has concluded that greater divorce
risk led to higher married women’s LFP.
    2
      The work experience of black women is different from that of white women and hence we choose not to mix the
two in this analysis. See Potamites (2007) for an analysis of differences in the evolution of LFP across black and



                                                           2
these cohorts there were significant changes in the economic environment: the ten percentage point

gender gap in college attendance of the 1935 cohort was completely eliminated, the average skill

premium faced by each cohort over its working life increased for both men and women by some 12

percentage points, the overall life-time gender wage gap faced by each cohort fell substantially, and

there is also evidence that the return to women’s work experience increased and child-care costs

fell. At the family level there were also important transformations.                 Fertility dropped from 3.0

children per woman for the 1935 cohort to 1.9 for the 1955 cohort. Individuals married later and

more assortatively, and the probability of a marriage ending in divorce doubled.3

    To assess the quantitative contributions of the many factors listed above, we develop a dynamic

life-cycle model with incomplete markets and risk-averse agents who differ in their education

endowments (college or high school) and make work, consumption, and savings decisions.                            In

the spirit of Cubeddu and Ríos-Rull (2003), marital status and fertility are treated as “shocks"

which are conditioned on gender, age, and education.4 Agents can be married, single, or divorced.

They make consumption, saving, and work decisions in each period and women’s disutility from

working may depend on her education, marital status, and on the presence of children. Married

agents share household consumption and save/borrow jointly. Their choices maximize the weighted

sum of the wife’s and husband’s welfare; unmarried individuals maximize their own welfare. Upon

divorce, assets are split between the two ex spouses.               Any child belonging to the ex-couple is

assumed to live with the mother and the ex-husband provides child-support payments.

    We construct LFP, wage, and marital status moments for each of our cohorts at different ages,

by gender and education, using a combination of several datasets including the Current Population

Survey (CPS), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), and the Survey of Income and
white women.
   3
     All quantitative statements in this paragraph are based on authors’ calculations using CPS, Census, and the 2004
SIPP.
   4
     See also, e.g., Love (2010) and Ríos-Rull and Sanchez-Marcos (2002) for uses of this approach.



                                                         3
Program Participation (SIPP). We calibrate our model to the life-cycle statistics of the 1935 cohort,

conditioning everywhere on gender and education, as well as on age and marital status.

    We use the calibrated model to assess the quantitative impact of various changes that occurred

over the life span of the two cohorts: the increase in assortativeness of marriage, the changing

distribution over the age of first marriage, fertility patterns, divorce and remarriage probabilities,

the increase in the skill premium and the decline in the gender wage gap, the higher returns to

women’s labor market experience, and the declining price of child care. All together we find that

these changes are able to account for a large proportion (85%) of the change in married women’s

LFP. The increase in divorce risk has a large impact on married women’s LFP, particularly when

they are younger.       We find that, in isolation, it can account for over 42% of the LFP increase

between the two cohorts during the ages of 25-40 for married college women and 49% of the LFP

increase for married high-school women.

    Our model keeps various factors exogenous that are undoubtedly endogenous, chiefly fertility

and marital status.        This has the significant drawback of not allowing another factor to drive

both the changes in married women’s LFP and in marital instability, as well as not permitting

the causality to be reversed (from working to increased marital instability). The decision to keep

fertility and marital status exogenous was driven by the desire to develop a reasonably tractable

dynamic quantitative model that would permit us to understand some of the mechanisms that

potentially drive the increase in women’s LFP.5 Our initial intuition was that working has two

potential benefits for married women, both of which become more important in the face of higher

divorce risk. First, working increases married women’s experience in the labor market thus allowing
   5
     As discussed in the next section, including endogenous marital status (or fertility) in a model with endogenously
evolving state variables vastly increases its computational complexity. That makes it very difficult to understand
the quantitative role played by various mechanisms since any changes in modeling assumptions or robustness checks
require recalibrating the model, a process that can potentially take months. We are now investigating the effect of
changes in divorce law on both marital status and women’s LFP in a simpler framework that facilitates treating both
as endogenous outcomes (see Fernández and Wong (2013)).




                                                          4
them to command higher wages in the future.         Since divorced women are more likely to work

than married women, a higher probability of divorce increases the importance of greater labor

market experience. Second, working while married can, by increasing income, potentially increase

household savings.   Since upon divorce women experience a drop in household income, a higher

probability of divorce makes greater marital savings more attractive.

   Interestingly, we found that the desire to increase labor market experience did not play a

significant quantitative role in the increase in married women’s LFP. Even more surprising, we

found that married household savings actually decreased in the face of higher divorce risk. Our

analysis indicates instead that married women’s higher LFP is the result of the (endogenously)

conflicting preferences of husbands and wives towards the adjustment of marital consumption in

the face of higher divorce risk. When confronted with higher divorce risk, married women would

prefer to increase saving in order to transfer more assets to the divorced state, thus helping them

smooth consumption.        Men, on the other hand, would prefer to increase consumption in the

married state as this is what allows them to smooth consumption.        A “compromise" is reached

— the solution to a Pareto weighted utility maximization problem — that involves married women

working more which allows married savings to decline by less than what they would otherwise.

This outcome is obtained by maintaining fixed the Pareto weights that govern the solution to the

household bargaining problem. Thus, in this framework women’s increased LFP is not the result

of one party’s increase in bargaining power but rather the solution to opposing preferences in the

household regarding how to allocate consumption across marital states.

   Our paper is organized as follows: the next section provides a brief review of the quantitative

literature in this area.   Section 3 develops a dynamic life-cycle model with endogenous labor,

consumption and savings.       Section 4 presents the data used to parameterize the model for

the 1935 cohort.     Section 5 discusses some key features of the benchmark model.       Section 6



                                                5
investigates the effects of various changes in family and wage structure in generating women’s LFP

outcomes. Section 7 explores the roles of experience, asset accumulation, and concavity in driving

the quantitative results regarding divorce. Section 8 conducts various robustness checks and section

9 concludes.



2        A Brief Literature Review

Our paper contributes to the small but growing literature that uses quantitative dynamic models to

study the evolution of female LFP without ignoring the issue of marital transitions. Most closely

related to our work is the recent paper by Eckstein and Lifshitz (2011). The authors also use a

dynamic life-cycle model with fertility and marital status determined by shocks (conditioned on

education, age, etc.) to quantify the contributions of changes in marital stability, wages, education,

and fertility to the evolution of female LFP over several cohorts born between 1925 and 1975.

        Surprisingly, Eckstein and Lifshitz (2011) find that changes in marital status (later marriage

combined with higher divorce probabilities) account for at most 1% of the changes in female LFP

across cohorts born between 1925-1975. The authors find that changes in education and wages

played the largest role in the transformation of female LFP. The most obvious key differences with

our approach is the assumption of a linear utility function (we use a concave one) and, relatedly,

assumptions regarding how married couples make decisions. A linear utility function implies that

women do not react to the increase in risk, which may be an important element underlying the

response of LFP to a higher divorce probability.6              Second, and relatedly, the authors do not

allow saving or borrowing and assume that women make unilateral labor market decisions. These

two features imply that an increase in the probability of divorce does not increase the level of

disagreement between husband and wife: there are no savings to contribute to and the husband is
    6
    See also the seminal paper by van der Klaauw (1996) on marital status and female labor supply in a setting with
linear utility.


                                                        6
unable to influence his wife’s labor market decision. In section 7 we explore further the importance

that these assumptions have in generating the differences in results.

       Our analysis, like Eckstein and Lifshitz (2011), models marital status as the outcome of an

exogenous shock, despite its obvious endogeneity.             This modelling choice has some important

drawbacks such as not allowing one to determine causality nor conduct a welfare analysis.                     On

the other hand, it has important benefits such as permitting one to include, in a computationally

tractable fashion, other endogenously evolving state variables which we consider critical to understanding

about the reaction of LFP to divorce risk.           The model’s tractability also allows one to conduct

sensitivity analyses and to unpack the key mechanisms whereby increased divorce risk might lead

to higher LFP. An alternative is to endogenize the marital status outcome. There are pros and

cons to both strategies, with the balance depending primarily on the focus of the research question

as illustrated by the papers discussed below.

       Greenwood, Guner, Kocharkov, and Santos (2012) present an elegant and insightful analysis

of how household technological change and changes in the wage structure affected educational

attainment, married female LFP, marriage and divorce rates, and the assortativeness of marriage

in the post-war era.      In that paper, marital instability and married women’s labor supply arise

endogenously as responses to the declining economic importance of marriage (e.g., decreasing

household returns to scale and improvements in home production) and to changes in the wage

structure. Not surprisingly, however, the ambitious scope of their paper requires other important

simplifications such as the assumption that agents are unable to borrow or save and that the

economy is in a steady state, both initially in 1960 and in the year 2000.7 Their modeling choice

makes sense given that their main interest is in producing a unified theory. Our focus, as in Eckstein

and Lifshitz (2011), however is on understanding how different forces could impact women’s work
   7
    See also Rios-Rull and Regalia (2001) who were among the first to develop a dynamic model with endogenous
marital status (but with a continuous labor supply decision) to study the rise in single households. They likewise
assume a stationary equilibrium in order to be able to solve the model.


                                                        7
decisions and analyzing the mechanisms that lead to different outcomes.                 In particular, treating

marital status transitions as exogenous allows us to focus on the life-cycle features of work decisions

and to include other endogenous state variables that we consider critical to thinking about the

impact of greater marital instability on women’s labor supply, such as an individual’s labor market

experience and a household’s asset holdings.8

       A very ambitious paper by Mazzocco, Ruiz, and Yamaguchi (2007) examines the interaction

between female LFP, savings, and marital decisions in an estimated model with limited commitment

where marital status and bargaining power evolve endogenously.                This paper is computationally

extremely demanding, making it very difficult to investigate the roles played by various mechanisms.

As a result of this (and data limitations), the authors focus their analysis on one 10-year cohort

and do not distinguish individuals by education.            Although they do not attempt to understand

the drivers of LFP over time, their model highlights some of the important interactions between

savings, labor supply, and marital status decisions.

       A recent paper by Voena (2012) builds on Mazzocco et al.’s framework in order to study how the

introduction of unilateral divorce differentially affected the asset accumulation behavior of married

households and the labor supply of married women across US states with different property rights

laws. Her model also endogenizes marital status but, since the life-cycle aspect is not central to the

paper’s main focus (she is not comparing across cohorts), it considerably lightens its computational

demands by assuming that periods are lengthy (10 years) and by not distinguishing across women

of different education levels.      For our research question, on the other hand, it is important to

respect educational differences and to distinguish among different points in the life cycle as these

differences show up clearly in the data.
   8
    In addition, it is worth noting that there are at least some exogenous factors driving the change in marital
stability such as changes in the legal environment (unilateral divorce law was introduced in most of the US in the
mid and late 70s) and subsequent changes in culture (divorce became more socially acceptable).




                                                        8
3        The Model

In this section we present the economic environment and the households’ decision problems.


3.1       Some Preliminaries

Time is discrete and denoted by t = 1, ..., T. Agents are born with gender g (either male m or

female f ). They enter life (at age 25 in the calibration) endowed with a given education level e

that can be either high or low (h or l) and a marital type ζ t .9 In addition to an agent’s potential

(or actual or ex) spouse’s permanent characteristics (education), ζ t also tracks the evolution of

time varying characteristics of the potential spouse (in the model these will be the asset holdings,

experience, participation, and permanent income shock) all up to period t.10                       Agents are also

endowed with an initial asset a0 draw and an initial marital status s0 . The marital status can be

either married (m), divorced (d) or single (s). The distribution of the initial marital status is both

gender and education dependent.

        An individual’s life cycle can be divided into two distinct stages of life.                 The first stage

corresponds to working life. In that stage, individuals receive fertility and marital shocks, wage

draws, and make consumption-savings and work decisions. The second stage of life corresponds to

retirement. In that stage, individuals face a non-stochastic environment and make consumption-savings

decisions. The timing of the two stages is exogenous.

        Before presenting the economic environment in greater detail, it is worth spending some time

explaining our assumption of a marital type.              Although we have assumed that marital status is

exogenous, that assumption in and of itself does not greatly simplify the computational burden

associated with an evolving marital status. The possibility that an agent may marry (either for
    9
     The prior NBER wp version of this paper endogenized the education choices of agents. In this version we omit
this choice as we found that simply including ability differentials did not provide for a sufficiently rich educational
sector for the calibration. In any case, we obtained similar quantitative results for LFP.
  10
     The significance of this assumption is explained in greater detail further on.



                                                          9
the first time or after a divorce) in the future implies that agents need to know the probability

with which they will be matched with spouses of different characteristics.                   In particular, they

need to know the joint distribution over prospective spouses’ assets, education, persistent wage

shocks, labor market experience, and prior children.              These characteristics affect the payoffs of

marriage/divorce and hence calculating an agent’s expected utility in order to solve for optimal

consumption, savings and LFP requires, at each point in time, assessing the welfare associated with

each possible outcome. One modelling choice often used to reduce the computational complexity

is to assume a stationary distribution of characteristics (this is the assumption, for example, in

Greenwood, Guner, Kocharkov, and Santos (2012) and Jacquemet and Robin (2011)). Our interest

in an environment that is continuously evolving (in education, divorce, women’s LFP, etc.) rules

out this avenue. Instead we introduce a new assumption to this literature: the endowment of a

marital “type". This marital type endows an agent with some information about the individual

that they may marry.         In particular, we assume that individuals know both the education and

the current value of the time-varying characteristics of their potential spouse (e.g., that agent’s

asset level, wage shock, labor market experience, etc., in that period but not in the future). This

assumption significantly reduces the computational burden at the cost of decreasing the uncertainty

individuals face.11

    Note that the time-varying characteristics of one’s potential spouse are endogenously determined.

That is, asset accumulation and (for women) labor market experience are chosen taking into account

the characteristics of one’s marital type as of time t.              Hence, although marital status is not

endogenous, the characteristics of one’s marital type evolve endogenously over time.
  11
     An alternative would be to assume that remarriage is to an agent with the same asset holdings as one’s own, as
in Voena (2012). Mazzocco, Ruiz, and Yamaguchi (2007) assumes that an unmarried agent meets others whose asset
holdings are in some interval around one’s own. Our specification has the advantage of respecting gender differences
in asset accumulation behaviors while unmarried.




                                                        10
Preferences, Consumption, and Borrowing Constraints


The instantaneous utility function of an agent with gender g, education e, and marital status s is

given by:
                                                             c1−σ
                                       Ueg (ct , Pt ; s) =    t
                                                                  − ψ seg (kt )Pt                 (1)
                                                             1−σ

where c is consumption and Pt denotes the LFP decision, taking the value one if the agent works and

zero otherwise.12 We henceforth assume that only women suffer disutility from market work, ψ se (kt ),

that depends on e, s and on a vector kt indicating the ages of her children in that period. Men’s

and single women’s work disutility is normalized to zero; they thus always work and accordingly

we will not match any empirical LFP moments for them.

      Household consumption can be thought of as a public good with congestion. If the household

spends ĉt on consumption goods, this yields


                                                                ĉt
                                                    ct =                                          (2)
                                                             e (kt ; s)


units of household consumption. Thus e (kt ; s) gives the economies of scale that exist which depend

on the ages and number of children and whether there are one or two adults in the household (hence

the s). Note that e (0; 1) = 1.

      Agents save through a risk free asset denoted at . Agents’ borrowing is only constrained by the

no-bankruptcy condition aT +1 ≥ 0 which imposes that agents must pay off all their debt before

they die.      Our choice of a utility function with infinite marginal utility of consumption at zero

consumption will ensure that the agent is bounded away from the constraint.
 12
      For computational simplicity we do not allow part-time work.




                                                             11
Divorce, Remarriage, and Children


Women obtain education and marital-status-dependent fertility shocks at the beginning of a period.

In keeping with modeling one of the major asymmetries between the sexes, we assume that when a

couple divorces the children stay with the mother. We use ktij to denote a vector that keeps track

of the age of each child that woman i had with husband j.        If a woman divorces, both she and

her ex-husband continue to share the same ktij variable until they remarry. Note that if there are

no children, ktij ≡ 0. Children remain with the parents/mother until they become adults (at the

age of 20 in the model). They make no decisions but deflate household consumption accordingly.

For computational ease we assume that divorced ex-spouses remarry at the same time so that the

children are simply reassigned to the newly remarried couple. In fact, we simplify matters further

by assuming essentially that they remarry each other in that the assets, children, and persistent

shocks are exactly the same as those of the ex spouse (and thus . This shortcut allows us to not

include the ex spouse in the state space once remarriage has occurred.

   Upon divorce, assets are split between the two ex-spouses, with a proportion α of assets going

to the wife and 1 − α to the husband.      Furthermore, the man pays his ex-wife child support as

long as she remains both unmarried and with a child under 20.        Agents are assumed to remain

divorced for at least one model period, i.e. they cannot receive a remarriage and a divorce shock at

the same time. Finally, if the wife does not remarry by the time she enters retirement, she receives

a proportion of her husband’s retirement benefits each period.


Income


In each period of the work stage of life, individuals receive wage draws yt .      The wage process

is uncertain.   It has an idiosyncratic persistent (zt ) and a transitory component (η t ), and is a

e, g-specific function of experience (xt ) that takes into account the human capital depreciation that


                                                 12
occurs if the agent did not work the prior period, i.e., yegt = yeg (xt , zt , Pt−1 ).

    In each period during retirement, an individual receives retirement income bsg (y) that is a

function of gender, past earnings (y), and marital status.


3.2    The Work Stage

Individuals are assumed to spend periods 1 until period tR in this stage. In each period, individuals

receive an e, g-specific wage draw that is a function of the individual’s history, in particular her/his

work experience and past wage draws. Given these draws, households make consumption-savings

and work decisions. How these decisions are made differs by marital status. Singles and divorced

individuals make these decisions to maximize their life-time utility. Note that married individuals,

on the other hand, will in general not agree on the optimal choice of female LFP and savings. As

in Chiappori (1988), we assume that married individuals choose household consumption and the

wife’s labor force participation so as to maximize the weighted sum of the spouses’ lifetime utilities.

Thus the household allocation is constrained Pareto efficient.13

    Households are also subject to fertility shocks at the beginning of each period and marital shocks

at the end of each period. Asset, consumption, and participation choices are made after fertility

shocks and income are observed but prior to the realization of the marital shock.                      Households

get divorced with probability deg,t , divorced individuals remarry with probability reg,t , and singles

marry with probability meg,t .        Women receive fertility shocks φest that differ by education and

marital status. A time line showing periods 0 and 1 of an individual’s life is given in Figure 1 to

clearly illustrate the timing of shocks and decisions.


                                                 [Figure 1 here]
  13
     See Del Boca and Flinn (2012) for an insightful analysis of various modeling approaches one may use to determine
household allocations. In future work, it may be interesting to explore the effect of wage on bargaining strengths
(see Cherchye, de Rock, and Vermeulen (2009) for a discussion of empirical evidence on fixed pareto weights.




                                                         13
Budget Constraints in the Working Phase


Married individuals:

       If married in period t, a household makes decisions subject to a budget constraint knowing

that at the end of the period its marital status may change as a result of a shock. The married

household’s budget constraint is given by:



                             ĉt (kt ) + am       m
                                          t+1 = Rat + (yef t − κ (kt ))Pt + yemt                          (3)



where am                                                           14 Income consists of capital
       t is the married household asset holdings entering period t.


income from last period’s asset, where R is the gross return, and yegt is each spouse’s labor market

income from which expenditures on childcare, κ (kt ), are subtracted if the wife works.              ĉ is the

                                m is the household’s asset position before the realization of the
expenditure on consumption and at+1

marital shock at the end of period t.      Henceforth, we use t̄ to denote the value of a variable before

the realizations of the end-of-period shocks.

       At the end of a period t, shocks to marital status may leave the household divorced, which then

affects their asset holdings. We assume that a fraction α ∈ (0, 1) of the assets am
                                                                                  t̄+1 are allocated to

the wife and the remainder to the husband. Thus, the laws of motion for asg,t+1 are given by:

            
            
            
            
            
             am      m
               t+1 = at+1                if st+1 = m, g = m, f (i.e. the couple enters t + 1 married)
            
            
asg,t+1 =     adf,t+1 = αat+1
                          m              if st+1 = d, g = f
            
            
            
            
            
            
             ad                 m
                m,t+1 = (1 − α) at+1     if st+1 = d, g = m


Divorced individuals:

       We assume that if a couple divorces, the ex-husband makes transfer payments to his ex-wife
  14
    Note that we are assuming, as in Mazzocco, Ruiz, and Yamaguchi (2007), that married agents are not allowed
to have their own private savings or borrowing. This seems like the more realistic alternative.



                                                     14
in subsequent periods if they have children under the age of twenty and she is not remarried. In

particular, the former husband must pay a fraction of his current income to his ex-wife as child

support h (kt , ymt ). Recalling that the children reside with their mother, the budget constraints of

a divorced woman and a divorced man at time t are thus given by:



                     Woman: ĉt (kt ) + adf,t+1 = Radf t + (yf t − κ (kt ))Pt + h (kt , ymt )            (4)

                        Man:     ct + adm,t+1 = Radmt + ymt − h (kt , ymt )                              (5)



       d
where at+1 is the asset position prior to the realization of the marital shock at the end of period

t. Note that a divorced man’s consumption equals his expenditure on consumption (since his

household consists only of himself).

   At the end of period t, the shock to marital status can transit a divorced individual into

remarriage. Thus, a divorced individual i that had saved adi,t+1 faces at the end of period t the

following law of motion for the asset position upon entering period t + 1:15

                  
                  
                  
                   adi,t+1 = ad                if st+1 = d (i.e., if i enters t + 1 still divorced)
                               i,t+1
      asi,t+1 =                                                                                          (6)
                  
                  
                   am = ad        d
                                + aj,t+1        if st+1 = m (i.e., if i enters t + 1 remarried to j)
                     t+1  i,t+1



Singles:

   Single women and men are assumed to always work. Their budget constraint differs only if the

woman has a child (whereupon she must pay child care). Thus, for a single woman and a single
  15
     Recall that a divorced agent is marrying another divorced agent by assumption, hence i and j both have d
superscripts in equation (6)




                                                       15
man:



                                                       s
                                   Woman: ĉt (kt ) + at+1 = Rast + yf t − κ (kt )                               (7)

                                                     s
                                       Man:    ct + at+1 = Rast + ymt                                            (8)



At the end of a period t, shocks to marital status can transit a single individual i into marriage,

whereupon the assets of the spouse i and j are combined, i.e.,16

                      
                      
                      
                       asi,t+1 = as                 if st+1 = s (i.e., if i enters t + 1 still single)
                                   i,t̄+1
          asi,t+1 =                                                                                              (9)
                      
                      
                       am = as        s
                                    + aj,t+1         if st+1 = m (i.e., if i enters t + 1 married to j)
                         t+1  i,t+1



3.3       Retirement

In periods tR through T all individuals are retired and hence do not work.                      They still make a

consumption-savings decision each period that depends on household type and receive a pension

bsg (y) that depends on own past earnings history y, gender, and present household type s.                        In

particular, divorced men may be required to transfer some of their pension to their ex-wife. There

are no longer any child support payments at this stage and all individuals are assumed to die at the

end of period T . Recall that we assume that individuals cannot die with debt. Thus the budget

constraints are given by:

                                       ĉt + ast+1 = Rast + bsg   and   asT +1 ≥ 0                              (10)


3.4       Optimization Problems and Equilibrium

In this section we outline each household type’s optimization problem and define equilibrium.

Before doing so, we introduce individual i’s state vector Ωit = {ait , xi,t−1 , Pi,t−1 , kt , zit , ei , ζ it } which
  16
       We assume that singles marry other singles.




                                                           16
keeps track of an individual’s assets, experience (for a man, his age, whereas for a woman how many

periods she worked in the past), whether i worked last period, the number and ages of children, the

persistent component of the income shock, an individual’s education, and one’s marital type, ζ it .

As discussed previously, in addition to an agent’s potential (or actual or ex) spouse’s education, ζ it

also tracks the spouse’s asset holdings, experience, participation, and persistent income shock, all

at period t. Finally, define the law of motion for experience as:



                                              xt+1 = xt + Pt                                      (11)



Divorced Agent’s Maximization Problem


Upon retirement, the optimization problem is simple given that there is no uncertainty. For an

individual of gender g it is given by:


                                        c1−σ
                                         t
                  Vgtd (Ωt ) = max                d
                                             + βVg,t+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt ) for t ≥ tR                     (12)
                             ct ,at+1   1−σ
                          s.t. retired divorced budget constraint for g in eq. (10)



   During the work phase of life, the divorcee has an exogenous eg-specific probability of remarrying

reg . Upon remarriage, the maximization problem transits to that of a married household’s. In any

given period t < tR − 1, the divorcee chooses consumption, saving and, if she’s a woman, whether




                                                    17
to work.17 Thus, the value function associated with a divorced woman at time t is given by:


                                          (ct )1−σ
                Vfdt (Ωt ) =      max              − ψ de (kt )Pt                                                   (13)
                                      d
                             ct ,Pt ,at+1  1 −  σ
                                n                h                  i          m                o
                                                   d
                           + β (1 − reg,t )E Vf,t+1      (Ωt+1 |Ωt ) + reg,t E Vf,t+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt )

                          s.t.      budget constraint (4) and laws of motion (6) and (11)



where the expectation is taken over future shocks to her income, fertility, and her potential marital

partner’s income as well as possible future marital status shocks.

    Similarly, the value of being a divorced man at time t is:



                d                         (ct )1−σ
               Vmt (Ωt ) = max                                                                                      (14)
                                    d
                               ct ,at+1    1−σ
                             n             h                  i          m                o
                                             d
                          + β (1 − reg,t )E Vm,t+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt ) + reg,t E Vm,t+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt )

                          s.t. budget constraint (5) and laws of motion (6) and (11)



Married Household’s Maximization Problem


A couple that enters the retirement period married solves


                                  c1−σ
                                   t
         Vtm (Ωt ) = max                    m
                                       + βVt+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt )                                                          (15)
                      mct ,at+1   1−σ

                   s.t.   retired married budget constraint (10) and asset law of motion (3.2)



for all t ≥ tR .    This is relatively simple problem because, in the absence of marital shocks and

labor decisions, spouses agree on the optimal allocation (unlike in the working period).
  17
     Note that the problem at time t = tR − 1 is slightly different since the continuation value is given by the solution
to the retirement stage problem. This is true for all other maximization problems that involve t = tR − 1.




                                                           18
    In the working stage a couple that enters a period t < tR − 1 married solves


                                                                        1−σ 
                                         c1−σ
                                          t                               ct                      m              
 Vtm (Ωt ) = maxm                χ            − ψm
                                                 e (kt ) P t   + (1 − χ)         + (1 − deg,t )βE Vt+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt )
               ct ,Pt ,at+1              1−σ                              1−σ
                    n h                   i          h                    io
                          d                            d
           + deg,t β χE Vf,t+1 (Ωf,t+1 |Ωt + (1 − χ)E Vm,t+1 (Ωm,t+1 |Ωt )                                      (16)

               s.t.     budget constraint (3) and laws of motion (6) and (11)



where χ denotes the Pareto weight of the wife. Note that Ωf,t+1 and Ωm,t+1 are the state variables

of the wife and husband, respectively.18 Using an asterisk to denote the resulting outcomes from
                                               
the optimization problem above c∗t , Pt∗ , at+1
                                            ∗     , the value function associated with a married man

is given by:



                m                c∗1−σ
                                  t
               Vmt (Ωt ) =
                                 1−σ
                                                                        n h                     io
                                            m                               d
                          + (1 − deg,t )βE(Vm,t+1 (Ω∗t+1 |Ωt ) + deg,t β E Vm,t+1 (Ω∗m,t+1 |Ωt )                (17)



and the value function associated with a married woman is given by:


                                 c∗1−σ
                                  t
               Vfm
                 t (Ωt ) =              − ψm          ∗
                                             e (kt ) Pt
                                 1−σ
                                                m                           n h                     io
                                                                                   d
                              + (1 − deg,t )βE Vf,t+1   (Ω∗t+1 |Ωt ) + deg,t β E Vf,t+1 (Ω∗f,t+1 |Ωt )          (18)

  18
     Note that we are slightly abusing notation by using Ωt as the household’s state vector. Since both Ωf t and Ωmt
have the same information, however, this is just an issue of formal notation.




                                                               19
Single Agent’s Maximization Problem


An individual of gender g who enters the retirement period single solves:


                                       c1−σ
               Vgts (Ωt ) = max         t        s
                                            + βVt+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt ) for t ≥ tR                                    (19)
                             s
                           ct ,at+1    1−σ

                       s.t.     retired single budget constraint (10) and asset law of motion (9)



         An individual of gender g who enters period t < tR − 1 single solves:


                                              c1−σ
                                               t
                Vgts (Ωt ) =     maxs              − ψ seg (kt ) Pt                                           (20)
                               ct ,Pt ,at+1   1−σ
                                          s                         m                  
                         + (1 − meg,t )βE Vt+1 (Ωt+1 |Ωt ) + meg,t βE Vg,t+1 (Ωf,t+1 |Ωt )

                        s.t.       budget constraint (7) or (8) and laws of motion (9) and (11)



3.4.1        Equilibrium

                                                                      
In addition to requiring all outcomes ct , Pt , at+1                      to solve the maximization problem of the

household as specified in equations (12), (13), (14), (15), (16), (19), (20), we also require that

the expectations over the evolution of the state space of an agent’s potential marital type be

consistent with the distribution of shocks and optimizing outcomes of this type.



4         Parametrization

In this section we describe the calibration of the model.19 Some model parameter values are taken

from preexisting estimates and others are estimated directly from the data using model restrictions.

A remaining set of parameters are calibrated within the model in order to match certain moments
    19
    In order to capture the fact that men and women marry outside their cohorts, we solve the model twice, once
for the marriage market probabilities faced by women and a second time for the probabilities faced by men. See
Appendix for further details.


                                                                 20
in the data.     The reasoning guiding different choices is explained below.               Table 1 reports the

parameters estimated “outside" the model and Tables 2, 3, and 4 report the “internally" calibrated

parameters and their targets. Our key parameters of interest are those that affect work decisions

for women. These parameters include those which govern disutility from labor, child-care costs,

and several parameters which affect wage dynamics.


                                                 [Table 1 here]


       To construct our key statistics we mainly use the 1962-2010 waves of the March supplement

of the Current Population Survey (CPS), a cross-sectional survey conducted by the Bureau of the

Census. Although this is not a panel, we choose this dataset due to its long time span which allows

us to observe the full life span of our cohorts. We construct synthetic cohorts: the “1935" cohort

consists of white men and women born between 1934-1936, while the “1955" are those born between

1954-1956.20 Married people are defined as those “married, with spouse present", singles are those

people who report “never married" while divorced people are those who report their marital status

to be either “divorced" or “separated". Finally, since longevity is deterministic in our model we

exclude widows from our sample. We next proceed to explain the choices of functional form and

their calibration in detail.


                                                 [Table 2 here]

                                             [Tables 3 and 4 here]


Demographics and Preferences

The model period is 5 years. Individuals begin the working stage of life at age 25 (period t = 1)

where they remain for 7 periods. Retirement begins in the model period tR = 8 (thus at age 60)
  20
    As explained previously, we choose to focus on whites as the historical experiences of black men and women have
been very different. In particular, black women have worked significantly more than white women throughout. Note
that although our sample is selected based on race, we do not restrict the race of the spouses of the people in our
sample.


                                                        21
and death occurs at the end of model period T = 12 (at age 85).

       To parametrize the utility function we set σ = 1.5 since most estimates for the relative risk

aversion parameter in the literature vary between one and two.                     This value is in line with the

values found by Attanasio and Weber (1995) using US consumption data.                               We set the discount

factor β = 0.90 (for a five year period) which corresponds to a conventional yearly discount factor

of 0.98.

       The disutility of labor is allowed to vary by marital status, education, and children’s age and are

calibrated within the model in order to match female LFP rates by marital status and education for

the 1935 cohort.21 With respect to children, we distinguish between mothers with young children

(below the age of 5) and those with older children assuming that only the former bear any additional

disutility from working.22        Lastly, these disutilities are allowed to differ by education, reflecting

the fact that jobs may have non-monetary rewards (e.g. the distinction made between a “job" and

a “career"). Single women’s and all men’s disutility from work is normalized to zero.


Income Process

For an individual of gender g with education level e, her/his wage at time t is given by yeg,t such

that:

                     ln yeg (, xt , zt , Pt−1 ) = τ eg,t + γ eg1 xt + γ eg2 x2t − δ(1 − Pt−1 ) + wet               (21)


where τ egt captures a time varying component in aggregate wages, by education and gender,

γ eg1 , γ eg2 are education and gender specific experience polynomials, and δ is the additional human

capital depreciation incurred from not working in the previous period. Note that since men always
                                                                                   Pt
work, xm,t = t and Pm,t−1 = 1, ∀t < tR , whereas for women, xf t =                    τ =1 Pf τ .
  21
     The distinction between working as a single woman versus married or divorced was particularly relevant to the
1935 cohort who grew up thinking of married women primarily as homemakers.
  22
     Mothers of young children may be especially reluctant to work. See, for example, Bernal (2008) and Bernal and
Keane (2011) for some evidence regarding the effect of a mother’s working on a child’s development.


                                                           22
       The stochastic component of wages wet is assumed to be the sum of a (observable to the

agent) persistent component (zet ) modeled as an AR(1) process and a transitory component η et ∼

N (0, σ ηe ).

                           wet = zet + η et ,    zet = ρe ze,t−1 + ǫet ,   ǫet ∼ N (0, σ ǫe )                       (22)


This choice of model for the stochastic process is standard in the literature and is consistent with

both the sharp drop in the autocovariance function for wages between lags 0 and 1 and also with

the large increase in the variance of wages observed in the data over the life-cycle.23

       We estimate the parameters of the income processing using the PSID. First, we construct

data on hourly wages (yem,t ) for men of education level e using data on earnings and total hours

worked.24 We then run the following regression in order to estimate the parameters γ̂ em1 , γ̂ em2 of

the second degree polynomial on age:



                               ln yem,t = Demt + γ em1 aget + γ em2 age2t + wem,t



where Demt is a set of year dummies. We use the residuals from this regression to estimate the

parameters of the stochastic process (σ ηe , σ ǫe , ρe ) using the minimum distance estimator first

proposed by Chamberlain (1984).              This method seeks parameters which minimize the distance

between the empirical covariance matrix of income residuals and the one obtained from simulating

the income process outlined above.              This choice of estimator is standard in the literature and

its use and identification in this specific income process is described in detail in, for example,

Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) and Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2010).25 Finally,

the time-varying intercepts τ em,t are given by the estimates of Demt . These are shown in figure
  23
      This specification and its estimation is discussed in great detail in, for example, Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron
(2004) and Guvenen (2007), as are the characteristics of the autocovariance functions and the variance growth in the
life cycle which motivate the functional form of the stochastic process.
   24
      See the Appendix for details of the sample selection.
   25
      We thank Gianluca Violante for kindly providing us with the estimation code.


                                                           23
A.1 in the Appendix.

       We assume that women share the same stochastic wage process (wet ) as men. The fact that

women move in and out of the labor force implies that we cannot use the same method as before

to estimate experience and time intercepts for women’s wage processes.                 Instead, the latter are

calibrated internally so as to generate the period-by-period gender wage ratio and skill premia for

women as seen in the data. The implied values of τ ef,t for our benchmark cohort are plotted in

figure A.1 in the Appendix. With respect to returns to experience, the literature has found values

in the range of 2 to 5% returns to wages from one year of participation for women born in later

cohorts (1940s onwards). Since there is evidence that the return to experience has increased over

time, we also target a 2% return to wages from an extra year of participation during the ages of

25-40 for women in the 1935 cohort.26

       Our model abstracts from alimony since the evidence in the data shows that both the proportion

of divorced people who receive it and the monetary amounts are very small.27                  Child support is

a more common and substantial payment. For example, Del Boca and Flinn (1995) find it to be

about 20% of the father’s income.         The rate of non-compliance, however, is fairly high at 37%.

Beller and Graham (1988) report an average child support payment of $1115 in 1978. Given an

average male wage that year of around $13,000, this amounts to 8.7% of the male wage; these

authors also find a high rate of non-compliance (over 50%). In the light of this evidence, we assume

that as long as his ex-wife has children under the age of 20, the man pays child support equivalent

to 10% of his current income (unless she remarries). We do robustness checks using other values
  26
     For example, Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008)’s calibrated returns to experience imply a return of
about 2% for the cohort of women born around 1945. Olivetti (2006) estimates the return to one year of full time
work to be between 3 and 5% using data in the 1970 Census and she also finds an increase of almost 90% in returns
to experience using the 1990 Census.
  27
     For example, Voena (2012) uses the National Longitudinal Survey of Young and Mature Women to show that
only 10% of divorced women report receiving alimony between 1977 and 1999 and the monetary amounts correspond
to only about 15% of the divorced woman’s household income. Using 1978 CPS data, Peters (1986) reports alimony
payments which correspond to under 3% of the average male earnings that year.




                                                       24
for this parameter.28

    After retirement, for computational simplicity (as in Guvenen (2007)), individuals in our model

receive a constant pension which is a function of her/his last observed earnings.                     The exact

functional form of the pension system mimics the US Social Security bend points (following

Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2010)) and it is outlined in the appendix. Married couples

receive either the sum of the husband’s and wife’s pensions or 1.5 times the husband’s pension

(whichever one is higher). A divorced woman receives, in addition to her own pension, 10% of her

ex-husband’s pension.29


Family Formation and Fertility

Agents’ initial marital status is assigned in proportions to match the ones in the CPS data for our

cohorts at age 25-29. These proportions are given in figure A.2 in the Appendix, and they vary

by gender, education, and cohort.

    Recall that agents are assigned a marital “type" which permanently determines the characteristics

of one’s spouse. For each agent, given her/his education, we assign a spousal type so as to match

the conditional distribution of spouses’ education as seen in the data for individuals between 35-39

for each respective cohort. These proportions, conditional on education and gender, are reported

in Table 5. Thus, the pattern of marriages mimics the degree of assortativeness in education found

in the data.


                                                 [Table 5 here]


    The probability of marriage for agents who enter a period single is calculated directly from
  28
     In our model, we abstract from the risk of non-compliance by the father in the payment of child support by
making these payments certain. Uncertainty in these payments would increase the effects of a higher divorce rate.
  29
     The laws governing an ex-wife’s claim to the man’s pension have evolved over time. Before 1980 unvested
pensions were not considered part of marital property. Currently, pensions are divided as part of marital property
and they are frequently the most valuable portion of the marital real estate (see Oldham (2008)). In our robustness
check we investigated other proportions as well.


                                                        25
the evolution over time of the proportion of people who are never married in the CPS data for

each cohort. These probabilities are reported in Table A.1 in the Appendix, by age, education and

gender. Next we need divorce and remarriage rates which we compute using the Survey of Income

and Program Participation (SIPP) conducted by the Census.30 These rates are reported in Table

6 and the details of the computation are in the Appendix.


                                                    [Table 6 here]


       Fertility shocks are education and marital status dependent and are calibrated to yield both the

proportion of women who are mothers during the ages of 25-29 for each cohort, by education level

and marital status, and to generate the average number of children a woman has in her lifetime,

by education level, as in the PSID data for each cohort.31 The exact timing of shocks by cohort

and education are given in the Appendix.


Consumption Deflator and Child-Care Costs

Children are assumed to live with their parents (or mother, if parents are divorced) until the age of

20. We use the McClements scale to calculate the economies of scale in consumption.32 Its exact

numbers (by child’s age) are reported in the Appendix.

       Women who have children under the age of 10 at home are assumed to incur child-care costs

if they work which depend only on the age of the youngest child, i.e. if a household has a young

and an old child, child-care costs are incurred once and for the younger child. We calibrate the
  30
       The SIPP is a series of short panels (from 2.5 to 4 years) of approximately 14,000 to 36,700 households in the
US.
  31
     We choose to match the proportion of women (by education and marital status) who are mothers because LFP
behavior is driven more by the presence of a young child at home rather than by the number of children women have.
Moreover, given that our childcare costs and additional disutility from labor depend only on the age of the youngest
child in the household, we chose to focus on the distinction between mothers and others (this is the strategy followed
by Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008)).
  32
     This scale is very similar to the OECD scale, but it has the advantage that it was computed based on expenditure
data from families.




                                                          26
child-care costs for young children (aged 0-4), κyoung and for old children (aged 5-9), κold internally

in the model and their values are reported in Table 2.


Other External Parameters

There is little guidance as to what the Pareto weight on a woman’s welfare in the household

allocation problem should be. A recent paper by Voena (2012), using variations in savings behavior

and divorce laws, estimates a value of 0.25. In our benchmark calibration we set this value, χ, to

0.3; the robustness section investigates the effect of changing this weight and finds small effects.33

      Upon divorce, we assume that the woman is responsible for the children and that assets are split

equally between the ex-spouses (i.e., α = 0.5). In the data, at the time when most of the divorces

were occurring for our 1935 cohort, most states either had equitable distribution laws or community

property laws. In the former, asset division is dictated by court of law, which may impose an equal

split or favor either the spouse who contributed more towards the asset or the one who has higher

needs. Under community property law, assets (and debts) are divided equally across the spouses.

Thus, an equal split is a reasonable benchmark. The robustness section explores values of α = 0.3

and α = 0.7 and finds similar quantitative results. Finally, the gross interest rate is set to R = 1.077

which in this five-year-period model corresponds to an annual interest rate of 1.5%. This is the

average real return on a 3 month t-bill over the period of 1935-2008.


4.1      Solution Method

The households face a known finite horizon which implies that the dynamic problem can be solved

numerically by backwards recursion from the last period of life using value-function iteration. At

each age, the households solve for their consumption-savings rule and LFP decisions taking as given

their state variables that period and next period’s value function. In addition to household assets,
 33
      See discussion in footnote (13).


                                                   27
our model has two other potentially continuous state variables: the husband’s and wife’s persistent

components of earnings, wmet and wf et , respectively.      As including more than one continuous

state variable, while possible, is computationally costly, we choose to discretize these two variables,

leaving assets as the only continuous state.

   During the working stages of the life cycle, the model combines a discrete decision (whether

the woman participates in the market) and a continuous decision (the level of savings).           This

combination may lead to non-concavities in the value function.        Given enough uncertainty, the

value function conditional on today’s participation is concave; we numerically check that this holds

for our model.   We follow Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008) and impose (and check)

a unique level of reservation assets a∗t at which, given the values of all other state variables, the

conditional value functions (working versus not working) intersect only once.       This is where the

woman’s participation decision switches from not working to working.         Thus, conditional on all

other states, for all values at < a∗t the woman works and for all values at > a∗t the woman does

not work.   We numerically check both the concavity of the conditional value functions and the

uniqueness of the reservation asset level. We then solve for each household’s optimal level of asset

accumulation, conditional on the LFP decision, i.e., we solve for alf p
                                                                   t+1 = argmaxat+1 V
                                                                                      lf p (Ω ), lf p =
                                                                                             t


{work, not work}. The Appendix presents further details about the solution, including number of

grid points and the algorithm used to calculate the optimal level of assets.

   It is also important to note that the solution of the optimization problem for both divorced

and single agents involves the calculation of a fixed point. Recall that each agent optimally

chooses her/his asset accumulation and labor force participation/experience (for women), taking

into account her/his expectations about their potential spouseâ€ s optimal decision paths while

the potential spouse does the same. In this sense, although a marital type is assigned exogenously

to each agent, the state space of their potential match in each period is endogenously determined



                                                  28
in the model and each agents forms the correct expectations over the endogenous path of optimal

decisions of their potential spouse.

         To summarize, there are a total of 29 parameters calibrated internally: 8 parameters which

govern the disutility of labor for married and divorced women, 2 parameters for child-care costs, 14

time-varying wage-intercept parameters for women and 2 for men, 1 wage depreciation parameter

and 2 returns to experience parameters. We choose to match a total of 44 statistics for our 1935

cohort: 28 average LFP rates for married and divorced women, by age and education,7 time-varying

gender wage ratios, 7 time-varying skill premia for women, the average lifetime skill premium for

men, and a two percent return to women’s wages from each year of work.34 Although this mapping

is only approximate, it may be useful to think of the time-varying wage-intercept parameters as

targeting the skill premia and gender wage ratio statistics. The remaining parameters are mainly

used to match the life-cycle pattern of LFP by education and marital status.

         We calibrate the internal parameters by minimizing the distance between implied model moments

and their data targets. The total distance between moments and targets is computed as a weighted

average of the squared difference between each moment and target.                    The weights are such that

the 28 moments for LFP receive half of the total weight and the 16 moments for wages receive the

other half of the weight. Within each group, the moments are equally weighted.



5         The 1935 Benchmark

As seen in figure 2, the benchmark model does an excellent job of reproducing the LFP profiles for

both married and divorced women according to their education. Furthermore, as shown in figure

2 the model does a good job of matching the period-by-period gender wage ratio and skill premia

for women. The LFP and wage targets as well as the model predictions are reported in Table 3.
    34
    Note that we only target one skill premium statistic for men using τ em,1 , e = {h, l}, since the remainder values
are calculated from first differences in the data on male wages.


                                                         29
                                                  [Figure 2 here]


       The disutilities of working in various states are reported in Table 4. They are higher, across

all marital-fertility categories, for high-school women than for college women. The cost of working

when divorced is slightly lower than when married. The highest cost is borne by working mothers

with children. The ratios of costs across categories is similar for both education groups. One way

to think about the differences in these numbers is that they also capture differences in the average

attractiveness of jobs available to women, by education, as well as differences in beliefs about the

psychic or developmental costs to children from having a working mother.35

       To make economic sense of the work disutility numbers we can calculate their equivalent

consumption cost.        To do this we compute the decrease in average consumption that women

would be willing to bear over one period in order to avoid incurring the disutility cost of working

that period, i.e., we find the z such that



                                           u(zcm          m
                                               f e ) = u(cf e ) − ψ es (k)                                       (23)



where cm
       f e is the average per-period consumption of married women (calculated over their lifetime)

with education level e.36 These proportions (z) are reported in Table 4. The percentage loss in

consumption due to disutility from labor is similar, within each education category, for married and

divorced women without children. It increases markedly for women with children, particularly for

married high-school women. As these women have very low LFP rates, a large disutility number is

required in order to “explain" this. Note from figure 2 that fewer than 35% of high-school women

are working during the ages of 25-34 despite the fact that their consumption is lower than their
  35
     Fernández (forthcoming) provides a simple model of married women’s LFP in which women’s beliefs about the
cost of working evolve endogenously over time through a learning process.
  36
     To calculate cM
                   f e we find the average consumption of married women of education e in each period (with or without
children) and then average across periods. We choose to express all percentages in terms of married women’s average
consumption as the pool of divorced women is constantly changing.


                                                         30
college counterparts since these have, on average, higher-earning husbands.

       The internally calibrated child-care costs for a young child correspond to around 68.9% of

average per-period female wages; the equivalent for an older child is 24.0% of average per-period

female wages.37 By way of comparison, Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008) find child-care

costs to be 66% of a woman’s mean earnings in their calibrated model.38 Thus, the two numbers

are remarkably close.


Some Implications of the Calibrated Model


The model generates statistics which were not directly targeted in the calibration and thus provide

additional checks of the model.           First, although data limitations do not allow us to target asset

levels for our two cohorts, we find that the ratio of average wealth to average earnings generated by

the model is 3.87, which is close to the value of 3.94 for the US found by Heathcote, Storesletten,

and Violante (2010).39

       Second, recall that we did not directly target the LFP of women with children and thus a

comparison with the data is informative.               Using the 1960 and 1970 Census (the CPS does not

report the presence of young children in the household for our time period), we observe the 1935

cohort at the ages of 25 and 35, respectively, and obtain an average LFP rate across those years

of 28.5% for married and divorced women with children under the age of 10.40                           The analogous

statistic in our model would be the LFP of women with children under 10 during the first three

periods of life.41 This yields an LFP of 27.0%, i.e. very close to the data. The LFP for married
  37
     The wages used to create the average are those from age 25-45.
  38
     This number is reported in terms of the mean earnings of a thirty-year-old woman who worked continuously prior
to childbirth.
  39
     This value is computed as the average of period-by-period ratios between average observed assets and labor
income in the model, across all household types.
  40
     The variable which denotes the existence and age of the youngest child in the household does not begin until
1968 in the CPS. For the Census data, we define women with children under 10 as those who report the existence
of an own child under that age in the household.
  41
     After the first three periods, given the structure of fertility shocks in the model, all children would be older than
ten.



                                                           31
and divorced women without children under 10 during this same time period is 63.8% in the data

versus 64.8% in the model.

   Third, the quantitative model allows one to evaluate the welfare cost of divorce by gender and

education. Given that divorced women retain sole custody of the children, they suffer a large drop

in consumption upon the dissolution of marriage as child-support and work do not, on average,

compensate for the loss of the ex-husband’s income.             To illustrate the cost of divorce we can

compare the average consumption of women who are married in both periods one and two, say,

with women who are married only in period one (ignoring the remaining periods). The average

consumption of divorced women in period 2 is 18.8% lower than their married counterpart’s for

college women and 9.3% lower for high-school women.

   An alternative illustration that takes into account as well the fact that divorced women also

work more is to calculate the proportion of average consumption a married woman would be willing

to sacrifice in period 2 in order to remain in her married state that period. This is the ze that

solves
                                                m                    d
                                 u(ze c̄m                    d
                                        e ) − ψ̄ e (k) = u(c̄e ) − ψ̄ e (k),                        (24)


         s
where ψ̄ e (k) denotes the average disutility from work decisions of women of education e in marital

status s ∈ {m, d} and with children of ages k. The average is thus the weighted sum of zeroes for

the women who do not work plus the weighted disutilities (varying by children’s age) for women

who do work. We use c̄se to denote the average consumption in period 2 of a woman with education

e and marital state s. This alternative calculation yields a consumption loss of 24.6% for a college

women and 19.3% for her high-school counterpart. The smaller gap in consumption loss between

education groups comes from their differences in labor disutility (the latter is higher for high-school

women).

   Men, on the other hand, gain from divorce. Comparing the average consumption (by education)

                                                     32
of men who are married in both periods one and two with men who are married only in period one,

the average consumption of divorced men in period 2 is 21.7% higher than that of their married

counterpart’s for college men and 20.9% higher for high-school men. Note that the difference in

consumption gains for men across the two education levels is significantly smaller than the equivalent

one for women.    This is because married women have low LFP rates and thus, on average, the

economic consequences of divorce for men arise mostly from a decrease in household size and not

from a change in household income.

    Although the empirical literature in this area does not have numbers that allow a direct

comparison of consumption costs, Peterson (1996) provides a survey of the literature in this field.

Using data from 1976-’77, he finds that women’s income-to-needs ratio (using a household-equivalence

scale) fell by 27 percent whereas men’s increased by 10 percent. All the literature surveyed by him

agrees that the economic consequences of divorce are to make women worse off and men better off.



6    From 1935 to 1955

In this section we investigate the consequences of modifying the 1935 environment so that it mimics

the 1955 one. We proceed by first changing the assortativeness of marriage to match that in 1955.

We then change the other features of family structure to match that in 1955. Since the impact of

various changes are non-linear, we return to the 1935 family structure and impose various features

of the 1955 wage structure.    Lastly, we examine the impact of the combination of changing the

entire family and wage environment to that of 1955.




                                                 33
6.1    1955 Family Structure

1955 Assortativeness


The first change we make, and keep throughout all the subsequent exercises, is to impose the 1955

degree of marital sorting by changing the conditional probabilities with which women and men

marry each other as a function of own education (see Table 5).42 This corresponds to a change in

the correlation coefficient in education from 0.650 and 0.624 for women and men of the 1935 cohort,

respectively to 0.654 and 0.641 for women and men of the 1955 cohort, respectively. Although the

literature (e.g., Weiss (1997), Ge (2011), Iyigun and Walsh (2007)) has found this to be an important

factor in explaining the rise in women’s college education, as shown in figure 3 this factor is not

quantitatively significant for married women’s LFP. In fact, the increased assortativeness reduces

slightly the LFP of married women, particularly that of college women. This is not surprising as

the increase in proportion of college-educated men means that women in both education categories

have a higher probability of marrying one and thus having higher household income.


                                                [Figure 3 here]


1955 Divorce Rates


Next, in order to gauge the importance of the markedly higher divorce rate, we substitute the 1935

profile of divorce rates with the one faced by the 1955 cohort. In this exercise we hold all other

parameters constant at their 1935 levels except for the change in marital assortativeness above.

Thus, the initial distribution of individuals at age 25 by marital status, the per period marriage

and remarriage rates, and fertility is held at 1935 levels.             Note from table 6 that the divorce

probabilities faced by the 1955 cohort are, on average, higher for both genders and education
  42
     We include this change throughout to incorporate the fact that household incomes have changed for both college
and high school women since they are both more likely to have a college spouse.




                                                        34
groups. Also, the age profile of divorce changes across cohorts: whereas in 1935 the divorce rate

is more or less uniform across the ages of 25-44, in 1955 most of the divorce risk is concentrated in

the ages of 25-34.

      As can be seen in figure 3, in response to the higher divorce probabilities, married women’s

LFP dramatically increases in the first two to three periods.43 The average magnitude of the LFP

increase for college women over their first two periods of working life is of around 30 percentage

points while that of high school women is around 25 percentage points.


1955 Marriage Market, Fertility, and Child-Care Costs


Next, we evaluate the effects of the remaining changes in the marriage market.                     Using the 1935

benchmark model, we change not only the assortativeness of marriage and the divorce probabilities,

but also the marriage and remarriage probabilities as well as the initial distribution of marital states

at age 25, all so as to match the 1955 marriage market.                As can be seen from figure A.2 in the

Appendix, between the two cohorts there was a significant decline in the proportion of individuals

who married by age 25-29.           There was also an increase in the proportion divorced by that age.

Furthermore, as shown by table A.1, the probability of transitioning from single to married changed

such that these probabilities look more similar across genders (by education).


                                                   [Figure 4 here]


      The changes in female LFP obtained from incorporating all changes in the marriage market are

shown in figure 4 (given by the line with squares). As can be seen, they look very similar to the

one obtained when we changed only the divorce probabilities, though there is also an increase in

LFP at later ages now as well.
 43
      The LFP of divorced women (see line with squares in figure 5) also increases but not as dramatically.




                                                          35
       An additional change that occurred during this time period was a decline in fertility and,

potentially, a decrease in child-care cost. We incorporate these changes, in addition to the changes

in the marriage market, by allowing fertility patterns to change as in the data and by assuming

that child-care costs decreased by 20%. Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008) investigate a

decrease of 1-5% in child-care costs for the cohorts born in 1945 and 1955. Since our cohorts are

further apart, we examine a 20% decline in these costs.

       The additional changes in LFP resulting from the lower fertility and child-care costs are shown

in figure 4 (the line with triangles). The LFP reaction of married high-school women differs from

that of married college women. The former decreases slightly when younger whereas the LFP of

married college women increases, and both increase thereafter (all relative to the 1955 divorce only

case). This difference in reaction is mainly due to the more significant drop in the total number

of children for high-school women (from 3.2 children per woman to 2.1), which ceteris paribus

increases their household consumption and thus dampens their incentive to work.

       Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008) found that 50% of the increase in married women’s

LFP between the 1945 cohort and the 1955 cohort could be explained by the decline in child-care

costs. To contrast our findings with theirs we examine the effect of a decrease in child-care costs

on its own with no other change in family structure (other than the marital sorting). The line with

circles in figures 4 and 5 shows the impact of 20% lower child-care costs on the 1935 environment.44

As can be seen from the figures (the line with small circles), a lower cost of child-care increases

female LFP, for both married and divorced women.                 The increase in LFP for married women is

significant (but not as large as found in Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos (2008)): it accounts

for about 22% of married women’s LFP increase for high-school women and 12% for college women

during the ages of 25-44.
  44
    To make comparisons easier, we have also allowed the degree of assortativeness to change to the 1955 level, as in
the prior exercises.



                                                         36
   To summarize, changes in the marriage market, fertility and child-care costs account for a

significant proportion of the change in LFP across the two cohorts of married women, especially for

those with a college education. These changes account for 72% of the average LFP gap across the

two cohorts of college married women from age 25 to 44 and for 67% of the same LFP gap across

the entire working life. The corresponding numbers for high-school women are 63% (ages 25-44)

and 58% (ages 25-59). Interestingly, they generate too much of an increase in the LFP of divorced

high-school women (see figure 5).


                                           [Figure 5 here]


6.2   1955 Wage Structure

Next we quantify the contribution of changes in the wage structure independently of any changes

that occurred in family structure (other than marital sorting). As is commonly recognized, two

key changes in wages took place over this period: (i) the skill premium increased for both men and

women, and (ii) the ratio of female to male wages increased (the gender wage ratio). Averaging

over the working lifetime of the two cohorts, the skill premium increased by 0.12 for both men and

women. Over the same period the average gender wage ratio went from 0.61 to 0.72.

   Quantifying the effect of the changes, given women’s selection into work, requires changing the

parameters which govern wages, in particular the τ eg,t which discipline their time path. Recall that

the sequence of {τ em,t }t=2,...,tR for men were calculated directly from wage data for each cohort

(the year dummies).     The ones that correspond to the 1955 cohort will now be used for this

experiment. The sequences of {τ ef,t }t=1,...,tR for women are calibrated internally in order to match

certain wage statistics as described below.     The parameters for the stochastic process and the

returns to experience for men (which were estimated from the data as pure age/experience effects,

after controlling for year effects), on the other hand, are left at their 1935 values. A subsequent


                                                 37
exercise examines the consequences of changing women’s returns to experience.


1955 Skill Premia and the Gender Wage Ratio


To examine the effects of the 1955 wage gender ratio and skill premia for both genders, we calibrate

the sequences of {τ ef,t }t=1,...,T (i.e., the wage intercepts for women) to match, period-by-period,

the gender wage ratio and the female skill premium.45


                                                   [Figure 6 here]


       As shown in figure 6 in the graph with the caption “Skill Premium + Gender Gap", these changes

in wage structure result in significant LFP changes for both college women (a 10 percentage point

average increase across the life cycle) and high-school women (12 percentage points on average).

The increase in female LFP is fairly uniform across most periods, as contrasted with the effect of

divorce which increased LFP primarily in the first few work periods.


1955 Returns to Experience


Given that the literature in this field has found that an increase in the returns to experience for

women increased their LFP (see footnote 26 for a discussion), an additional exercise is to compound

the changes in the wage structure above with a higher return to women’s labor market experience.

We do this by changing the parameters γ ef 1 , γ ef 2 to 0.1061 and -0.003, respectively, so that an

extra year of experience translates to a 3% increase in wages for the 1955 cohort (relative to the

2% for the 1935 cohort), a reasonable number given Olivetti’s (2006) finding.46

       As seen in figure 6 in the graph labelled “All Wages", the higher returns to experience results
  45
      Note that in the data average real lifetime wages for men are unchanged between these two cohorts. However,
an increase in the gender wage ratio introduces a level effect. Given that we have a non-homothetic model, it is not
clear whether one should eliminate all level effects as this would imply that the disutility of labor is proportional to
income.
   46
      In the robustness checks we experimented with 5% returns to experience with very similar results.




                                                          38
in married women working more when young, with a more prolonged effect for high-school women.

It has basically no effect on married women’s LFP once they are older.

   To summarize, combining all the changes in wage structure we find that these changes account

for 58% of the average LFP gap across the two cohorts of college married women across the entire

working life. The corresponding number for high-school women is 51% of the average LFP gap.

For divorced women, the model predicts an increase which is larger than what is seen in the data,

as can be seen in figure 7 (line with small circles).


                                            [Figure 7 here]


6.3   1955 Wage and Family Structures Combined

Combining all the changes in wage structure from the previous section with the changes in family

structure from section 6.1, we obtain the LFP path for married women shown in the graph in figure

6 labelled “wages + family". Except for the first and second periods, married women’s LFP is still

below the levels in the data for women of both education groups in the 1955 cohort, but not by a

large amount. When the changes in family structure are introduced after those in wage structure,

as done here, the former impacts married women’s LFP mostly during their fertility years. The

changes in wage and family structures combined can account for 93% of the average LFP gap

between the two cohorts during the ages of 25-44 for married college women and for more than the

entire gap between those same ages for high school women. Across the life cycle, those changes

account for over 90% of the average LFP gap for married college women and over three quarters

for married high school women.     The effect of these changes for divorced women is shown in figure

7 where it can be seen that the predicted response has a greater proportion of divorced women

working than in the data.




                                                  39
7     Understanding the Role of Divorce Risk

As shown previously, the profile of higher divorce rates faced by the 1955 cohort was an important

factor in the increase in married women’s LFP. In this section we investigate the mechanisms by

which higher divorce risk delivers higher LFP and the role of concavity in the quantitative analysis.


7.1     The Role of Experience and Asset Accumulation

Why does a higher divorce rate increase married women’s LFP? A plausible reasoning would be

that, since greater divorce risk implies a higher probability of being in a low consumption state

(i.e., becoming a divorced mother with children), married women face a greater incentive to work

in order to potentially increase their consumption should they divorce.      The channels by which

working while married increases consumption when divorced are twofold. First, working increases

a woman’s labor market experience and thus also her future earnings.         This allows her to have

higher consumption should she divorce and need to work (recall that the LFP of divorced women

is, endogenously, very high). Second, working while married allows couples to more easily increase

their savings. If the married couple subsequently divorces, the larger asset transfer would allow

the divorced woman to increase her consumption (recall that, upon divorce, marital assets are split

fifty-fifty).

    We now turn to examining the validity and quantitative importance of each of these two

channels. First, to gauge how much labor market experience matters, we can have women face an

exogenous schedule of wage increases over time that mimics perfectly the increase in wages that

come from the return to experience. This is equivalent to obtaining an additional return to age.

In this way, married women’s LFP choices are rendered independent of their desire to have a higher

return to working in the divorced state since this return is assured independently of their prior LFP

choices.


                                                 40
                                          [Table 7 here]


   Column 1 in table 7 reports the LFP of married high school (panel A) and college women

(panel B) over their working lives under the assumption that the calibrated 2% increase in annual

labor income is exogenous, i.e., independent of a women’s work history. All other parameters are

the same as in the benchmark 1935 model except for assortativeness. We use the 1955 degree of

assortativeness throughout, just as in the prior section, to allow for easier comparisons. Column 2

reports the LFP results from running the 1955 divorce experiment in this new setting. Column 3

reports the percentage point change in LFP from divorce (i.e., column 2 minus column 1). Column

4 reports the percentage point change in married women’s LFP from the 1955 divorce experiment

but with endogenous experience (i.e., it replicates the original 1955 divorce experiment of section

6.1).

   We are now set to evaluate the role played by the desire to accumulate experience in generating

the results associated with marital instability. As can be easily seen from comparing columns 3

and 4, the desire to gain labor market experience played basically no role in increasing married

women’s LFP. Had the return to experience been exogenous, i.e., solely a function of age, there

would have been virtually the same changes in LFP in response to higher divorce risk as when this

return is endogenous. Overall, if experience was exogenous, married college women’s LFP would

have averaged 0.54 percentage points less over their working lives; high-school women would have

had on average a 0.03 percentage points smaller increase in LFP.


                                          [Table 8 here]


   Next we analyze the role played by women’s desire to accumulate more marital assets. Table

8 shows the evolution of assets over the lifetime of married high-school (panel A) and college

(panel B) women. Column 1 reports the evolution of assets for the benchmark model (with 1955


                                                41
assortativeness). Column 2 shows how assets react to introducing the 1955 divorce profile. Note

that the higher divorce risk in fact induces households to save less in the first 4 periods (recall that

divorce risk, by assumption, is present only in these periods), rather than more.47                  Why is this?

It should be noted first that a higher divorce risk decreases both spouses’ incentive to save since

divorce, by dividing assets, is an implicit tax on savings. This channel, ceteris paribus, affects both

spouses symmetrically. An asymmetric channel, however, stems from intertemporal consumption

smoothing. Upon divorce, men are richer and women are poorer leading them to have opposing

preferences. Overall men will want to save less (borrow more) than women. Quantitatively, as

shown in the following exercise on Pareto weights, the higher divorce risk leads women to desire

more savings and men to prefer lower savings than in the 1935 benchmark.                  The ultimate effect on

household saving depends on each party’s bargaining power in the household (i.e., on their Pareto

weight).     With the benchmark weights, men have greater decision-making power and succeed in

reducing savings (i.e., they borrow even more than before the divorce rate increase).48

       To summarize, the effect of the increase in divorce risk is to decrease the savings of married

couples and to increase married women’s LFP. Both changes increase the consumption of women

in their married state without increasing their ability to consume in the divorced state (modulo the

experience effect which is small).        Hence, the explanation originally proposed for why increased

divorce risk leads to higher married women’s LFP is wrong. Why then are married women working

more?       The answer is that married women work more because, if they did not, the decline in

married household savings would be even larger, leading to even lower consumption for a woman in
  47
     This finding is in agreement with the empirical evidence presented in Mazzocco, Ruiz, and Yamaguchi (2007).
The authors document, using the PSID, that couples who divorce have significantly lower assets the year prior to
the divorce than couples who continue married. Of course, selection on various characteristics may be an important
driver of this fact.
  48
     Note that household savings drop for all couples. In particular, considering only couples in which i. the wife
did not work in the 1935 environment but, ii. faced with same wage and fertility shocks, the wife work when faced
with 1955 divorce probabilities, we find that household savings drop for these couples, though by less than for those
married households in which women did not work in either environment.




                                                         42
the divorced state.49 Working while married allows the increase in marital consumption (desired

by the husband) to be achieved in part by increasing married household income rather than solely

by decreasing married household savings.

    We can gain further insight by studying the role played by the Pareto weights in the analysis

above. To do so, we examine how the responses of savings and married women’s LFP to the increase

in divorce risk vary with the Pareto weight (χ) on a woman’s welfare.                    For ease of comparison,

Column 3 of table 8 reports the net change in savings resulting from the 1955 divorce profile in an

otherwise 1935 environment with the original Pareto weight of χ = 0.3 (i.e., the difference between

column 2 and column 1) .           Column 4 reports the net change in savings from the same divorce

experiment but for the case of χ = 0.5; column 5 does the same for χ = 0.7.50                      As can be seen

clearly from this table, the greater the bargaining strength of married women, the greater is the

amount by which saving increases in periods 1 through 4 as a reaction to the higher divorce rate.

    It is important to note that, as χ increases, the increase in household savings is not accompanied

by a decrease in the reaction of married women’s LFP. On the contrary, returning to table 7, column

5 shows the percentage point change in married women’s LFP given the increase in divorce rates for

χ = 0.5; column 6 does the same for χ = 0.7. Thus, the greater is women’s bargaining strength, the

greater is the reaction of married women’s LFP on average and of savings. This reflects women’s

desire to shift consumption to the divorced state: working serves both to increase savings and to

optimally balance (given the Pareto weights) the opposing desires of wives and husbands regarding

the distribution of consumption over different states. If married women’s LFP did not increase,

the increase in household savings would be smaller (or even negative as for our benchmark case of

χ = 0.3).
   49
      Indeed, if we examine the subset of women who did not work in either 1935 or when subject to the 1955 divorce
risk, houshold savings falls substantially more than for couples in which the wife worked given the 1955 divorce risk.
   50
      Note that in each case the change in savings is obtained using the new Pareto weight with both the 1935 divorce
profile and the 1955 divorce profile. The Pareto weight in each experiment, thus, does not change across cohorts; it
only changes across experiment.


                                                         43
7.2      The Role of Concavity

As noted in the literature review, Eckstein and Lifshitz (2011) concluded that the increase in

divorce risk played only a small quantitative role in increasing married women’s LFP. While there

are several differences across the two models, the role played by a concave utility function in our

environment as opposed to their linear utility specification is a key difference to investigate. We

turn to an analysis of the role of concavity in generating the results.


                                               [Tables 9 and 10 here]


       To examine concavity’s role, we assume preferences are almost linear by setting γ = 0.001 and

proceed to recalibrate the model.51 Figure 8 shows the result of this recalibration for the LFP of

married and divorced women, by education. As can be seen in this figure, the calibrated model

does very well in reproducing the life-cycle path of LFP for all women (see table A.5). Tables 9

and 10 present the new values of the internally calibrated parameters.                      Note that although the

parameters for the disutility from labor are all larger than in the benchmark calibration, their

consumption equivalence is remarkably similar as can be seen by comparing table 4 with table 9.

       Next, we perform the same exercise as in the previous section: we examine the role of the higher

1955 divorce rate by keeping the rest of the environment at its 1935 benchmark values (as before,

we also change the degree of assortativeness of marriage to match that in 1955).                         The result is

shown in figure 9.52


                                                   [Figure 9 here]


       As can be seen from the figure, greater divorce risk increases married women’s LFP in the linear

utility model. There are two interesting differences, however, to point out with respect to the case
  51
      An almost linear specification was preferred as a fully linear one could potentially exhibit behavior very different
from the model with curvature simply due to computational “kinks".
   52
      Note that the increase in LFP is driven entirely by the increase in divorce rate — the increase in assortativeness
on its own has no effect as can be seen separately the figure.


                                                           44
of concavity. First, the increase in LFP is significantly smaller, especially when married women

are younger.   Over the first 3 periods of married women’s working lives the increase (over both

education categories) averages 3 percentage points per period. In our original benchmark (γ = 1.5),

it averaged 21 percentage points per period over the same ages. Second, the response is more or

less uniform over women’s lifetime as opposed to being concentrated exclusively over the first few

periods of life in the concave case. This is due to the increase in women’s wages resulting from

greater labor market experience.     In the absence of curvature in the utility function, the wage

increase induces significantly more women to work in the later periods of their working life.    In

the concave model, the main driver of women’s increased LFP is the significant decrease in utility

due to the potential fall in future consumption if divorced; the additional experience is secondary.

With linearity, the potential fall in consumption does not yield the same disutility and experience

plays a more important role over the entire life span.

    Overall, divorce alone accounts for around 20% of the increase in married women’s LFP over

their working lifetime in the linear case relative to over 40% of this increase with concavity. We

conclude that concavity plays an important quantitative role in generating a larger impact from

the changed divorce probabilities.



8    Robustness Checks

In this section we discuss the robustness of our model’s main findings to alternative values of

parameters whose empirical foundations are less well grounded.

    A key parameter that governs the welfare of wives versus husbands is the Pareto weight χ which

is used to obtain a solution to the married household’s allocation problem.     We chose χ = 0.3,

implying thus that the wife’s welfare has lower weight than her husband’s.       Another plausible

choice would have been χ = 0.5, where husband and wife receive equal weight in the household


                                                45
allocation problem. With this in mind, we recalibrate the benchmark 1935 model using χ = 0.5.

   While most wage parameters remain similar (albeit higher), all parameters for disutility from

labor become smaller than they were in the original benchmark in order to explain why women

worked as much as they did. Repeating the experiment of changing only divorce probabilities to

those for the 1955 cohort (see beginning of section 6.1), we find equivalent results although the

reactions are somewhat more muted. As before, the response in LFP to increased divorce remains

concentrated on the first periods of working life. While in the original benchmark the increase in

LFP during the ages of 25-34 was around 30 percentage points for both college and high school,

those same statistics are now around 20 percentage points. The recalibrated model also yields the

same implications as the original benchmark when we redo the experiment in which we change all

wage and family structure (see end of section 6.2), although, once again, the effects are smaller.

These changes now account for around 72% of the LFP gap between the two cohorts of married

women.

   Next we can investigate whether a change in women’s bargaining power can help explain the

cohort changes. This is motivated by research that argues that, given the changes in female wages,

woman’s bargaining power within the household has increased over time. For example, Knowles

(2007) finds that χ = 0.34 in 1970 but that the increase in women’s wage increased the value of

χ = 0.41 in the 1990s. Since we chose χ = 0.3 for both cohorts, this possibly underestimates the

bargaining power of women in the 1955 cohort.

   We investigate the consequence of increasing χ = 0.5 for the 1955 cohort, keeping the 1935

cohort fixed at χ = 0.3.    Note that a feature of any simple model with disutility of labor for

women is that an increase in the wife’s Pareto weight will, ceteris paribus, lower her participation

rate. This is indeed what happens in this model. As compared to the specification with the Pareto

weight of χ = 0.3, the combined changes in wage and family structure result in average lifetime LFP



                                                46
of married college women dropping by 12 percentage points (from 71.3% to 60.2%) and their high

school counterparts’ participation is 17 percentage points lower (it drops from 63.7% to 46.7%).

The LFP of divorced women during their youth is also lower than in the specification with χ = 0.3

as they take into account the possibility of future marriage and decreased participation.

         Additional robustness checks included changing the proportion of a man’s income which must

be paid in child support and the pension support for ex wives. We recalibrated the model for 5%

and 20% of income. The parameter values implied by these alternative proportions are generally

similar to the ones implied by the benchmark model and the effects on labor and education decisions

across the different experiments were also very similar.

         Finally, given that we did not have firm evidence as to the proportion of household assets

obtained by a wife upon divorce, we recalibrate the model with asset splits of α = 0.3 and α = 0.7.

Implied labor disutility parameters are generally lower than the benchmark in the former and higher

in the latter. The experiments on these recalibrated benchmarks also yielded similar results as the

original benchmark.53



9         Concluding Remarks

This paper developed a dynamic quantitative life-cycle model to evaluate how changes in family

structure and economic environment contributed to changes in women’s LFP. The model was

calibrated to match key statistics of the 1935 cohort. We then proceeded to change key features of

the environment in order to mimic the one faced by the 1955 cohort. The model was successful in

predicting increased LFP for women, accounting for over 85% of the LFP gap of married women

between the ages of 25-59 (though it overpredicted the LFP of divorced women).

         We found that both changes in family (i.e., assortativeness, marriage, divorce, and remarriage
    53
         All results from the robustness checks are available upon request.



                                                              47
patterns, fertility, and child-care costs) and wage structure (skill premium, gender wage gap, and

returns to women’s labor market experience) are important in explaining the increase in women’s

work. Each group of factors in isolation is able to account for a large proportion (about 55%) of

the observed changes in married women’s LFP over their working lives. Furthermore, the increased

probability of divorce faced by the 1955 cohort is on its own a key driver of the increase in married

women’s work. It alone accounts for around 46% percent of the increase in married women LFP

over their working lives (age 25-59).

   Our analysis of the mechanisms through which a higher divorce probability affected married

women’s propensity to work yielded some surprising results.      In particular, the analysis showed

that the increase in married women’s LFP was not driven by the desire to obtain greater labor

market experience and that higher LFP did not translate into a higher asset level for married

couples.   Instead, our analysis indicates that married women’s higher LFP is the solution to

the conflicting preferences of husbands and wives towards how to adjust marital consumption to

higher divorce risk.   When confronted with higher divorce risk, married women would prefer to

increase savings in order to transfer more assets to the divorced state, thus helping them smooth

consumption. Men, on the other hand, would prefer to increase consumption in the married state

as this is what allows them to smooth consumption. A “compromise" is reached — the solution to

a Pareto weighted utility maximization problem — that involves married women working more and

thus allowing married savings to decline by less than what it would otherwise.

   This paper points to marital instability as one of the key drivers in the increase in married

women’s LFP. It takes a significant step by incorporating interactions between family structure and

work choices in a computationally tractable dynamic life-cycle setting with endogenous consumption,

saving, and accumulation of labor market experience.       Its findings contrast with others in the

literature (Eckstein and Lifshitz (2011)) and hence clarify the importance of risk aversion and



                                                 48
household bargaining in obtaining quantitatively significant results for the role of marital instability

in affecting married women’s work.




Raquel Fernández, New York University, NBER, CEPR, ESOP, IZA
Joyce Cheng Wong, International Monetary Fund




                                                  49
References
Albanesi, S. and C. Olivetti (2009a). Gender roles and medical progress. working paper.
Albanesi, S. and C. Olivetti (2009b). Home production, market production and the gender wage
  gap: Incentives and expectations. Review of Economics Dynamics 12, 80—107.
Attanasio, O., H. Low, and V. Sanchez-Marcos (2008). Explaining changes in female labor supply
  in a life-cycle model. The American Economic Review 98 (4), 1517—1552.
Attanasio, O. and G. Weber (1995). Is consumption growth consistent with intertemporal
  optimization?   evidence from the consumer expenditure survey.   Journal of political
  Economy 103 (6), 1121—1157.
Beller, A. H. and J. W. Graham (1988). Child support payments: Evidence from repeated cross
  sections. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 78 (2), 81—85.
Bernal, R. (2008). The effect of maternal employment and child care on children’s cognitive
  development. International Economic Review 49 (4), 1173— 1209.
Bernal, R. and M. P. Keane (2011). Child care choices and children’s cognitive achievement: The
  case of single mothers. Journal of Labor Economics 29 (3).
Chamberlain, G. (1984). Panel data. In Z. Griliches and M. Intriligator (Eds.), Handbook of
  Econometrics, Volume 2, Chapter 22. North Holland.
Cherchye, L., B. de Rock, and F. Vermeulen (2009). Opening the black box of intrahousehold
  decision making: Theory and nonparametric empirical tests of general collective consumption
  models. Journal of Political Economy (117).
Chiappori, P.-A. (1988). Rational household labor supply. Econometrica 56 (1), 63—90.
Cubeddu, L. and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2003). Families as shocks. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 1 (2-3), 671—682.
Del Boca, D. and C. Flinn (1995). Rationalizing child-support decisions. American Economic
  Review 95 (5), 1241—1262.
Del Boca, D. and C. Flinn (2012).             Endogenous household interaction.         Journal of
  Econometrics 166 (1).
Eckstein, Z. and O. Lifshitz (2011). Dynamic female labor supply. Econometrica 79 (6), 1675—1726.
Fernández, R. (2013). Cultural change as learning: The evolution of female labor force participation
  over a century. American Economic Review 1 (103), 472—500.
Fernández, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004). Mothers and sons: Preference formation and female
  labor force dynamics. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4).
Fernández, R. and J. Wong (2013). Free to leave? a welfare analysis of divorce regimes. mimeo.
Galor, O. and D. Weil (1996).      The gender gap, fertility, and growth.      American Economic
 Review 86 (3), 374—387.
Gayle, G.-L. and L. Golan (2012). Estimating a dynamic adverse-selection model: Labour-force
 experience and the changing gender earnings gap 1968—1997. Review of Economic Studies 79,
 227—267.
Ge, S. (2011). Women’s college decisions: How much does marriage matter? Journal of Labor
 Economics 29, 773—818.


                                                50
Goldin, C. (1990). Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women.
 New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2002). The power of the pill: Oral contraceptives and women’s career
 and marriage decisions. Journal of Political Economy 110 (4), 730—770.
Gray, J. S. (1998). Divorce-law changes, household bargaining, and married women’s labor supply.
  American Economic Review 88 (3).
Greenwood, J., N. Guner, G. Kocharkov, and C. Santos (2012). Technology and the changing family:
  A unified model of marriage, divorce, educational attainment and married female labor-force
  participation. NBER Working Papers 17735.
Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and M. Yorukoglu (2005). Engines of liberation. Review of Economic
  Studies 72 (1), 109—133.
Guvenen, F. (2007). Learning your earning: Are labor income shocks really very persistent? The
 American Economic Review 97 (3), 687—712.
Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2010). The macroeconomic implications of rising
  wage inequality in the united states. Journal of Political Economy 118 (4), 681—722.
Iyigun, M. and R. P. Walsh (2007). Building the family nest: Premarital investments, marriage
  markets, and spousal allocations. Review of Economic Studies 74 (2), 507—535.
Jacquemet, N. and J.-M. Robin (2011). Marriage with labor supply. working paper.
Johnson, W. R. and J. Skinner (1986). Labor supply and marital separation. American Economic
  Review 76 (3), 455—469.
Jones, L., R. Manuelli, and E. McGrattan (2003). Why are married women working so much?
  working paper.
Kneip, T. and G. Bauer (2007). Effects of different divorce probabilities on female labor force
 participation and fertility. Mannheim Centre for European Social Research Working Paper 102.
Knowles, J. (2007). High-powered jobs: Can contraception technology explain trends in women’s
 occupational choice? working paper.
Knowles, J. (2013). Why are married men working so much? an aggregate analysis of
 intra-household bargaining and labour supply. Review of Economic Studies 3 (80), 1055—1085.
Love, D. (2010). The effects of marital status and children on savings and portfolio choice. Review
  of Financial Studies 23 (1), 385—432.
Lundberg, S. and E. Rose (1999). The determinants of specialization within marriage. Unpublished
  paper. University of Washington.
Mazzocco, M., C. Ruiz, and S. Yamaguchi (2007). Labor supply, wealth dynamics, and marriage
 decisions. mimeo.
Oldham, J. T. (2008). Changes in the economic consequences of divorces, 1958-2008. Family Law
  Quarterly 42 (3), 419—448.
Olivetti, C. (2006). Changes in women’s hours of work: The role of returns to experience. Review
  of Economics Dynamics 9 (4), 557—587.
Papps, K. L. (2006). The effects of divorce risk on the labour supply of married couples. IZA
  Discussion Paper No. 2395.



                                                51
Peters, E. (1986). Marriage and divorce: Informational constraints and private contracting.
  American Economic Review 76 (3), 437—454.
Peterson, R. R. (1996). A re-evaluation of the economic consequences of divorce. American
  Sociological Review 61 (3), 528—536.
Potamites, E. (2007). Why do black women work more? a comparison of white and black married
  women’s labor supply. working paper.
Rios-Rull, J.-V. and F. Regalia (2001). What accounts for the increase in the number of single
  households? working paper.
Ríos-Rull, J. V. and V. Sanchez-Marcos (2002). College attainment of women. Review of Economic
  Dynamics 5 (4).
Stevenson, B. (2008).    Divorce law and women’s labor supply.         Journal of Empirical Legal
  Studies 5 (4).
Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004). Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic labor market
  risk. Journal of Political Economy 112 (3), 695—717.
van der Klaauw, W. (1996). Female labour supply and marital status decisions: A life-cycle model.
  Review of Economic studies 63 (2).
Voena, A. (2012). Yours, mine and ours: Do divorce laws affect the intertemporal behavior of
  married couples? working paper.
Weiss, Y. (1997). The formation and dissolution of families: Why marry? who marries whom? and
 what happens upon marriage and divorce? In R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark (Eds.), Handbook of
 Population Economics. Amsterdam Elsevier Science.




                                                52
Figures and Tables

                                                                        Figure 1: Timeline for periods 0 and 1 of agent’s life
                                                                                           Type revealed                   Fertility Shock
                                                                                                 +                                 +                                       Marital Shock
                                                                                          Marriage market                   Wage draw                                      at̄+1 → at+1
                                                                                                    ↓                                ↓                                             ↓

                                                                                t=0                                  t=1                                 ↑                                   t=2
                                                                                                                                                     Work
                                                                                                                                              Consume and Save
                                                                                                                                                 ct , at̄+1 , Pt




 Figure 2: LFP for married and divorced women by education (left) and skill premium and the
                 gender wage ratio (right) for the 1935 cohort, model vs data.

    ,"!!$                                                                                                                                      '"%$


    !"+!$
                                                                                                                                               '"#$
                                                                                                                                                           01233$45/62768$9:6/;$
    !"*!$                       56$
                      0/0$4
                 1233
                                                                                                                                               '"($
    !")!$

                          56$
    !"(!$        78$4
                                                                                                                                                 '$

    !"'!$
                                                                                                                                               !"&$        </;=/5$9-./$>-?:$
    !"&!$    12330/0$9.::50;$

                                 $
    !"%!$
                          .::50;                                                                                                               !"%$
                 78$9
    !"#!$
        #'-#+$                        %!-%&$           %'-%+$               &!-&&$        &'-&+$            '!-'&$         ''-'+$              !"#$
                                                                                                                                                  ()*(+$                 ,!*,#$             ,)*,+$            #!*##$      #)*#+$            )!*)#$   ))*)+$
                                                                             ./0$                                                                                                                              -./$




            N o te : • = d a ta . (,                                    , △) = m o d e l p re d ic tio n s


Figure 3: Model predictions for married women with 1955 assortativeness and 1955 divorce rates

                                                                         01223/4$53.6$78699:$;9</=$                                                                                01223/4$5677/./$869/:$
                                        !"+!$                                                                                                 !"+!$


                                        !"*!$                                                                                                 !"*!$

                                                                                                                                                           ;+''$<1=1$
                                        !")!$                                                                                                 !")!$
                                                               1  @1$
                                                      >+  ''$?
                                        !"(!$                                                                                                 !"(!$


                                        !"'!$                                                                                                 !"'!$


                                        !"&!$                                                                                                 !"&!$
                                                                                                                                                           ;+%'$<1=1$
                                                            @1$
                                                       $?1
                                                     %'
                                        !"%!$    >+                                                                                           !"%!$


                                                                                                                                              !"#!$
                                        !"#!$
                                                                                                                                                  #',#+$             %!,%&$        %',%+$            &!,&&$    &',&+$   '!,'&$     '','+$
                                            #',#+$          %!,%&$         %',%+$     &!,&&$       &',&+$       '!,'&$      '','+$
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -./$
                                                                                      -./$


                                                                                                                         ;3<62=/$             ->>62?1@</:/>>$




                                                                                                                                         53
Figure 4: Model predictions for married women with various 1955 family structure changes

                                                        01223/4$53.6$78699:$;9</=$                                                                  01223/4$5677/./$869/:$
             !"+!$                                                                                                    !"+!$


             !"*!$                                                                                                    !"*!$

                                                                                                                               ;+''$<1=1$
             !")!$                                                                                                    !")!$
                                        1        @1$
                               >+  ''$?
             !"(!$                                                                                                    !"(!$


             !"'!$                                                                                                    !"'!$


             !"&!$                                                                                                    !"&!$
                                             $                                                                                 ;+%'$<1=1$
                                     1@1
                             %   '$?
             !"%!$        >+                                                                                          !"%!$


                                                                                                                      !"#!$
             !"#!$
                                                                                                                          #',#+$         %!,%&$     %',%+$    &!,&&$     &',&+$     '!,'&$     '','+$
                 #',#+$                 %!,%&$            %',%+$    &!,&&$        &',&+$     '!,'&$     '','+$
                                                                                                                                                               -./$
                                                                     -./$



                                                                            5;374<12/$            012231./$012=/>$?00@$                  00$A$B/2C73>D$A$5;374<12/$




   Figure 5: Model predictions for divorced women with 1955 family structure changes

                                                        1233405$64/7$897::;$<:=0>$                                                                  1233405$67880/0$97:0;$
             *"!!$                                                                                                    *"!!$

                                                                                                                               *)%%$<2=2$
             !")!$                                                                                                    !")!$



             !"(!$                                                                                                    !"(!$
                                    @2$
                             % $?2
                         *)%
                                                                                                                      !"'!$
             !"'!$
                                                                                                                                      2=2$
                                                                                                                                   %$<
                                       @2$                                                                            !"&!$    *)-
             !"&!$           %   $?2
                         *)-

                                                                                                                      !"%!$
             !"%!$


                                                                                                                      !"#!$
             !"#!$
                                                                                                                          +%,+)$         -!,-#$     -%,-)$    #!,##$     #%,#)$     %!,%#$     %%,%)$
                 +%,+)$                 -!,-#$            -%,-)$    #!,##$        #%,#)$     %!,%#$     %%,%)$
                                                                                                                                                               ./0$
                                                                     ./0$



                                                                                     5;374<12/$          =3>62</$             00$?$@/2A73BC$?$5;374<12/$




   Figure 6: Model predictions for married women with 1955 wage and family changes

                                                       01223/4$53.6$78699:$;9</=$                                                                    01223/4$5677/./$869/:$
          !"+!$                                                                                                       !"+!$


          !"*!$                                                                                                       !"*!$

                                                                                                                               ;+''$<1=1$
          !")!$                                                                                                       !")!$
                                   1    @1$
                          >+  ''$?
          !"(!$                                                                                                       !"(!$


          !"'!$                                                                                                       !"'!$


          !"&!$                                                                                                       !"&!$
                                                                                                                               ;+%'$<1=1$
                                  @1$
                          '  $?1
                     > +%                                                                                             !"%!$
          !"%!$

                                                                                                                      !"#!$
          !"#!$
                                                                                                                          #',#+$         %!,%&$      %',%+$     &!,&&$     &',&+$     '!,'&$     '','+$
              #',#+$              %!,%&$                %',%+$     &!,&&$        &',&+$     '!,'&$     '','+$
                                                                                                                                                                -./$
                                                                   -./$


                                                                               ;<377$=2/93>9$?$@/:4/2$@1A$            -77$81./B$                  81./B$?$C1937D$




                                                                                                                 54
      Figure 7: Model predictions for divorced women with 1955 wage and family changes

                                                                                 12345607$82/9$:6944;$<4=0>$                                                                                       12345607$84990/0$:4;0<$
                                    *"!!$                                                                                                                *"!!$


                                    !")!$                                                                                                                !")!$
                                                                                                                                                                      *)%%$1=>=$


                                    !"(!$                                                                                                                !"(!$
                                                                    $
                                                               ?@?
                                                           %$1
                                                   *)%
                                    !"'!$                                                                                                                !"'!$

                                                                                                                                                                               =>=$
                                                                                                                                                                            %$1
                                                                 ?@?
                                                                     $                                                                                   !"&!$         *)-
                                    !"&!$                  %$1
                                                       *)-

                                    !"%!$                                                                                                                !"%!$


                                                                                                                                                         !"#!$
                                    !"#!$
                                                                                                                                                             +%,+)$                -!,-#$           -%,-)$        #!,##$            #%,#)$    %!,%#$   %%,%)$
                                        +%,+)$                      -!,-#$         -%,-)$      #!,##$            #%,#)$      %!,%#$       %%,%)$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ./0$
                                                                                               ./0$


                                                                                                                                        81./;$           81./;$<$=1937>$




Figure 8: LFP for married and divorced women by education and age for the 1935 cohort (left)
and skill premium and the gender wage ratio for the 1935 cohort by age (right), linear model vs
                                            data.

          ,"!!$                                                                                                                                           '"%$


          !"+!$
                                                                                                                                                          '"#$
                                                                                                                                                                      01233$45/62768$9:6/;$
          !"*!$                       $
                                  $456
                           0/0
                       1233
                                                                                                                                                          '"($
          !")!$

                              56$
          !"(!$        78$4
                                                                                                                                                            '$

          !"'!$
                                                                                                                                                          !"&$        </;=/5$9-./$>-?:$
          !"&!$    12330/0$9.::50;$


                                    ;     $
          !"%!$                ::50                                                                                                                       !"%$
                              .
                       78$9
          !"#!$
              #'-#+$                          %!-%&$                    %'-%+$        &!-&&$            &'-&+$            '!-'&$         ''-'+$           !"#$
                                                                                                                                                             ()*(+$                      ,!*,#$          ,)*,+$            #!*##$            #)*#+$      )!*)#$   ))*)+$
                                                                                       ./0$                                                                                                                                 -./$




       N o te : • = d a ta . (,                                          , △) = m o d e l p re d ic tio n s


Figure 9: Model predictions for married women with 1955 assortativeness and 1955 divorce rates,
                                         linear model

                                                                                   01223/4$5677/./$869/:$                                                                                         01223/4$53.6$78699:$;9</=$
                                    !"+!$                                                                                                                !"+!$

                                    !"*!$                                                                                                                !"*!$
                                                   ;+''$<1=1$
                                    !")!$                                                                                                                !")!$
                                                                                                                                                                                           $
                                                                                                                                                                                     1@1
                                                                                                                                                                                  '$?
                                    !"(!$                                                                                                                                   >+'
                                                                                                                                                         !"(!$

                                    !"'!$                                                                                                                !"'!$

                                    !"&!$                                                                                                                !"&!$
                                                   ;+%'$<1=1$
                                                                                                                                                                                   @1$
                                                                                                                                                                             $?1
                                                                                                                                                                          %'
                                    !"%!$
                                                                                                                                                         !"%!$         >+


                                    !"#!$
                                                                                                                                                         !"#!$
                                        #',#+$                     %!,%&$          %',%+$      &!,&&$            &',&+$       '!,'&$       '','+$
                                                                                                                                                             #',#+$                %!,%&$          %',%+$         &!,&&$        &',&+$       '!,'&$    '','+$
                                                                                                -./$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -./$


                                                                                                                                       ;3<62=/$          ->>62?1@</:/>>$




                                                                                                                                                    55
                                  Table 1: External Parameters

Parameter                                                                                                 Value
Micro estimates of Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution                  σ                             1.5
Discount Factor                                                              β                            0.90
Risk Free Interest Rate                                                     R                             1.16
                                                                           γlm1                        0.1651
Regression log wage on age and age2 , HS men
                                                                           γlm2                       -0.00308
                                                                           γhm1                        0.2276
Regression log wage on age and age2 , College men
                                                                           γhm2                       -0.00285
                                                                            ρl                        0.90985
Persistence of wage residuals, by educ.
                                                                            ρh                        0.96920
                                                                           σηl                        0.10787
Std. Dev. of transitory error of wage residuals,by educ.
                                                                           σ ηh                       0.07653
                                                                           σ ǫl                       0.02850
Std. Dev. of persistent error of wage residuals, by educ.
                                                                           σǫ h                       0.03417
                                                                     {τlm,t }t=2,tR
Time varying log wage intercepts, men                                                              see Figure A.1
                                                                     {τhm,t }t=2,tR
Probability of divorce, remarriage and first marriage         {deg,t , reg,t , meg,t }t=1,...4    see Tables A.1, 6




                          Table 2: Parameters Calibrated Internally

        Parameter                                                                          1935 Bench
        Disutility of labor for women                                   ψes (kt )          see Table 4
                                                                        κyoung                   1.1450
        Childcare costs for children aged 0-4 and 5-9
                                                                         κold                    0.4029
                                                                          τlm,1                  0.0841
        Initial intercept log wages for men, by education
                                                                          τhm,1                  0.6128
                                                                    {τlf,t }t=1,tR
        Time varying log wage intercepts, women                                          see Figure A.1
                                                                    {τhf,t }t=1,tR
        Wage depreciation from not working                                  δ                    0.0839
                                                                          γef 1                  0.1041
        Returns to experience, women
                                                                          γef 2                  -0.003

        Moments                                                           Data             1935 Bench
        LFP of married women, by age and education (14)             see   Table     3      see    Table   3
        LFP of divorced women, by age and education (14)            see   Table     3      see    Table   3
        Skill Premium by age, women (7)                             see   Table     3      see    Table   3
        Ratio of male to female wages by age (7)                    see   Table     3      see    Table   3
        Skill Premium (lifetime), men                                     1.43                    1.44
        Returns to one year of work, women                                0.02                    0.02




                                                    56
                       Table 3: Calibration targets, model vs. data

                                         Married LFP                          Wages
                               College                  HS               Gender Wage Ratio
                  Ages     Data     Model     Data          Model        Data        Model
                  25-29    34.59    33.41     26.40         27.51         0.75         0.70
                  30-34    32.74    34.96     34.22         33.58         0.65         0.62
                  35-39    47.10    47.92     44.81         45.29         0.60         0.58
                  40-44    62.34    61.94     54.72         55.60         0.55         0.58
                  45-49    69.97    68.87     57.30         58.04         0.55         0.60
                  50-54    68.85    69.81     56.69         57.53         0.59         0.58
                  55-59    62.50    62.55     48.22         47.59         0.63         0.63
                                         Divorced LFP                       Wages, Women
                               College               HS                     Skill Premium
                  Ages     Data     Model     Data          Model        Data        Model
                  25-29    63.37    63.46     60.90         60.11         1.40         1.45
                  30-34    75.00    75.43     66.05         65.68         1.44         1.45
                  35-39    84.65    84.34     73.95         72.95         1.39         1.43
                  40-44    85.67    86.66     73.87         74.79         1.34         1.39
                  45-49    88.10    87.58     76.00         75.95         1.39         1.45
                  50-54    88.41    87.69     73.38         74.11         1.48         1.44
                  55-59    81.96    80.58     65.13         63.93         1.53         1.48
                                        Skill Premium, men:               1.43         1.44
                                    Returns to experience, women:         0.02         0.02
                  Note: The total distance between moments and targets is computed as a
                  weighted average of the difference between each moment and target. The
                  moments and targets for the gender wage ratio and skill premium are both
                  multiplied by 100. The weights are such that the 28 moments for LFP receive
                  half of the total weight and the 15 moments for wages receive the other half
                  of the weight. Within each group, the moments are equally weighted.




                     Table 4: Disutility of labor parameters, ψem (k)

                                                       Married       Married        Divorced      Divorced
                                                                    with Child                   with Child
                                     High School        0.0840        0.2233         0.0962         0.1182
    Parameter values
                                     College            0.0420        0.0959         0.0448         0.0667

                                     High School        11.1%         33.6%          12.7%          15.9%
    Consumption equivalence
                                     College            5.3%          12.7%          5.7%           8.6%
The consumption equivalence numbers give the fraction of average consumption of a married woman of eduation
e that a woman of the same education level would be willing to sacrifice in order to avoid the disutility of labor
associated with a particular marital and fertility state. See text for exact calculation.




                                                       57
Table 5: Proportions of marriages to college spouse conditional on own gender and education, by
                                             cohort.

                                                          College Spouse
                                                     1935 Cohort 1955 Cohort
                               College Woman                75.20             78.41
                                HS Woman                    21.39             29.21

                                 College Man                59.72             74.06
                                  HS Man                    12.07             24.24
                          Note: CPS. The proportions of individuals with college spouse are
                          calculated for married people between the ages of 35-39, by gender
                          and education, in each 3 year birth cohort.




                   Table 6: Per period divorce and remarriage probabilities

                                                       d1           d2   d3      d4      r
                         1935 Cohort
                                          HS          5.87      8.60     8.49   6.44   37.23
                         Men
                                          College     6.45      6.03     4.67   5.67   42.48

                                          HS          5.39      4.93     5.34   5.38   38.84
                         Women
                                          College     3.44      3.84     4.62   5.46   38.49
                         1955 Cohort
                                          HS          18.04    11.60     7.85   4.70   35.21
                         Men
                                          College     17.42    9.17      5.65   5.06   40.18

                                          HS          14.48     9.90     5.36   3.61   36.11
                         Women
                                          College     13.99     9.90     6.17   2.93   35.38
                     Note: d1 refers to ages 25-29, d2 to ages 30-34, d3 to ages 35-39 and d4 to
                     ages 40-44. The divorce numbers were calculated from 2004 SIPP data. The
                     remarriage numbers were calculated from 2004 SIPP data as reported in the
                     text and assuming a uniform probability of remarriage. See text for details
                     about their calculation.




                                                         58
                 Table 7: Effects from Divorce: LFP

                 Experience (LFP levels)                          Bargaining (LFP differences)
               Benchmark Divorce (2)-(1)                          Original χ = 0.5 χ = 0.7
       ages           (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
                                            A. High School
       25-29      19.72              51.88          32.16          32.38         36.05         38.87
       30-34      29.53              52.13          22.60          22.77         26.78         30.02
       35-39      39.82              48.45           8.63           8.62         13.25         17.17
       40-44      51.49              54.17           2.69           2.69          5.81          7.31
       45-49      54.95              56.54           1.58           1.58          2.65          1.54
       50-54      55.20              57.06           1.86           1.87          2.71          1.81
       55-59      47.51              48.59           1.08           1.08          1.87         -0.32
                                              B. College
       25-29      23.60              59.13          35.52          37.76         42.85         46.77
       30-34      29.30              55.68          26.38          27.56         32.01         35.59
       35-39      40.80              53.76          12.96          13.33         18.99         23.79
       40-44      60.36              58.99          -1.37          -1.38         3.16          6.80
       45-49      65.70              65.98           0.27           0.25          2.84         5.00
       50-54      70.12              69.55          -0.58          -0.58         1.50          4.24
       55-59      60.97              63.06           2.09           2.09          4.22         6.40
Notes: Column 1 shows the LFP values for HS and college married women in the
benchmark model with exogenous returns to experience; column 2 shows the analogous
values for the experiment with 1955 divorce probabilities. Their difference is shown in
column 3. Columns 4-6 shows the corresponding difference for: (4) the model with
endogenous returns to experience, (5) the model with χ = 0.5 and (6) χ = 0.7.
The benchmark for all cases corresponds to the baseline 1935 setup with the 1955
assortativeness.




               Table 8: Effects from Divorce: Assets

                                    Benchmark                            Bargaining
                                   (asset levels)                    (asset differences)
                            Original Divorce (2)-(1)                 χ = 0.5 χ = 0.7
               ages           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                                            A. High School
               25-29         -4.88          -5.01          -0.13        0.54            1.56
               30-34         -7.61          -8.12          -0.51        0.56            2.23
               35-39         -4.37          -4.73          -0.37        0.31            1.39
               40-44         -0.28          -0.65          -0.37       -0.23            0.09
               45-49          4.40           5.39           1.00        0.80            0.89
               50-54         12.57          16.55           3.98        2.70            1.19
               55-59         22.37          27.25           4.88        3.11            1.66
                                              B. College
               25-29         -6.87       -7.39             -0.53          1.60          1.94
               30-34        -11.25      -12.40             -1.15          2.57          3.18
               35-39         -7.33       -8.12             -0.79          1.67          2.07
               40-44         -0.98       -1.20             -0.22          0.20          0.28
               45-49          7.10       12.55              5.45          1.71          0.98
               50-54         19.22       27.53              8.31          2.41          1.49
               55-59         31.93       41.24              9.31          3.39          2.81
       Notes: Column 1 shows the values for household asset for HS and college
       married women in the benchmark model; column 2 shows the analogous
       values for the experiment with 1955 divorce probabilities.        Their
       difference is shown in column 3. Columns 4-5 shows the corresponding
       difference for: (4) the model with χ = 0.5 and (5) χ = 0.7. The
       benchmark for all cases corresponds to the baseline 1935 setup with the
       1955 assortativeness.




                                                    59
          Table 9: Linear model: disutility of labor parameters, ψem (k)

                                                       Married       Married          Divorced        Divorced
                                                                    with Child                       with Child
                                    High School         0.1454         0.3468             0.1311       0.1762
Parameter values
                                    College             0.0986         0.1729             0.0587       0.1400

                                    High School         12.3%          34.1%              14.9%        16.1%
Consumption equivalence
                                    College             6.1%           13.5%              7.7%         9.0%
The consumption equivalence numbers give the fraction of average consumption of a married woman of eduation
e that a woman of the same education level would be willing to sacrifice in order to avoid the disutility of labor
associated with a particular marital and fertility state. See text for exact calculation.




             Table 10: Linear model: parameters calibrated internally

     Parameter                                                                                1935 Bench
     Disutility of labor for women                                            ψes (kt )        see Table 9
                                                                              κyoung               4.0596
     Childcare costs for children aged 0-4 and 5-9
                                                                               κold                0.5753
                                                                                 τlm,1             0.2860
     Initial intercept log wages for men, by education
                                                                                 τhm,1             2.7458
                                                                           {τlf,t }t=1,tR
     Time varying log wage intercepts, women                                                  see Tab A.4
                                                                           {τhf,t }t=1,tR
     Wage depreciation from not working                                           δ                0.0899

     Moments                                                                     Data         1935 Bench
     LFP of married women, by age and education (14)                       see   Tab A.5      see   Tab A.5
     LFP of divorced women, by age and education (14)                      see   Tab A.5      see   Tab A.5
     Skill Premium by age, women (7)                                       see   Tab A.5      see   Tab A.5
     Ratio of male to female wages by age (7)                              see   Tab A.5      see   Tab A.5
     Skill Premium (lifetime), men                                               1.43               1.43




                                                       60
                                           FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


A    Appendix: Figures and Tables

    Figure A.1: Implied log wage intercepts for men and women, by education - 1935 cohort

                                             Men                                                                                             Women
        "#(%                                                                                         ("
                6455.-.%


        "#'%                                                                                       !#'"
                                                                                                              0122/./"


                                                                                                   !#&"
        "#&%


                /0-1%231445%                                                                       !#%"
        "#$%


                                                                                                   !#$"        34.5"675112"
          "%
           $)!$*%    +"!+&%       +)!+*%      &"!&&%   &)!&*%   )"!)&%      ))!)*%
                                                                                                     !"
                                                                                                      $)*$+"        ,!*,%"        ,)*,+"       %!*%%"         %)*%+"   )!*)%"   ))*)+"
        !"#$%
                                               ,-.%                                                                                             -./"




                           Figure A.2: Proportion of each gender-education group in each
                                  marital state during the ages of 25-29, by cohort.
                               $!!"#       ,#*'%                                                      &#'+%
                                                                    '#*$%                                                +#!*%             '#,$%
                                                       *#("%                                                                                             )(#'!%
                                           *#&!%                    $#,*%            )'#'&%
                                ,!"#                                                                 )!#&!%                                ),#**%
                                +!"#                                                 ),#+$%
                                                       &!#,'%                                                                                            &"#+!%
                                                                                                                         ,*#!&%
                                *!"#

                                )!"#

                                (!"#
                                           !"#$!%                  !$#"'%
                                '!"#                                                                 $*#&$%                                !)#"+%
                                                                                     $&#()%
                                &!"#                   "&#"%                                                                                             "&#*+%
                                                                                                                         +'#&*%
                                %!"#

                                $!"#

                                 !"#
                                           $,&(#       $,((#       $,&(#             $,((#           $,&(#               $,((#             $,&(#             $,((#

                                            -.//010#2.304#               56#2.304#                        -.//010#704#                             56#704#

                                                                            7899:0;#     6:41/0#      <:=.9>0#
            Note: Current Population Survey. Sample consists of all white men and women in each birth cohort. “Married”
            is defined as “married, with spouse present”; “Divorced” is defined as either “divorced” or “separated”. People
            with at least some college education are those with at least 1 year of college. Those with high school are defined
            as people with a high school diploma or no more than 12 years of education.




                                                                                       A1
Figure A.3: Linear model: implied log wage intercepts for men and women, by education.

                                     Men                                                                       Women
     !#%"                                                                        $"
            4233,+,"                                                                   ./00-,-"
                                                                               (#$"

                                                                                 ("

                                                                               '#$"
                                                                                       12,3"453//0"
                                                                                 '"

     !#$"    -.+/"01/223"                                                      &#$"

                                                                                 &"

                                                                               %#$"

                                                                                 %"

                                                                               !#$"

       !"                                                                        !"
        $&'$("     )!')%"   )&')("   %!'%%"   %&'%("   &!'&%"   &&'&("            &$)&*"    '!)'("    '$)'*"    (!)(("   ($)(*"   $!)$("   $$)$*"
                                      *+,"                                                                       +,-"




                       Table A.1: Transition probabilities from single to first marriage

                                                                         Men                         Women
                                                 age     College          High School         College High School
                                                 30        51.24             44.19                18.14           41.01
                                                 35        26.06             18.90                19.52            3.84
                            1935 Cohort
                                                 40        22.65             15.91                23.64            5.63
                                                 45        17.32              6.18                 1.63            1.00

                                                 30        41.89             32.27                41.26           21.84
                                                 35        33.17             11.42                24.39           14.99
                            1955 Cohort
                                                 40        21.78             21.28                18.91           15.52
                                                 45        24.68              9.48                14.35            2.28
                        Note: CPS 1962-2008. Probabilities are calculated using the evolution of the proportion
                        of people who are “never married” between the age shown and 5 years before. These
                        probabilities are conditional on being single.




                                                                          A2
      Table A.2: Proportion of women who are mothers during the ages of 25-29,
                      by cohort, education and marital status

                                                           Single   Married    Divorced
                                      High School          8.22      90.81       62.46
                      1935 Cohort
                                      College              2.07      90.98       43.14

                                      High School          10.39     81.25       52.37
                      1955 Cohort
                                      College              3.70      59.87       32.59
                    Note: CPS 1962-2008. Proportion of women between the ages of 25-29 who
                    report having at least one own child in the household.




       Table A.3: Implied log wage intercepts for men and women, by education

              age       College Men      HS Men      age      College Women       HS Women
              25-29          0.61           0.09     25-29           0.61             0.10
              30-34          0.69           0.19     30-34           0.63             0.11
              35-39          0.59           0.14     35-39           0.61             0.10
              40-44          0.54           0.10     40-44           0.75             0.12
              45-49          0.47           0.04     45-49           0.79             0.14
              50-54          0.54           0.02     50-54           0.80             0.16
              55-59          0.48          -0.06     55-59           0.84             0.18




Table A.4: Implied log wage intercepts for men and women, by education - Linear model

                        College Men      HS Men               College Women       HS Women
              25-29          0.29          0.20      25-29           4.45             2.73
              30-34          0.37          0.30      30-34           4.27             2.46
              35-39          0.27          0.25      35-39           4.21             2.07
              40-44          0.22          0.21      40-44           3.98             1.86
              45-49          0.15          0.15      45-49           3.24             1.57
              50-54          0.21          0.13      50-54           3.35             1.60
              55-59          0.16          0.05      55-59           3.23             1.55




                                                    A3
Table A.5: Calibration targets linear model, model vs. data

                       Married LFP                          Wages
                  College          HS                  Gender Wage Ratio
    Ages      Data     Model       Data     Model      Data         Model
    25-29     34.59     36.02     26.40      28.06      0.75          0.72
    30-34     32.74     35.53     34.22      35.33      0.65          0.64
    35-39     47.10     45.40     44.81      43.37      0.60          0.60
    40-44     62.34     64.07     54.72      56.54      0.55          0.59
    45-49     69.97     68.14     57.30      56.72      0.55          0.62
    50-54     68.85     68.66     56.69      58.61      0.59          0.60
    55-59     62.50     60.59     48.22      48.67      0.63          0.65
                       Divorced LFP                       Wages, Women
                  College          HS                     Skill Premium
    Ages      Data     Model       Data     Model      Data         Model
    25-29     60.90     59.80     60.90      59.80      1.40          1.42
    30-34     66.05     65.00     66.05      65.00      1.44          1.42
    35-39     73.95     74.52     73.95      74.52      1.39          1.40
    40-44     73.87     76.49     73.87      76.49      1.34          1.36
    45-49     76.00     76.28     76.00      76.28      1.39          1.42
    50-54     73.38     75.02     73.38      75.02      1.48          1.41
    55-59     65.13     65.24     65.13      65.24      1.53          1.44
                         Skill Premium, men:            1.43          1.43
    Note: The total distance between moments and targets is computed as a
    weighted average of the difference between each moment and target. The
    moments and targets for the gender wage ratio and skill premium are both
    multiplied by 100. The weights are such that the 28 moments for LFP receive
    half of the total weight and the 15 moments for wages receive the other half
    of the weight. Within each group, the moments are equally weighted.




                                       A4
B     Appendix: Data

B.1    LFP

We use the Current Population Survey from 1962- 2010 to compute labor force participation rates.

We construct two synthetic cohorts of women born between 1934-1936 and 1954-1956 and compute

their LFP as the proportion of women during each age bracket (e.g. 25-29) who report being in

the labor force.

    Data is available for the most part of the life-cycles of these women. However, note that the

women who are aged 26-29 in 1962 correspond directly to the women from our cohort. However,

we do not have any information about these women’s behavior when they are 25. Thus, in order

to compute the LFP for the first period of the women from the 1935 cohort, we also add to the

sample women who are 25 years old in 1962 (these women would have been born in 1933). The

opposite problem happens for the 1955 cohort. The data ends in 2010 when the median woman

of that cohort is 55 years old. The labor force participation behavior for those women during their

last period of work (aged 55-59) is computed from the LFP behavior of the women who are aged

between 55-59 in 2010 (some of which belong to our cohort - those aged 55 and 56 - and some who

were born between 1951-1953).


B.2    Wages

Hourly wages used for the skill premium and the gender wage ratios are computed from the CPS

using the individuals’ reported labor income and hours and weeks worked last year.         We use

the sample of white men and women who do not live in group quarters.            Prior to 1977, for

hours per week, we use the variable which reports the hours worked in the previous week, by

intervals; we use the midpoint of the interval. From 1977 onwards, we use the variables for “usual

hours worked per week" (last year) and the continuous variable for number of weeks worked last

                                               A5
year.     Whenever we compute lifetime averages for a variable, we first compute the average of

the variable over each year and then average across years. Sample weights are used throughout

(PERWT). Concerning top-coded observations, we follow the procedure in Katz and Autor (1999).

We mutiply all top-coded observations until 1996 by 1.5. After 1996, top-coded observations in the

CPS correspond to the average value of all top-coded observations, thus we do not impose further

treatment. We compute the gender wage ratio as the ratio of the average wage of women versus

men. The skill premium is computed analogously, using the average wage of college versus high

school.


B.3       Income Process



                    ln yegt = τ eg,t + γ eg1 xt + γ eg2 x2t + λe ln θ − δ(1 − Pt−1 ) + wet




                       wet = zet + η et ,        η ∼ N (0, σ 2η,e )

                       zet = ρe ze,t−1 + ǫet ,        ǫ ∼ N (0, σ 2ǫ,e )



   Age Profiles:

   We use the pooled sample of PSID for the years 1968-2009, restricted to white males who are

heads of households. We exclude individuals in the Latino, SEO and immigrant samples. We also

drop observations from people younger than 25 and people older than 65 years old and those who

report being self-employed. We choose only individuals with at least 8 (not necessarily consecutive)

observations. Furthermore, we drop individuals with missing, top-coded and zero earnings those

with zero, missing or more than 5840 annual work hours. Individuals with changes in log earnings

greater than 4 or less than -2 are also eliminated from the sample.               This leaves us with 1645



                                                        A6
individuals in the "low" education group and 1261 in the "high" education group.54

       First, we construct data on hourly wages (yem,t ) for men of education level e using data on

earnings and total hours worked. We then run the following regression in order to estimate the

parameters γ̂ em1 , γ̂ em2 of the second degree polynomial on age:



                              ln yem,t = Demt + γ em1 aget + γ em2 age2t + wem,t



where Demt is a set of year dummies.

       Given the residuals from the regression above, we estimate the parameters for the persistent and

transitory shocks using the Minimum Distance Estimator (Chamberlain (1984)). The methods of

estimating this process are standard in the literature (see e.g. Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante

(2004) for a detailed description of the method). Note that we allow for time-varying σ 2ǫ,e and σ 2η,e

during the estimation process. In the model, we use as inputs the average value across the sample

and this is what we report.

       In order to estimate the time-varying age intercepts for men τ em,t , although we use all the waves

from 1968 to 2009 of the PSID, these years still do not fully span the life-cycles of our two cohorts.

Namely, our 1935 cohort was 33 years old in 1968 and our 1955 cohort was 54 years old in 2009.

We assume that the wage intercept for the first period of the 1935 cohort (ages 25-29) is the same

as the one for the second period (ages 30-34), whereas the last intercept for the 1955 cohort (ages

55-59) is the same as the period before (ages 50-54).           As can be seen in the Figures A.1 in the

Online Appendix these are reasonable assumptions. We use Demt to compute the estimates for the

time-varying intercepts.

       In order to obtain a value for each τ em,t in the model, we average the Dem,s values obtained over
  54
    The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is the longest panel survey conducted in the US, starting in 1968.
Interviews were conducted on an annual basis until 1997, and from then onwards, biennially.




                                                     A7
the 5 years corresponding to the τ em,t interval. Recalling that our earliest data is from 1968 (when

our 1935 cohort is 33 years old), our assumptions imply that τ em,1 = Dem,1968 . We calibrate τ em,1

internally. For the 1955 cohort, on the other hand, we are missing the last intercept τ em,5 , since

the cohort is only observed up to the median age of 55 in 2009. We thus assume that τ em,5 = τ em,4 .


B.4       Divorce and Remarriage Rates

To compute divorce rates ideally one would keep track of each agent’s marriage duration conditional

upon year of marriage (age).           Doing so, however, would add significantly to the computational

complexity by increasing the state space. Moreover, it is difficult to estimate with precision the

probabilities of divorce/remarriage conditional on both year and duration of marriage/divorce due

to small sample size in each year-of-marriage bin. Given these considerations, we choose a simple

alternative. Recall that in our model the first period corresponds to the ages of 25-29, the second

period, to the ages of 30-34, and so on.            Conditional on gender and education, we compute the

proportion of people who begin age 25 as married but who undergo at least one divorce between

the ages of 25-29. This gives us the probabilities of divorce between periods 1 and 2 in the model.

We proceed analogously for the remaining periods, deriving 4 age-varying divorce probabilities by

education and gender. Thus, our model reproduces, period-by-period, the correct proportion who

divorced in each age bracket.

       For remarriage rates, due to sample size restrictions, we proceed in a different way.55                       We

calculate, conditional on gender and education, the proportion of people who remarry before the

twentieth anniversary of their last divorce and assume a uniform remarriage rate over this twenty

year interval.56
  55
     The number of people in the SIPP who entered ages 25 and 30 as divorced is too small — around 30 for men and
15 for women — to employ the same procedure.
  56
     We augment our birth cohorts by 2 years due to sample size (i.e. the 1935 cohort is defined as all people born
between 1933-1937). To calculate the remarriage rate we proceed in the following manner: individuals who divorced
after the age of 30 contribute to the remarriage rate if they remarried within 20 years of their divorce and prior to the



                                                          A8
B.5     Fertility

The timing of fertility shocks is as follows. For the 1935 cohort, single women and college women

of all marital status receive a fertility shock in the first period that takes the value of zero or one.

Divorced women and married high-school women receive a fertility shock that takes the value of

zero or two. The probability of receiving a non-zero value is calibrated so as to match the initial

proportions (age 25-29) in the data by marital status and education as reported in Table A.2. In

period 2, divorced and single women are not hit by fertility shocks whereas all women who are

married in period 2 are assumed to have an additional child. Lastly, all women who were married

in both periods 1 and 2 receive an additional fertility shock in the second period that can take the

value of zero or two for high-school women, and zero or one for college women. The frequency of

shocks is calibrated to generate 2.54 children per college woman, 3.20 for high school women and

an overall average of 3.00 children per woman for the 1935 cohort.57

    For the 1955 cohort the structure and values of fertility shocks are the same as those for the

1935 cohort. The frequencies in the initial period are adjusted so as to match the proportions in

the data for the 1955 cohort between the ages of 25-29 as reported in Table A.2. In the second

period, once again, no divorced or single women receive any additional children. All women who

were not married in period zero and got married at the end of period one receive a child. Lastly,

once again, all women who were married in both periods are hit by a fertility shock that can take

the value of zero or one.58       This generates the following numbers of children over their lifespan:
age of 60, if not, they are considered divorced. For those individuals who enter the age of 30 already divorced, the
20 year window in which to count as “remarried" commences as of age 30. This is the correct procedure since the
initial proportion of individuals across marital states already accounts for divorces and remarriages that took place
before the age of 30.
  57
     The numbers for average number of children were computed using the PSID by calculating the average number
of children ever born to women from each of our cohorts by the time they reached aged 40. Due to sample size
constraints, we define the 1935 cohort as women born in 1933-1937 and the 1955 cohort those born in 1953-1957. In
order to generate the correct number of average children, we assign a 98% probability of a non-zero fertility outcome
during the second period for women who have been married for two periods if they have college education and 43%
probability if they have high school.
  58
     Once again, to generate the correct number of average children seen in the data, we assign the probabilities of
receiving an extra child during the second period to women who have been married for 2 periods of 73% if they are


                                                        A9
college women have 1.74 children on average, high school women have 2.11 and, overall there are

1.91 children per woman for the 1955 cohort.


B.6     Consumption Deflator:

We use an altered McClements scale (e (kt ; s)) in order to deflate household consumption. Table

B.6 reproduces the original McClements scale in normalized for one adult.

                                           Table B.6: McClements Scale

                                                                    +1 child, by age:
             1 adult   2 adults   + 1 adult    0-1       2- 4      5-7      8-10    11-12   13-15    16-18
                1       1.64       +0.75      + 0.148   +0.295   + 0.344   +0.377   +0.41   +0.443   +0.59




    Since we have 5 year periods, and our children are aged 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-20, we weigh the

scale accordingly. For example, a child aged 0-4 will add: 0.4(0.148) + 0.6(0.295) = 0.2362.

    The scale e (kt ; s) is constructed using the number of adults in the household (1 if s = S, D and

2 if s = M ) and the number of children and their respective ages (kt ).


B.7     Pensions:

To compute retirement benefits for a model household, we modify the approach used in Heathcote,

Storesletten and Violante (2010) in order to avoid keeping track of an individual’s average earnings

over their lifecycle. More specifically, we take each individual’s last observed earnings yT and

compute social security benefits as follows: 90% of yT up to a first threshold equal to 0.38ȳT , where

ȳT is the average observed earnings in the economy during the last period, plus 32% of yT from

this bendpoint to a higher bendpoint equal to 1.59ȳT , plus 15% of the remaining yT exceeding this

last bendpoint. For married households, this process is done for both the husband and the wife;

the household total benefits are either the sum of their benefits or 1.5 times the husband’s benefits,
college and 52% if they are high school.



                                                         A 10
whichever one is highest.



C     Appendix: Model Solution

In our model, households have a finite horizon, so the dynamic problem is solved numerically by

backwards recursion from the last period of life using value function iteration. At each age, the

households solve for their consumption savings rule and participation decisions taking as given their

state variables that period and next period’s value function. In addition to assets, our model has

two other potential continuous state variables: the persistent components of earnings wtem and of

the wife, wtef . Handling more than one continuous state variable is possible but computationally

costly.   We choose to discretize these two variables, leaving assets as our only continuous state.

We use 25 nodes whose locations are age-dependent for each of the earnings components.

    During the working stages of the lifecycle, our model combines a discrete decision (whether

the woman participates in the market) and a continuous decision (the amount of savings). This

combination may lead to non-concavities in the value function.        Furthermore, the existence of

transitions across marital states also requires some attention. For all periods t > 4, since there are

no longer any transitions across different marital status, the maximization problem for the single

men and women and divorced men is a straightforward consumption-savings problem. The problem

of the married couple and of the divorced woman combines the discrete participation choice of the

wife together with the continuous choice of assets.     The combination implies that concavity of

the value function is not guaranteed even if one controls for the participation decision that period.

Given enough uncertainty the value function conditional on today’s participation is concave We

follow Attanasio et al. (2008) and impose (and check) a unique level of reservation assets a∗t at

which, given the values of all other state variables, the conditional value functions (working vs not

working) intersect only once and thus the woman’s participation decision switches at that point


                                                A 11
from not working to working.       Thus conditional on all other states, for all values at < a∗t , the

woman works and for all values at > a∗t the woman does not work. We numerically check both the

concavity of the conditional value functions and the uniqueness of the reservation asset level.

   The optimization problem of the household who enters a period t ≤ 4 as a married couple must

take into account the continuation values of the husband and wife, which are different. It is also

important to note that the solution of the optimization problem for both divorced and single agents

involves the calculation of a fixed point. Recall that each agent optimally chooses her/his asset

accumulation and labor force participation/experience (for women), taking into account her/his

expectations about their potential spouseâĂŹs optimal decision paths while the potential spouse

does the same. This generates a computationally iterative process whereupon the optimal (asset

and labor market experience) decisions for each potential couple are given by solutions consistent

the optimal decision paths taken as given by their counterpart, e.g. in order for ad,s      ∗ d,s
                                                                                   m,t+1 , Pt , af,t+1 to


be a solution in a given period, then it must be the case that the potential wife chose ad,s        ∗
                                                                                         f,t+1 and Pt

taking as given her expectations about her potential husbandâĂŹs optimal decision path while her
                         d,s
potential husband chose am,t+1 taking as given his expectations over his potential wifeâĂŹs path

of optimal decisions. In this sense, although a marital type is assigned exogenously to each agent,

the state space of their potential match in each period is endogenously determined in the model

and each agents forms the correct expectations over the endogenous path of optimal decisions of

their potential spouse. Thus the algorithm is as follows:


   • Given adm,t+1,0 and all the other state variables, the ex-wife chooses adf,t+1,0 and Pt .


   • The ex-husband takes adf,t+1,0 chosen by the wife and chooses adm,t+1,1 .


   • If adm,t+1,1 = adm,t+1,0 then this decision point is done. If not, then the wife will takeadm,t+1,1

      as given and solve for a new value of adf,t+1,1 and Pt .



                                                 A 12
   • This process is iterated until convergence, defined as |adm,t+1,j − adm,t+1,j+1 | < 1−10


If the process above converges after D iterations, then the asset levels at time t + 1 for the divorced

female and male are given by adf,t+1 = adf,t+1,D and adm,t+1 = adm,t+1,D




                                                 A 13
