                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    REPtJTATIONAL CONSTRAINTS
                       ON MONETARY POLICY




                         Kenneth Rogoff




                     Working Paper No. 1966




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            Working Paper #1986
                                            July 1986




              Reputational Constraints on Monetary Policy




                               ABSTRACT




     Recent advances in game theory have made it possible to
study monetary policy credibility in a structured fashion. Some
have concluded from these models that reputational considerations
substantially discourage the monetary authorities from ever
attempting surprise inflations. Hence legal constraints on money
supply growth are unnecessary and can only be harmful. In this
study, I critically assess a number of alternative models of
monetary policy reputation, including some new variants. The
bulk of the paper is concerned with comparing specific details of
these models. One general conclusion is that although this first
generation of monetary policy reputation models yields a
significant number of important insights, it is premature to
argue that time consistency is not a major issue in the design of
monetary policy institutions. The main problem is that the
models either yield a multiplicity of equilibria, or/and yield
conclusions which are very sensitive to apparently minor changes
in the information structure. Whereas an optimal reputational
equilibrium may arise without any explicit cooperation among
atomistic private agents, it is not (yet) clear why we should
expect them to coordinate on the most favorable equilibrium.
Strategic uncertainty may be an important drawback to
institutional setups which place few constraints on monetary
policy.




                                            Kenneth Rogoff
                                            Economics Department
                                            1180 Observatory Orive
                                            University of Wisconsin
                                            Madison, WI 53706
                          INTRODUCTION



     Research on strategic issues in macroeconomic policy design
is proceeding at a rather rapid pace, and there is some risk
involved in any attempt to survey it.1   To a very limited
extent, one can anticipate new developments in strategic macro
policy by using the applied game theory literature as a leading
indicator. The limitations stem from the fact that most of the
applied game theory literature has evolved around applications to
industrial organization, and the more literal translations of
these results into macroeconomics have not been very successful.

The problem is partly that the models can be quite sensitive to
the specification of the institutional environment, and more

importantly that abstractions which are plausible in the study of

duopolies are not necessarily plausible in the study of
macroeconomic policy.
     It will be convenient to treat monetary policy as our

generic example of macroeconomic policy, in part because much of
the extant literature concentrates on monetary policy. But the

issues raised here are clearly germaine to, say, taxation and
government spending.

     Early analyses of the "time consistency" problem of monetary
policy demonstrated the possibility that the government might be
able to increase its own welfare, and in some instances social

welfare, if only it could tie its hands and precommit to a

(perhaps state-contingent) path for the money supply.2    This can
be the case even if there are no exogenous disturbances, and even
                                2

if the government is trying to maximize the welfare of the

representative individual. That is, the optimal money supply
rule is not always subgame perfect.3   A main theme of the recent
literature is that by focusing on "one-shot" gaines, the early
analyses may have overstated the government's credibility

problems. Because monetary policy involves repeated interactions
between the government and the public, reputational

considerations can mitigate, or even eliminate the time-
consistency problem.

     Whereas the current generation of reputational models of

monetary policy have some very appealing features, they also have
one fundamental limitation. Typically, the models either yield a
multiplicity of equilibria, or else yield an equilibrium which is
extremely sensitive to the assumed information structure.

This defect, which is inherited from antecedent game theory
models, is well known to careful readers of the policy

credibility literature. But because many articles focus perhaps
excessively on the most efficient attainable equilibria, casual

readers may not fully appreciate how important the uniqueness
question may be. It is true that the new reputation models
suggest ways in which the government can be induced to behave
"cooperatively", even when there is no legal mechanism for
enforcing its good behavior. But there is as yet no compelling
argument as to why out of the continuum of reputational

equilibria, the economy will coordinate on a "good" equilibrium
and not a "bad" equilibrium. There is a real sense in which
                                 3

these repeated game models replace a cooperation problem with a

coordination problem. Resolution of this question is central to
understanding the implications of time consistency for government
policy.

     An extreme reputation view is that time consistency is not a

serious is'sue in policy provided that the government places

significant weight on the future. Hence, because it is virtually
impossible to forsee every type of problem which will confront
society (that is, there is qualitative uncertainty), it is unwise
and unnecessary to try to legally bind the government. A less
sanguine view is that all the of the continuum of equilibria are

equi-prObable (since we have as yet no theory for choosing among

them). Of course, if governments have very high discount rates,
the issue is moot; all the reputationaj. equilibria will be

qualitatively similar to the equilibriijni of the one-shot game.
Some who hold this view have suggested that time consistency

problems imply a need to constitutionally constrain monetary

policy. [An intermediate position is presented in Rogoff
(1985b). I argue that the social institutions which evolve in

response to time consistency problems represent a compromise
between the benefits of complete flexibility and the need for
precommitment.

     In section II, I begin by reviewing the model of central
bank reputation first proposed by Barro and Gordon (1983a).
Their reputation mechanism is a variant of the infinite-horizon

trigger-strategy equilibrii.gn proposed by J. Friedman (1971). In
                                4

a discrete-time version of the model, tAe equilibrium inflation

rate can take on a range of values, with the range depending on

the central bank's discount rate and on the length of the

"punishment" period. The multiplicity of supergame equilibria
can be drastically curtailed by imposing that the public's
expectations of future inflation be continuous in current

inflation. But though this assumption has some appeal, it is not
clear how to rigorously justify it. Also, there is a danger of

throwing out the baby (any good reputational equilibria) with the
bathwater. To further illustrate the multiple equilibrium
problem, I extend the analysis to admit "severe" punishment

strategies analogous to those considered by Abreu (1982). By
allowing for this class of equilibria, I show that it is

possible, for a given discount rate and punishment interval, to
sustain lower inflation rates than would be possible under the

expectations rules considered by Barro and Gordon. It would seem
important to recognize the existence of such equilibria in

evaluating any casual arguments concerning how an equilibrium is
chosen. Severe punishment strategy equilibria are also relevant
when the central bank has private information, as in section Iv.
     In section III, I examine the case where the policymaker has
a finite horizon. Unless the equilibrium of the one-shot game is
unique, then it is still possible to have trigger-strategy

equilibria analogous to those considered in section II.
Moreover, even if the range of one-shot game equilibrium

inflation rates is very narrow, the range of repeated game
                                5

equilibria can be very broad. The range again depends on the
policymaker's time horizon and discount rate. It may even be
possible to have an equilibriun where inflation is zero during

the initial periods. It is interesting that these results do not
appear sensitive to the assumption that there is literally a

finite horizon. Qualitatively similar equilibria are shown to
obtain (even when the one-shot game equilibrium is unique) in the
case where the policymaker has an infinite horizon, but heavily

discounts periods which come after the end of his term in office.
     An alternative finite-horizon formulation has been developed
by Tabellini (1983), Backus and Driffill (1985), Barro (1986),
and by Horn and Persson (1985). In these analyses, which draw
heavily on the work of Kreps and Wilson (1982), the public is not

certain what type of policymaker they are facing. For this

reason, policymakers who may be tempted by the transitory gains
from unanticipated inflation, have an incentive to pose as hard-
money types. Once the public is certain that the policymaker is
not a hard-money type, inflationary expectations will rise. This
gives "soft-money" types an incentive not to reveal themselves
too early on. A possible advantage of this formulation is that
for some variants, there is a unique equilibrium. There are some
drawbacks, however. The approach requires one to specify priors
for the public, and it is not clear where these come from.

Ideally, one would like to endogenize the evolution of priors

across regimes. Also, superficially minor changes in the
public's beliefs can significantly affect the nature of the
                                    6

equilibrium. For example, it matters whether the hard-money type
is someone who places a higher weight on inflation than average,
or whether he is a "robot" who is programmed never to inflate.

In the free-will case, a type who is very tempted to inflate may
never find it worthwhile to pose as a hard-money type. As

Vickers (1985) has shown, the hard-money type may be able to take
actions (deflate temporarily) which separate himself from high
inflation types.

     Another possible problem with the adaptations of Kreps and
Wilson's model is that certain of the results might be sensitive
to the assumption that there is a fixed finite horizon. I argue
that it is difficult to find an example in which the the finite-

horizon assumption can be taken literally. Two other features of
the models have attracted criticism, but these criticisms can be

addressed. First, the existing models only allow for two types
of policymakers. Second, the equilibria involve randomizing
strategies. In a self-contained appendix, I illustrate one way
to extend these models to allow for a continuum of types of

policymakers, instead of just two. The model of the appendix has
an equilibrium in pure strategies with pooling. That model also
illustrates the why it is important how the hard-money type(s)
are specified.

     In section IV ,   I   present two views of how private

information may impinge on the analysis. Canzoneri (1985) argues
that it is impossible for the central bank to precisely control

the price level. The Friedman-type reputational equilibria of
                                7

section II cannot be sustained if the public can never directly

observe how much of any given price level change was intentional,
and how much was due to an incorrect forecast of money demand.

Following Green and Porter (1984), and Barro and Gordon (1983a),
Canzoneri demonstrates that it is still possible to have

reputational equilibria, though to sustain them the economy must
suffer periodic reversions to a high inflation equilibrium.

There remain a multiplicity of equilibria. One reason
Canzoneri's analysis is interesting is that it illustrates how
the problem of coordinating on the best equilibrium seems to
become more accute when there is private information. Canzoneri

suggests that if private information is indeed the explanation

behind the economy's periodic bouts with inflation, then attempts

to achieve monetary policy credibility through legislation will
have inherent limitations. Cukierman and Meltzer (1986) share
the view that the central bank's private information is

important. They argue, however, that the level of private
information is endogenous. In their model, the central bank has
incentives to adopt imperfect monetary control procedures, so
that it can mask its intentions. Obviously, their theory has

somewhat different implications for institutional reform.
Cukierman and Meltzer show that their model has a unique linear

equilibrium, but do not provide a complete resolution of the
multiple equilibrium problem.
     In section V1 I summarize some issues which arise when there

is more than one government controller. In the international
                                8

context, this is relevant because of sovereign governments. In

the domestic context, it may be important when there are two or

more quasi-independent government agencies, and when there are
two or more political parties. The introduction of multiple
controllers suggests a range of interesting applications, and
adds a new dimension of strategic complexity. In the

conclusions, I ask whether the models of reputation developed to
date are compelling. Can we rely on reputatiorial considerations
to accomplish what we once thought could only be accomplished
through institutional reform?
                                     9

    II. CREDIBLE MONETARY POLICIES IN THE
                                          INFINITE-HORIZON CASE


      In   the first part of this section, I review the "trigger-

strategy" model of monetary policy reputation due to Barro and
Gordon (1983a). As Barro and Gordon stressed, there are a

multiplicity of equilibria of the type they consider.      There are
also other classes of equilibria, as I demonstrate by extending

their analysis to allow for an analogue of the "severe"

punishment strategies identified by Abreu (1982) (in a different

context). I then speculate on how it may ultimately be possible
to modify these models to produce more definite results.
     The framework for analyzing monetary policy credibility i

will employ is a slight variant of a popular example due to
Kydland and Prescott (1977). One justification for using this

extremely simple model is that it forms the basis for virtually
all the literature surveyed below. Obviously one would want to

use a more fully articulated model for purposes of applied policy
analysis. But the Kydland and Prescott example is very
convenient for illustrating strategic factors, which may easily
become obscured in a more complex model.4

     Monetary policy can have real effects in our model because
private agents form expectations of period t inflation,     based
on t - 1 information.5 it is important to
                                           emphasize that the
atomistic agents are "expectations takers". The aggregate
inflation rate, it,   is   exogenous to the individual; he can only
affect his own price prediction error, t -
                                                (mei).   I stress
                               10

this point because in the analysis below, it is easy to become

confused into thinking that individuals are setting their
expectations strategically. What is true is that there are
equilibria in which the collective actions of private agents have

a strategic effect on the government's choice of monetary policy.

But these equilibria do not require any explicit cooperation
within the private sector. Any individual who "defects" and
tries setting his expectations differently will only be punishing
himself.

     The fact that the individual cannot affect the aggregate

inflation rate or the aggregate prediction error does not
necessarily imply that these factors do not enter his utility
function.6 Consider the case, for example, where there is an
externality arising from income taxation. When other citizens

are "tricked" into working too much, or into holding too high a

level of real money balances, the individual gains because
government revenues rise. However, it never pays for the
individual to try to intentionally guess wrong himself. Thus we
will assume that an individual attempts to minimize7


           =   -
                   (nei)]2                   (1)



     In most of the monetary policy credibility literature, it is
assumed that unanticipated inflation increases output (via a
contracts or an islands model). Many parallel issues arise when
unanticipated inflation matters because the government issues
                                                11

currency or non-indexed nominal bonds. I will assume that the
loss function of the monetary authorities is given by


           =                                                                      (2a)
                       -
      L5 =     f[rt5       (ne)   -   k]   +   g(rt5),                            (2b)



where k > 0, f'(), g'()                    0 as ()        0, and f'(), g'() -     0 as

()    -* o. a is       the monetary authorities' subjective discount
rate, and T is their time horizon. 1                     - Tt is   the average level
of private sector price prediction errors. For now, we will
assume that T is infinite and that f"(), g"() > 0; both
assumptions will be relaxed in section III. The basic structure
underlying eqs. (1) and (2) has been extensively examined [see
Barro and Gordon (1983a,b), Canzoneri (1985), Rogoff (1985b) or
Tabellini (1983)]. Barro and Gordon discuss how in the presence
of externalities such as income taxation (our example above), the

government's objective function can be interpreted as the social
welfare function, even though k > 0.                     Note that if k =   0, then
there is no externality, the government will always try to set
  =   e,   and the optimal monetary rule is subgame perfect.

      Before considering repeated-game reputational equilibria, it
is useful to first examine equilibria of the "one-shot" game

(there is only one period). Because the private sector forms
expectations about period t inflation based on t - 1 information,
the central bank treats (The) as given when setting

Minimizing Q over it, we obtain the first-order condition
                                     12

-f'(m -    - k)    =   g'(n).   Since the public forms expectations
rationally, we require that it = 11e•       Hence, a necessary condition
for a subgame perfect equilibrium in the one-shot game is


     —f'(—k) =    gu(u*)                                               (3)



where it is the one-shot game equilibrium inflation rate. Given
our assumptions that f", g" > 0, it is straightforward to show
that the second-order conditions hold and that it is unique. The

logic underlying the equilibrium characterized by (3) is well
known. The central bank always has the ability to inflict price
prediction errors on the private sector. But when e =              >   0,

it will never choose to do so.8           As inflation rises so too does

the marginal cost of inflating. The time-consistent equilibrium
level of inflation, rt', is sufficiently high so that the marginal

gain from surprise inflation equals the marginal cost.
     In this nonstochastic model, the fact that the central bank

can exercise discretion brings no benefits, and only leads to a
high rate of inflation. Recall that private agents do care about
the aggregate inflation rate. However, because an individual's
actions have only an infinitesimal effect on the aggregate price

level, each agent acts as if he were only concerned with his own
price-prediction error. Whether or not the economy will
coordinate on a more favorable equilibrium (without imposing

legal restraints) is the main focus of our investigation. The

equilibrium characterized by (3) is of interest for a number of
                                          13

reasons. First, it is the unique subgame perfect equilibrium
when the monetary authorities maximize over any finite horizon

(if, as in our example, the equilibrium of the one-shot game is
unique.) Moreover, m remains an equilibrium when their horizon
is infinite. Second, in the infinite-horizon case, the one-shot

game equilibrium can serve as a credible threat to induce more

"cooperative" behavior from the monetary authorities. We will
now illustrate this point. This class of reputational equilibria
was demonstrated by Barro and Gordon (1983a).
       Consider a level of inflation, if, such that 0             C rt, and
suppose that the public forms expectations according to


       (The) =                   if mt_i = (me)l                         (4)
                               *
                           (     otherwise.


       Thus if (rte)_l = if C its', the public will continue expecting

low inflation as long as the central bank "cooperates" and does
not try to fool them.9 If the central bank ever does inflate
beyond ñ, the economy will be subjected to a "punishment"

interval, which we have arbitrarily set at one period. (When
       > if =    (me)_l,        e reverts to rt*. If the central bank then
                 *                           -
sets   mt = it       ,   ite reverts back to it.) It is very important to

note that the public's expectations are rational in the subgame
which would occur if the central bank were ever to "cheat". The

central bank has absolutely no incentive to surprise private
                                                                  *
agents during a punishment period. For by setting it = it             during
                                                  14

a punishment period, it minimizes both this period's loss

function, and next period's inflationary expectations.)
      We shall now confirm that there are indeed equilibria where

the public forms its expectations according to (4), and where
ft < Tt. To determine whether ft is a trigger-strategy equilibrium

level of inflation under (4), it is necessary to consider whether

the central bank will have any incentive to defect and set rt                                       ft.


This question turns on the magnitude of the maximum current-

period gain from defecting, B(ft), in comparison with the expected

future cost to defecting, c(ft). These magnitudes are given by


        B(ft) =   f(—k)   + gift) —      f[TLD(ft)       —   ft   —   k]   —
                                                                               g[TLD(ft)] > 0,    (5)



where D(ft) =       argmin[f(rt     -    ft   -    k)   + g(rt)], and



        C(ft) =   3[g(*)    —
                                 g(ft)] c 0.                                                      (6)



For a given level of ft to be an equilibrium, it is necessary that

B(ft)      C(fl); otherwise the central bank will always choose to
defect. Though ñ =          0   may not be an equilibrium 10, it is
possible to prove that there always exists some ft such that
o   ft c       and B(ft)        C(ft).        [Proof:         ft c itD(ff) <           by
fU, g" > 0. Let ft =               - c.           Since .ft(L) - ft -             k) =   g'(&),   and
since & — ft C c, then B(ft) must become second order as e becomes
small (by an envelope theorem argument). Since C(ft) remains

first-order for small c then, by the continuity of f and g, there
                                15
                                                      *
must exist some c > 0 such that B(it* - s)   S C(rt       -
                                                              s).]
     Denote ñ as the lowest (positive) inflation rate which can
be a trigger-strategy equilibrium level of inflation under (4).
It is trivial to show that ft is nortincreasing in 3, the central

bank's discount rate. It is also simple to show that if ft > 0,
then it would be possible to have lower inflation if the
expectations mechanism of the public embodied a punishment
interval longer than just one period. If the discount rate 3 is
small, however, even an infinite punishment interval may not be

enough to sustain zero inflation.1'

     When ft > 0, there is another mechanism for sustaining a

lower inflation rate, one which does not involve extending the

punishment period. The alternative mechanism involves having a
more severe punishment, instead of a more prolonged punishment.

The more severe punishment consists of reverting to an inflation
rate higher than it whenever the central bank defects. In some
applications, this alternative mechanism may be important because
it is not intuitively appealing to have a long or infinite
punishment interval. Also, severe punishments can play a role in
the optimal equilibriun of the model with private information,
which will be studied in section IV.   I do not, however, regard

severe punishment equilibria as being particularly plausible in
the present context. My primary motivation for introducing this
alternative class of equilibria here is to underscore the
                                                  16

 severity of the multiple equilibriujn problem.                 Thus it is
 sufficient merely to illustrate the equilibria, and we will not
 concern ourselves with deriving the optimal severe punishment
 equilibriua.

      To make the mechanism underlying severe punishment

 equilibria more transparent, it is helpful to first demonstrate
 why it is possible for inflationary expectations to rise
 temporarily above rt'. Let 8 > 0, and consider the following path
 of expectations initiating in period t:


              =   it   + 5,
                                                                                (7)
      (ue)+ =               ft   if rtt+j..l =
                                                   (ne)+_1,     i   1
                             *
                       (          otherwise.

                   *
      Since   g(rt )       - g(rc)   .    .   .
                                     is finite, it is clearly possible to
choose a 5 small enough so that it + 8 is an equilibriun for
period t, provided that the public's expectations are governed by
(7). It is true that at rt + 8, the central bank would be

willing to let output drop below the natural rate in order to
achieve lower current-period inflation.                  But the central bank
knows that it must be willing to suffer
                                                        through exceptionally
high inflation in period t if it wants inflation in t + 1 to be
ft, and not            The fact that * + 5 can be made a credible
threat implies that it is possible to attain an inflation rate
lower than ft without extending the punishment interval. For

example, consider an equilibrinjn analogous to (4):
                               17

      (ue) =               = (e)1                                  (8)

               ç   + & otherwise. 12


It is clear that the lowest attainable inflation rate under       (8)

is lower than the lowest attainable inflation rate under (4),
(ft), if ft   0.

     The trigger-strategy equilibria we have been analyzing do
not require any explicit cooperation between the private agents,
or between the private sector and the central bank. If an
atomistic private agent believes that other agents form

inflationary expectations according to (4) [or (8)], then it is
only rational for him to form expectations the same way (if the

equilibrium is subgame perfect).13     However, although these low-
inflation equilibria do not require explicit cooperation across

individual agents, there is a serious question of how agents

coordinate on a particular equilibriujr. First, what is the
length of the punishment interval going to be? Given the length
of the punishment interval, is there any reason to suppose that

the public will expect the lowest equilibriwn inflation rate

corresponding to this punishment interval? Even if we assume
that the public can coordinate on the punishment interval and can

agree to expect the lowest credible level of inflation, there is
still a degree of indeterminacy. Will      =   ft,   the lowest
attainable inflation rate under (4), or will the public expect
the lower inflation rate attainable under a severe punishment
strategy such as (8)?
                               18

     It might be argued that by making pronouncements about its
monetary policy, the government can focus the private sector's

attention on a particular equilibrium. But I, for one, am
extremely uncomfortable with this reasoning. The government has
obvious incentives to make false announcements, and the public is
not likely to pay attention to statements that are not backed by
concrete measures. A somewhat more serious alternative is to

explore whether the goverment can achieve some degree of

coordination by placing external restraints on itself. (Such as
making a commitment to a fixed exchange rate system which, if
violated, would lead to a breakdown of a tariff agreement.) This

resolution, of course, really amounts to changing the structure
of the game so that there are less equilibria.

     Perhaps the most implausible feature of the equilibria
considered in this section is that (except for the one-shot game

equilibrium), they require that the public's expectations about
future inflation be discontinuous functions of current inflation.

If the government defects by a small amount, expected inflation
rises by just as much as if the government were to inflate

massively. It would seem worthwhile exploring assumptions which
imply that continuous changes in the environment lead to

continuous changes in the public's beliefs about future
inflation, Whereas it may still be possible to have reputational
equilibria with continuous reaction functions, the severity of

the multiple equilibrium problem might be significantly
diminished. [For a discussion along these lines within the
                               19

context of 1-0 models, see Gui, Sonnenschein and Wilson (1986)

Stanford (1986) provides some suggestive results.] Yet another
approach to placing restrictions on the possible equilibria is to
recognize that agents cannot make an unlimited number of

calculations; see, for example, Rubinstein (1986).
     The analysis above is readily generalized to the stochastic

case, if information is symmetric.   (In section VI, we shall

consider the case of asymmetric information.) Barro and Gordon
(1983a) have illustrated some of the possibilities which can
arise. The optimal trigger-strategy equilibria will involve

having the public make (unforecastable) price prediction errors.
When a disturbance causes the benefits to unanticipated inflation

to be unusually high, the monetary authorities engineer a

surprise inflation. Expectations of inflation are still correct,

on average, because the monetary authorities spring surprise
deflations when the benefits are low. It should be noted that
because the models studied in this section have multiple
equilibria, they can generate variable or stochastic inflation
even in a completely unchanging environment. It is possible to
have trigger-strategy equilibria which bounce back and forth
between different points either with certainty, or with reference
to an extrinsic random variable (sunspots).
                                              20

            III. REPUTATION IN A FINITE-HORIZON CONTEXT



     The trigger-strategy equilibria discussed in the preceeding
section break down if the monetary authorities maximize over a

finite horizon. (Because only the one-shot game equilibriujn can
obtain in the last period, the strategies "unravel" backwards.)

It has been suggested that this may be an important problem,
because policyniakers have finite terms in office.                   Before
questioning the merits of this view, we will discuss some

mechanisms for modelling reputation in the finite-horizon case.
     First of all, if there are multiple equilibria in the one-
shot game, then there can exist trigger-strategy equilibria in

the finite-horizon case. Benoit and Krishna (1985), and Friedman
(1985), have demonstrated this general principle. In fact, even
if only a narrow range of high inflation rates can obtain in the

one-shot game, it is still possible to sustain inflation rates

very close to zero early in the policymaker's term (if his term
is long enough and his discount factor low enough). Let                       > 0
be the lowest equilibrinjn inflation rate in the one-shot game,

and let rt2 be the highest. During the policymaker's final period
in office, period T, the equilibria are the same as in the one-
shot game. Hence, 111             1'T              However, in period T - 1, it


            .
may be perfectly rational for the public to believe that
                -        e > 0.
(ue)T_l =           e,                  For small enough s, these expectations
can supported by the belief that if the government does not
defect in T - 1 (mT_i =           ft1 - e),    then (1te)T =   n1.   If it defects
                                         21

                - h then      (lte)T =         Hence defection is punished by
going to the "bad" Nash equilibrium in the final period. Let
        denote the lowest subgame perfect equilibrium which can be
attained in period s. It is straightforward to show that if

(it')5 > 0, then (it')5 -         (rc')..1   > 0. (I am implicitly assuming

that the discount rate             is constant.) The more periods that
remain, the longer the punishment interval can be. Also, as we
move back from date T, the maximum one-period punishment,
it2 -   (u'),     rises. To be more concrete, we present an example:
        Suppose one replaces the central bank's inflation loss

function, g(rt) [see eq. (2b)], with the following loss function


                                                    for it   m" + k,
                     7g(rt)
        h(rt) =        g(it + k)                    for rt + k C it    z,      (9)

                              + k) + g(m - z)       for z C it,



where z is a sufficiently large constant such that
- f'[-    (k + z)]
                              *
                        g'(rt + k). If we replace g() with h(s) in
equation (2b) then, as one can easily confirm, there are two
equilibria in the one-shot game, rt* and                + z. Now let us
assume that the central bank maximizes over a two-period horizon,

and that it does not discount second-period welfare (B                 = 1).
Consider what happens if the public forms expectations of it as

 follows:
                                       22

      (ne)Tl = 0
          (ne)T =                      Ttrtji_j   0,                (10)
                          + z     otherwise.
When confronted with the inflation expectations mechanism (10),

the central bank will ratify the public's beliefs and set

     = 0. If it sets rtTl > 0, then it will bear a cost in
period T of h(rt* + z) -     h(rt*)   which, by construction of h, is
equal to g(* + k). This cost outweighs any possible gain. The
gain to inflating in period T - 1 is strictly less than
f(-k) -   f(0),   which is strictly less than g(Tt* + k) -    g(rt*).
Hence e = 0 is a subgame perfect equilibrius for period T - 1.
As in the infinite-horizon case, there are a multiplicity of

equilibria. For example, any inflation rate less than it but
greater than zero can be equilibriuni for period T - 1.

     It is interesting to observe that an analogous equilibritjni
arises in the case where (a) the one-shot game equilibrim is

unique, and (b) the policymalcer does not literally have a finite

horizon, but heavily discounts events which will occur he after
leaves office. Suppose, for example, that we replace the
policymaker's loss function, (2a), with the alternative function


          = E L5t3(s)(5t),
                                                                        (11)



where L5 is again given by equation (2b), but now 13(s) = 1 for
s S T, and (s) = e for s > T, with c being very small. In his

final period in office, T, the lowest attainable trigger-strategy
                                    23

equilibrium level of it,   fI1   will be very close to its', since

future periods are discounted very heavily. (This assertion is
easily confirmed.) Nevertheless, the small wedge between fi,1. and

u' is sufficient to support a level of inflation UT_i < 1'T via
the same general argument as above. If the policymaker's term is

long enough, it will be possible to credibly sustain a very low
inflation rate during his initial periods in office.

     A rather different model of monetary policy credibility is
based on the assumption that the public is unsure about the
policymakers' preferences or about his cost of breaking
commitments. A number of researchers have adopted this approach,
applying the framework of Kreps and Wilson (i982). Barro's
(1986) version of the model is roughly as follows:
     The policymaker has a fixed term in office. His horizon is
finite either because he has no reason to care what happens to
social welfare after his departure, or because he believes that

his actions do not affect the credibility of the monetary

authorities in future periods. Upon entering office, the
policymaker makes a commitment never to inflate. The public
thinks there is at least a small chance that the policymaker is a
"type 1", for whom it is prohibitively expensive to break his

commitment.   Otherwise the policymaker is a "type 2", who bears
no cost   to breaking commitments. (In the appendix, I extend the
model to allow for a continuum of types.) Barro shows that if
terms of office are long enough, then there will be no inflation
in the early periods of a term regardless of which type the
                                24

 policymaker actually is. At some point, depending on the
 public's initial priors on the policyma]cer's type, the type 2

policymaker begins to randomize his behavior, inflating with a

time-dependent, endogenously-determined probability.   At the
point randomization begins, private sector expectations of
inflation rise by a discrete amount (because there is now some

chance inflation will occur). As long as the public continues to

observe zero inflation, expected inflation fluctuates around a
constant level. If the public ever observes any inflation, then
it knows the policymaker is a type 2, and expected inflation
rises to its one-shot game level rt'.

     Two features of this scenario seem odd at first glance, but

appear more reasonable upon closer inspection. First, it is not
very appealing to think of the central bank as flipping a coin to
decide whether or not to inflate. This aspect of the model is,
in part, attributable to the fact that there are a discrete

number of types. In the model of the appendix, which has a

continuum of types, there does exist a pure strategy equilibrium.

     A second "odd" characteristic of the model is that the
expected rate of inflation rises only at the beginning of the

randomization interval, and then remains constant until the
public actually observes inflation. This is the result of two
offsetting effects. On the one hand, the public knows that a

type 2 policymaker is more likely to inflate as the end of the

term approaches, and will certainly inflate in the last period.
Offsetting this effect is the fact that each time a period passes
                               25

and no inflation occurs, the public raises its probability that

it is indeed facing a type 1 (precommitted) policymaker. This
result is not general. In the model of the appendix, it is
possible to have expected inflation rise over the period in which

the policymaker might break his commitment.

     Also, if one conditions expectations only on information

available to the public in period zero, then the path of expected
inflation does indeed rise over the randomization interval.

During the randomization interval, the cumulative probability
that the type 2 policymaker will have revealed himself by the end

of any given period rises over time. Once he reveals himself,
then inflation rises to rt.
     For any initial set of public beliefs, the model discussed

above yields a unique equilibrium. However, the public's priors
are a "free parameter" which have an important effect on the
predictions of the model. Also, as Vickers (1986) has shown, it
makes a considerable difference whether a type 1. agent is someone

who legally binds himself to a fixed target inflation rate, or
whether he is someone prefers low inflation because he places a
greater weight on inflation than average. In the latter case,

the hard-money type may be able to signal his type by deflating.
If there are not too many periods left, a type 2 policymaker may
prefer to unmask himself rather than suffer a large deflation. A
type 1 agent, on the other hand, finds the sacrifice worthwhile

if it proves his type to the public. Thus in the separating
equilibrium, type 2 policymakers set inflation at rC. Type 1
                                26

 policymakers initially deflate. Then, having separated
 themselves, they inflate at some low level (which depends on the
 relative weight they place on inflation versus unemployment). In
a richer institutional setting, hard-money types might have other

ways to send separating signals of their type.    (They can send
signals via the budget deficit, they can appoint conservatives to

govern the central bank, etc.) The issue of whether or not all
policymakers have at least some discretion also arises in the
model of the appendix.

     Possibly the least robust results for this class of models
are those pertaining to the policymaker's final periods in

office, the "endplay" of the model. These results may be
sensitive to the assumption that the policymaker has a known
finite horizon, an assumption I will now argue is seldom
plausible. First of all, let us consider the case where type 2

policymakers genuinely care only about the social welfare
function, (2), and where society's horizon is infinite.    It is
true that for any one play of the game, the public will be better
of f when the policymaker actually turns out to be a type 2.

[(Since the one-time inflation surprise raises social welfare;

see Barro (1986).] However, the public is also better off the
higher its initial subjective probability that the policymaker is
actually a type 1. And it seems implausible for a type 2

policymaker to think that his actions this term will have no
effect on the public's probability distribution over types in

future periods, and hence on future social welfare.
                               27

     It is true that a policymaker's actions would not affect the
public's beliefs about future policymakers, if his successor is

drawn at random from a very large population, and if the public
has very strong priors about the relative distribution of type 1
and type 2 agents in this population. But it seems (to me) more
plausible to think that the policymakers are chosen via some
nonrandom process. The observation that the latest Fed chairman

was a type 2 ought to influence the public's priors as to the
nature of his successor. So if the policymaker really cares about
social welfare, he should take into acdount the effects of his

actions on future periods.
     It is entirely possible that the policymaker does not care

at all about social welfare, and only aims to maximize his
seigniorage revenues while in office. There may be many
countries where this scenario is plausible, but in these
countries, policymakers usually do not have fixed one-time terms
in office. Moreover, the length of their terms in office is

probably not exogenous.
     Another rationale for the policymaker's fixed finite
perspective might be the electoral cycle. Backus and Drif fill

(1985) note (only in passing) that their model yields something

akin to a political business cycle. On average (that is,
averaging over both type 1 and type 2 policymakers), inflation
tends to be higher towards the end of a term. There is no
tendency for output to be high on average before elections; the

booms which occur during the regimes of type 2 agents are
                               28

cancelled out by the recessions which take place under type 1

agents. A problem with an electoral cydle interpretation of the
model is that it contradicts empirical evidence that pre-electjon

distortions in policy are most severe when the incumbent is up

for re-election, not during his final term in office.
Rogoff and Sibert (1986) present an equilibrj signaling model
in which the electoral cycle in
                                macroeconomic policy arises
precisely because the incumbent party is striving to stay in
power.
                                     29

                      IV.    PRIVATE INFORMATION



    Thus far, we have assumed that the public can perfectly
monitor the central bank's actions. Canzoneri (1985), and
Cukierman and Meltzer (1986), have analyzed the implications of

relaxing this assumption. In this case, achieving the
coordination necessary to attain optimal reputational equilibria
seems even more problematic. The studies considered in this

section are also interesting because they have implications for
attempts at institutional reform. We will first consider

Canzoneri' s model.

     Canzoneri analyzes an infinite-horizon model similar to the

model of section II. He assumes that the central bank does not

discount the future (       = 1),   so that (for a long enough

punishment interval) there always exists a trigger-strategy
equilibrium in which expected inflation is zero. He then
introduces money demand shocks into the model. These shocks are
observed only after the central bank has set the money supply.
However, the central bank is able to condition its actions on a

forecast of the money demand disturbance. Its forecast is
imperfect, so the central bank would be unable to completely damp
out price fluctuations even if it were trying to minimize the

price prediction errors of private agents.
       If the public is able to observe both the money demand
disturbance and the central bank's forecast of it, then no new

 conceptual issues arise. There are trigger-strategy equilibria
                                  30

 analogous to those of section II (for
                                           stochastic versions of the
 models). As long as the public can always directly confirm that
 any unanticipated inflation is entirely attibutable to an error
 the central bank made in forecasting, there is no need to

 "execute" any punishment.  (Technically, of course, private
 agents do not act strategically, and there is no explicit

 cooperation among them.) Canzoneri argues, however, that it
 might be very difficult for the public to directly confirm the

 central bank's forecast, and that this forecast should be
                                                           treated
 as private information.14 He then shows, by applying Green and
Porter's (1984) extension of Friedman's
                                             trigger-strategy model,
that it is still possible to have an equilibrium which improves

on the outcome of the one-shot game.'5

     In the equilibri Canzoneri
                                       analyses, the public sets
expected inflation equal to zero, as long as the economy is not

entering a reversionary (punishment) period. The public then
observes actual inflation, and employs a one-tailed test. If
inflation is above a certain
                             threshold value, then there will be
a one-period reversion to the
                              inflation-rate expectations of the
one-shot game. If the threshold is set at just the right level,
the central bank can be induced to target zero inflation.16 (In

setting the level of the money supply, the central bank must
trade off increases in current
                                 employment with increases in the
Probability of entering a reversionary period.) Even though the
central bank does not cheat (in
                                equilibrium), large money demand
forecast errors still occur
                            Periodically, thereby throwing the
                               31

economy into periods of high expected inflation.
     As in the model of section II, there is a multiplicity of
other equilibria, and it is not clear how or why the public would
coordinate on this particular one. It is not satisfactory to

argue that this equilibrium is somehow "focal" because it is
optimal. For one thing, the optimal equilibrium does not, in
general, have such a simple structure. (Note that punishments
actually occur in this model. So even if different punishment
strategies yield the same level of expected inflation, they do
not necessarily yield the same level of welfare.) Abreu, Pierce

and Stacchetti (1985) have shown that optimal punishment
strategies in the Green-Porter model typically involve an
analogue of the severe punishment strategies discussed in section
II. They also show that the optimal strategies are not, in
general, based on a simple one-tailed test (though the one-tailed

test equilibrium is intuitively appealing). That the optimal
trigger strategies can be so complicated, even when the

underlying model has a relatively simple structure, is further
reason to avoid loose arguments that the public will coordinate

on the best equilibrium.
     Canzoneri's model has some attractive features and some, at

least superficially, odd features. By introducing private
information, Canzoneri is able to explain why there must be some

inflationary bias (on average) even if the public can coordinate

on the best attainable equilibrium. Also, the model illustrates
how serially uncorrelated forecast errors can produce serially
                                32

correlated inflation rates: Reversionary periods follow a
cooperative period in which inflation was high. On the negative

side, the public's expectations mechanism does not seem
particularly plausible. The public finds itself punishing the
central bank periodically, even though it knows that the central
bank would never cheat (in equilibrium). Whenever the central
bank inadvertently allows inflation to slip above its threshold
value, the public must punish it by discontinuously raising

inflation-rate expectations. The punishment is necessary in
order to induce the central bank to continue to target low

inflation in the future. Note that the public never actually
learns anything about the policymaker's type; it knows everything
at the outset and knows that it would never pay for the central
bank to defect from the equilibrium. Canzoneri's model should

not be interpreted as one in which the central bank has private

information about its preferences. His model has quite different
properties than the models discussed in the latter part of
section III.

     Canzoneri treats the, information structure as exogenous.

Cukierman and Meltzer (1986) suggest that the central bank may
deliberately saddle itself with an inefficient forecasting
technology, in order to mask its intentions. Their basic
argument may be illustrated in the following one-period model:

     Let the central bank's objective function take the specific
functional form:
                                        33

     I. =   -x(u   - The) ÷                                                (12)



(Cukierman and Meltzer do not interpret the central bank's loss

function as a social welfare function.) It is easily seen that

in a one-shot game, the equilibrium inflation rate               =   x.   It is

helpful to note that for the loss function (12), the central bank

will set it     =x   regardless of the value of ne.

     A key element of Cukierman and Meltzer's result is the

assumption that the central bank's preferences are stochastic.
Suppose, for example, that based on time t -          1   information, x = 0

in period t with probability 4, and that x =          2   in period t with

probability 4. If the private sector is able to observe x before

setting e, then Et_i(Lt) = 4(0) + 4(2) = 1.               [Thus Et_i(L)t is

the expected value of the central bank's period t objective
function, prior to the realization of x.]            If the private sector

is unable to observe x before setting 1e, then e = 1, and
            =   4(0) + 4(0)   =   0.   Therefore if the central bank can

precommit itself not to reveal x before the public sets The, it

will choose to do so. Hiding its preferences does not allow the
central bank to systematically fool the private sector, who can

still guess inflation correctly, on average. Rather, the central
bank gains because it is able to cause surprise inflation when

 the benefits to inflating are high, and save surprise deflations

 for periods when the benefits are low.
      Cukierman and Meltzer's complete model involves an infinite

 horizon, with serially-correlated preference shocks. The public
                                34

 never directly observes the central bank's preferences, but is

 able to infer something about them from the path of the money

 supply. By intentionally adopting an imprecise monetary control
procedure, the central bank is able to obscure its preferences.
It gains via the channel illustrated above, but it loses because

inaccurate monetary control raises the variance of inflation.
 (The reader will have to look to Cukierman and Meltzer's article
for further details.)

     Cukierman and Meltzer focus on equilibria in which the
public forms its beliefs using a linear feedback rule.    They show
that there is a unique equilibriujn of this type; the equilibriujn
is analogous to a one-shot game equilibriiam in the sense that all

the dynamics come from the internal structure of the model. They

do not prove that there are no other classes of equilibria,
however. Given the fact that their model incorporates an

infinite horizon, and given the pervasive information asymmetries
in its structure, the issue of uniqueness would seem to be a

serious one. However, a question for future research is whether
(for some variant of the model) the linear equilibrium might be

unique within a broader class of equilibria, say for example, the

class of equilibria in which the public's expectations are

continuous in the observed variables. The results of Stanford
(1986) suggest posing this question.

     It seems possible that the central bank's decision to

obfuscate its behavior might depend on whether or not the public
can coordinate on a relatively cooperative equilibrium.   As
                               35

Canzoneri's model illustrates, private information impedes the

attainment of the pareto-efficient equilibrium, since its
enforcement requires occasional reversionary periods. So
although obfuscation might be a good move for a central bank

perpetually caught in the worst equilibrium (in which the
inflationary bias is large), it might not be a good move in an
economy which coordinates on a low inflation equilibrium.
     The models of Canzoneri and of Cukierman and Meltzer have
somewhat different implications for monetary reform. If the
information structure is exogenous, then one needs to be

concerned about how to deal with the private information problem
in any legislative solution to the inflation problem. Cukierman
and Meltzer's analysis, on the other hand, suggests that the
extent to which private information is a problem may itself be a

function of the legal and institutional structure.
                                36

           V.   COORDINATION WITH MULTIPLE CONTROLLERS


     Here I briefly discuss a couple of questions which arise
when the public faces more than one government agency or

sovereign. Allowing for multiple controllers adds an interesting
new dimension of strategic complexity to the analysis.
     Alesina (1985) analyzes a model in which there are two

political parties, with different preferences over the relative
importance of inflation and unemployment. There is exogenous
uncertainty over the outcome of the election, making it difficult
for voters to forecast the post-election inflation rate. The

induced volatilty in post-election output and inflation is such
that both parties would be better off (on average) if they could

agree on a consensus inflation policy. But if the winner of the
election always behaves myopically, it will break any such
agreement. Alesina demonstrates that in the infinite-horizon
case, a more efficient outcome may be achieved via reputation.
In fact, if the two parties have low enough discount rates, then
it is possible to have an equilibrium in which post-election

inflation rate volatility is completely eliminated. What
supports the "cooperative" equilibrium is that the winning party
believes that if it defects, then the next time the opposition

party gains power, it, too, will choose its own most preferred
inflation rate.17

     Rogoff (1985) analyzes a two-country model in which each
country's monetary authority faces a credibility problem vis-a-
                                37

vis its own private sector. The credibility problem is similar
to that of the model described in section II above. However,

there are also strategic interactions between the two sovereign

monetary authorities. What creates an overlap in their objective
functions is that when either country (unilaterally) increases

its money supply (by more than the private sectors anticipated),
it causes its real exhange rate (vis-a-vis the other country) to

depreciate. (This is a robust result which obtains across a
broad class of open-economy macroeconomic models.) The central

banks tend to regard this as an undesirable consequence of

conducting an unanticipated inflation. First, real exchange rate
depreciation affects output adversely if the foreign good enters
as an intermediate good in the production function, or if wages
are indexed to a basket which includes the foreign good.     (The
main results obtain with either an islands model or a contracting

model.) Second, a depreciation in the real exchange rate raises
the rate of CPI inflation.

     In the one-shot game, both governments can actually make
themselves worse of f by coordinating their monetary policies (via

a legally fixed exchange rate or via a monetary union).     By
coordinating their monetary policies, they remove a check on
themselves. The private sectors recognize this when forming
their inflationary expectations, and the time-consistent rate of
inflation actually rises. The same result holds in a repeated
game if the public is unable to coordinate on the optimal

trigger-strategy equilibriui, or if the monetary authorities have
                               38

high discount rates.18   Thus institutional reforms aimed at

promoting government to government cooperation must be designed
with private sector responses in mind. Kehoe (1985) extends
these results to show that government to government tax policy

cooperation can also be counterproductive. Again, the main theme
is that competition between governments may be beneficial by
mitigating their credibility problems vis-a-vis the private

sector.
                              39

                          CONCLUSIONS

     It would seem reasonable to suppose that reputational

considerations temper the government's incentives to conduct

surprise inflations. However, while considerable progress has
been made in introducing reputation into models of monetary
policy, there are still some important unanswered questions. The
most disturbing feature of the models proposed to date is that

either the equilibrium is very sensitive to changes in the
informational structure, or/and there are a multiplicity of
equilibria. There would appear to be substantial coordination
problems involved in achieving the most favorable reputational
equilibria. Crawford (1985) has observed that in some

situations, strategic uncertainty --   uncertainty   about which

equilibrium strategy other agents are adopting -- may be just as
important as uncertainty about exogenous factors. [See also
Axelrod (1984).] The fact that the current generation of
repeated game models do not place sharp restrictions on the data

makes it difficult to apply them with confidence.

     It may be possible to construct an argument that certain
equilibria are "focal". Perhaps the government can aid in the

coordination problem by, for example, announcing monetary
targets. But this line of reasoning is tenuous and in some
sense, runs counter to whole thrust of the rational expectations
revolution. The public is much more likely to be influenced by
governmental announcements which are backed by concrete measures.

Another, perhaps more promising, approach to eliminating some
                                40

 equilibria in these models would be to search for refinements in

 the equilibrium concept. If, for example, one could provide a
strong argument for assuming that the public's expectations about
future inflation are continuous in current inflation (an

assumption which seems quite plausible), this might rule out many
of the reputational equilibria discussed in the text. Other
approaches include allowing for more heterogeneity in the private
sector, and introducing more institutional detail. Until
reputational models of monetary policy can be refined to yield
sharper predictions, it would seem premature to focus attention
only on the most favorable equilibria. it is certainly too soon
to conclude that reputatjona]. constraints substantially vitiate

the case for imposing legal constraints on monetary policy, as
some have inferred.

     Although there are reasons why one cannot yet be satisfied
with extant models of strategic monetary policy, they represent a

clear improvement over early rational expectations models, in

which the government's behavior was treated as exogenous.
Whereas it may be constructive to ignore strategic factors in

studying some macroeconomic phenomenon, they are central to the
analysis of the government's role in the economy. A major appeal
of strategic macro models is that they allow one to formally
model political and institutional relationships which previously
could only be discussed informally.

     in my effort to highlight certain general modelling issues,
i have not focussed on institutional details.   But it is
                               41

ultimately important to take these details into account in

constructing an applied strategic monetary policy model.
                                42

                             APPENDIX


      In section iii, we Considered some attempts to adapt Kreps
 and Wilson's (1982) sequential equilibrium model of reputation to

 analyze monetary policy credibility.   One mildly unattractive
 feature of these models is that their equilibria involve

 randomizing strategies. It seems implausible to think that the
 central bank decides when to start inflating based on the outcome
 of a sequence of coin flips. Another drawback to the models is

 that they allow only for two types of policymakers. In this

 (essentially self-contained) appendix, i present an alternative
formulation in which there are a continuum of types, and for
which there does exist a pure-strategy (sequential)

equilibri.i9 Otherwise, the model generally yields
qualitatively equivalent results to the models surveyed in the
text, though there are some further differences.
                                                  For example,
the results concerning the path of conditional expected inflation
differ somewhat from those of Barro (1986). Also, the analysis

illustrates how there can be multiple sequential equilibria in
this type of model unless one places restrictions on beliefs
about of f the equilibriuj path behavior.

     In the models of Tabellini (1983) and Barro (1986),

policymakers differ according to how much it costs them to break
a commitment never to inflate. These studies do not go into

detail about just what form such a commitment might take. One

natural possibility would be for the legislature to pass a law
                                 43

dictating the rate of growth of a monetary aggregate. Such a
commitment should not necessarily be treated as absolute; there
are any number of reasons why the central bank might inflate in
spite of such a law. First of all, the central bank (or some
special interest group) might be able to challenge the law's

constitutionality. Or, if the penalties are not sufficiently
severe, the central bank may simply be willing to pay the price
for violating the law. Even if it proves impossible to revoke or
ignore the law, the central bank could still try to circumvent it

via regulatory changes which influence the transactions demand

for money. Such regulatory changes might involve deleterious
microeconomic side-effects, but the central bank may be willing
to tolerate such inefficiencies in order to reap the benefits of
unanticipated inflation. Finally, depending on how the law is
structured, there is always the possibility that the legislature
will decide to back off and repeal the law if the central bank
ever actually inflates. In each of the scenarios described
above, one could argue that the central bank has some private
information about the disutility it will receive if it breaks the
law.

       In Barro's model, the cost to the central bank of breaking
its zero-inflation commitment takes on one of two extreme values:
zero or prohibitive. The central bank knows its cost type,
whereas the public only knows the distribution of types. Here I
modify Barro's model to allow the cost of reneging to take on a
continuum of values.
                                          44

     The policymaker has a finite-horizon loss function given by

          T
         =Z   L5(rt,rte,cfl3s ,            1/2   <   C 1,                (Al)
     L[n,(Ue),c] =          - [itt   -
                                         (Re)]    + f(ltt)2              (A2)

                                + tZ(c, itt, Tht_1, t—2'"),


where Z = c   if itt    0   and it_ =       0   for all i >0; Z =   0

otherwise. In other words, the central bank bears a fixed one-
time cost to reneging on its commitment never to inflate. (This
cost might be associated with the cost of repealing the law. One
way to justify the finite-horizon would be to assume that the law

has a known expiration date. Or, perhaps it is known that at
some future date, a new transactions technology will come on line

which will render meaningless the definition of money embodied in
the lawj2° As in Barro's and Tabellini's analyses, the public
does not directly observe c. At time zero, the public only knows
that c   [0,p.], where ' > 1; it has uniform priors over this

interval. In subsequent periods, the public uses Bayes rule to
update its priors in a manner we shall specify shortly.

     Because the central bank bears only a one-time fixed cost to

repealing its zero-inflation commitment, then it must be true
that (ne) =   it'   = 1 if rt        0   for any 5< t, where rt is the
(here unique) equilibrium level of inflation in the one-shot
game. After the central bank inflates once, the 3 function for
future periods (3 = 0) becomes common knowledge, and there is a

unique equilibrium because of the finite horizon. Thus if the
                                    45

central bank is going to inflate at all in the current period t,
then it should choose itt so as to minimize its current-period

loss function; expected future inflation will equal rL* for any
     0. Thus one can deduce


Proposition 1: t = 0        or itt = 1 for all t.



Proposition 1 holds, of course, only because of the special form
of the loss function (A2), in which it - 1e         enters linearly, and
in which 2 can only take on one of two values, c or 0.



Definition: 0t e c(ite)Iml,u_27.. .           0}
is the public's expectation of inflation in period t, given that
the central bank has not broken its commitment prior to t.

     Clearly a        1, since by proposition 1, it will equal zero or
one in any period t. Temporarily treating the path of a as
exogenous, we can calculate the loss to the central bank if it
follows a strategy of setting it = 0 in periods 0 through t -       1,
and it = 1 in periods t through T:


                                                    1
     I'(t,c) =2 a5 + 13t[(c - 1)12 + at] + 42             ,          (A3)
                 C.
                                                    ttl



Note that F(t,c) is continuous and monotonically increasing in c.
From (A3), we can immediately deduce two important facts: First,
                                        46

Proposition 2: If t = 0 for all t < T, then ItT = 1 if c C 1,
and itT = 0 if c    1.


Proposition 2 follows from (A3); r(T,c)                     E           as c      1. In
other words, if the cost to the central bank of breaking its

commitment is less than one, then it will certainly be inflating

by the final period T. Conversely, we can similarly deduce that
no type c > 1 will inflate for the first time in the final period

T. However, without further restrictions on (a}, we cannot yet
rule out the possibility that types c > 1 will begin inflating
before period T. This point will turn out to be crucial in our
later discussion of the uniqueness of equilibrium.

     We can also deduce from (A3) that a high cost type would

never begin inflating in an earlier period than a low cost type

would. Holding {a} fixed, the higher the cost to the central
bank of breaking its commitment, the more incentive it has to
wait to incur this cost.



Proposition 3:     [r(t11c2) —       I'(t2,c2)]   > [r(t1,c1) —               r(t2,c1)],
for c2 > c1 and t2 > t1.


Proposition 3 follows immediately from the fact that


     [r(t1,c1) —   r(t2,c1)]     —
                                      [F(t1,c2)       —
                                                           r(t21c2)]      =

                                             (1   —                 —
                                                          13m)(ci       c2)    c 0,    (A4)
                                             47

for 3 C 1, where m t2 -                4.
      With   the above results, we are now prepared to discuss the

evolution of 0t. In a sequential equilibrium, the public's
beliefs must evolve according to Bayes rule, so that


         =         -
             (ôt       ôt_l)/(ls   -
                                       at_i),                               (AS)



where ô E sup{ô           [O,u]Ic < a implies F(t + i,c) > r(t,c)
for all i such that 0 < i              T -   t].
     Thus all types c < at will begin inflating in period t if
they have not already begun inflating in an earlier period. The
denominator of (AS) represents the range of cost types which the
public believes would not have inflated prior to period t. The
numerator represents the range of cost types which the public
believes will inflate for the first time in period t (in which
case they will set it =       1).       (AS) gives the expected inflation
rate, conditional on past inflation being uniformly zero, because
the public has uniform priors over c. Since proposition 3
implies that & must be nondecreasing in t, (A5) is the only
possible form for rational expectations.

     It is natural to look for an equilibrium in which                 = 1.
For if the time horizon were only one period (T =            0),   then the
unique sequential equilibrium would obviously be [by
proposition 2 and (AS)], a = 1/j.i. and a = 1.          If the cost to the
central bank of breaking its commitment is greater than one, then
it will not inflate even in a one-shot game. In a multi-period
                                   48

game, the central bank must bear an additional cost if it

inflates before period T. For then the central bank not only has
to bear the one-time reneging cost, c, but it also must live with

high expected inflation (rte = 1) in all future periods.

      We will proceed by showing that a necessary and sufficient
condition for a sequential equilibrium with 8T = 1 is that the

path of Ôt must be governed by the recursion relationship


r(t,a) -   lit   +   1,a)   > 0, if ôt =   0,
                            = 0, if ô >    0.                   (A6)



      That the recursion (A6) is a sufficient condition for

equilibrium is a straightforward consequence of proposition 3
together with the continuity of r in c; the proof will be

ornmitted. [The proof involves showing that when faced with

expectations of inflation governed by (AS) and (A6), all types
c C     would prefer to first inflate in period t over first

inflating in some future period, and that no type c > â would
prefer to begin inflating on or before date t.]
      To demonstrate that (A6) is a necessary condition for a

sequential equilibrium with aT = 1, we first prove that if there
is a sequence of periods during which some types first inflate,

then this sequence cannot be followed by a period(s) where no
type would begin inflating. We then show that (A6) must hold

with equality during any period prior to T in which some types

would begin inflating.
                                   49



Lemma 1: In any sequential equilibrium where        u > at > at-i. for
any t C T, then



Comment: The proof of Lemma 1 requires our assumption in (Al)
that 3 > 1/2.

Proof: Suppose, in contradiction to the Lemma, that there is
some time t < T such that          =    >   at_i. Now this cannot be
an equilibrium unless r(t,at) lit + 1,o) and, by (AS),
     = 0. But by (A3), if    = 0, then



     r'(t,a) nt + i,a) =
          N   1 +      + )/2 - 6N 1 + a)/2.                       (A7)



But the RHS of (A7) must be positive for ô ? 0 if        > 1/2.


Proposition 4:      (A6) must hold with equality in any period t such
that Ôt_i < a <           for t C T.

Proof: In any such period t, there must exist some a > 0, s.t.
for 0 C 8 C a, any type a ô inflates first in period t, and
any type a + ô inflates first in period t + 1. The proposition
then follows from the fact that n'(t,c) is continuous and

monotonically increasing in c.

     Lemma 1 and proposition 4 together imply that (A6) must hold
during any period t C T such that a > 0. That (A6) must hold
with inequality over the initial periods where a = 0 can be
                                               50

confirmed directly from (A3).
       We are now ready to characterize the equilibrium governed by

(A6). Combining (A3) and (A6), we obtain


       [—   1   + ât(1 —   f3)]/2    =   °t+1        —    1).                              (AS)



Substituting (A5) into (AS) yields 21


 ât+l =     F(at)   =

  [( - 1)/2J(ât)2           + ([j(l -      )+            13/2)ot + (i -      u/2).         (A9)



Via direct differentiation, we can confirm that paths which obey
(A9) also satisfy Lemma 1:



       dôt+i/dat = [js(1 —           )+   1 —       2(1    —
                                                                13)ât]/213 > 0,            (AlO)



since t > 1, and Ôt             1 if ÔT = 1.


       To prove existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium
characterized by the fundamental recursion (A6) (together with
the terminal condition ÔT =              1),    we invert eq. (A9) to solve for
ô in terms of


at =   F3(ôt+i)      =   [u(1   —    )+   111(2 —2)
        ([u(1—) + i]2 —                                    —
                                                                is(213—1H}1/(2    —
                                    4(1—)[2i3at+i                                     2f3). (All)
                                       51

 From (All), it is readily confirmed that if          p. >   1 and 3 >   1/2,
 then for 0   Ôt÷l S 1, F1 has exactly one real root less than
 one. Moreover, F(at+i) <                   [this also follows directly from
(AlO)]. By (A6), an eguilibriun path is governed by (A9) only
where a > o. Tracing the equilibrium backwards from time
                                                         T, if
there comes a point where â1.1 is such that F2(at+i) < 0, then
   = 0 for all s S t. That this is indeed
                                           an equilibrium is
readily confirmed. By (A9), or by (All), F' c 0 if and only if


     Ct+l <   - p.12(3.
                                                                         (A12)


By setting ôt = 0 and °t+l =        ôt+l/u    in (A8), we see that
condition (A12) provides the maximum level of â1 such that a
type zero would not choose to inflate for the first time at t.
The equilibriujn is unique because along the path obtained by

using (All) to trace back from              = 1, there is only one a > 0

such that (A12) holds. This rules any path where a type zero
waits even longer to first inf late, so that ô jumps directly from
a = 0 to some higher a on the path leading
                                           up to               =   1.
     To prove existence, it is sufficient to show that when we
trace (All) backwards from time T, there can only be a finite
number of periods where a > 0. From (AlO), we have


                 =   — (1   —
                                t3)/(3 < 0.                               (A13)


By (Ala) and (A13), F"(at+i) > 0. This implies that
                                52

CT_k - CT_k_i is increasing in k; as as we solve for the path of

ô working backwards from the terminal condition CT = 1, c must
indeed become zero in finite time. Thus an equilibrium always

exists. It also follows that if the time horizon T is long
enough, then there will be no chance of inflation early on in the
policymakers' term.

     Figure 1 presents a graph of eq. (A9), and traces out the
equilibriun path leading to the terminal condition, CT = 1.     The
condition 1 > 1/2 insures that the curve intersects the â4.1 axis
at a positive value. The condition 1 > ji. - u/213 insures that the

     intercept is less than one. [From (A12), this is the
necessary and sufficient condition for ÔT_1 > 0.1
     An immediate implication of Lemma 1 together with equation
(A8) is ds/dt > 0 for a > 0. Whether or not a given cost type

chooses to initiate inflation in any given period depends on the
opportunity cost. The higher         the lower the opportunity
cost to inflating in the current period. It does not take as
high a      to tempt a low cost type to begin inflation. Over
time, a must rise so that higher and higher cost types are
tempted to break away. This scenario is somewhat different than
the one in Barro (1986), which was discussed in section III.

Observe that by (A8) and (A13), a rises at a decreasing rate.
    We have shown that there exists a unique sequential
equilibrium with ÔT = 1.   Can there exist other sequential
equilibria with ÔT    1? Candidate equilibria with ÔT < 1 are
ruled out by proposition 3. And candidate equilibria with
                                      a
                           Figure 1


e tt 1

   1




                                   p.'

                                          at




         a
             6T-3' C1-1,   a0=o.
                                 53

1 < CT < i' are ruled out by applying propositions 3 together with
Lemma 1. Proposition 3 states that no type c > 1 will ever first

inflate in the final period, and Lemma 1 proves that if Ôzp C is,

then some types must inflate for the first time in the final

period. However, the results contained in this appendix are

insufficient to preclude sequential equilibrium paths in which
ÔT = s. Suppose, for example, that the time horizon, T, is very
large, and the public's beliefs are: (The)0 = 1, and       = 1 for

all 1 S s < T. If the policymaker does not inflate in period 0,
he will, by (A2), suffer a loss of 1 in period zero. If c > 1,
this loss is less than the loss he receives by inflating in

period 0, 1/2 + c/2. However, if the public maintains its
beliefs, he will lose 1 again in period 1. This is greater than
his loss would be in period 1 had he inflated in period zero

(1/2). He will be worse off (by 1/2) in each ensuing period
until he gives in. Hence, if the policymaker does not inflate in
period 0, it may still be rational for the public to believe that

he will inflate for certain in period 1. For any value of ji,

there   is a T large enough so that this type of equilibrium cannot
be ruled out as sequential. (Conversely, for any T, there is a is
large enough so that the equilibrium is unique.) Note that we
could definitely preclude such equilibria if the public's priors
are that c is uniformly distributed on [0,1] with probability

1/(1 + is), and c = Co with probability is/(1 + is).   In this case,

which would be more directly analogous to the model of Milgrom

and Roberts (1982), the unique sequential equilibrium is the one
                               54

illustrated in figure 1.) If there is a second equilibriwn in
pure strategies, then it may not be possible to rule out mixed
strategy equilibria.

     The basic problem is that the sequential equilibrium concept
does not place constraints on how the public must interpret

events which occur with probability measure zero on the
equilibrium path. Unless some types c > 1 are "robots" (as is
the case where c = — is a possibility), then their actions can be

influenced by bizarre public beliefs. It is possible, however,
that one may be able to rule out the "perverse" equilibrium

described above by appealing to a refinement of sequential
equilibrium.22

     In conclusion, I should point out that although the finite-
horizon model discussed in this appendix improves on earlier

models in a couple of dimensions, it still shares some of their

major deficiencies (as discussed in section II of the text). In
particular, if different types of policymakers have different
preferences instead of different costs to breaking commitments,
then there might exist separating equilibria in which some types
deflate. In a more general setting, there may well be other ways

for types to separate themselves. Also, it is difficult to take

the finite-horizon assumption literally, and some of the results
may be sensitive to this assumption.
                               55

                            FOOTNOTES




1. Fischer (1986) and Cukierman (1985) have recently provided
excellent surveys of the monetary policy credibility literature.
The emphasis here is quite different, and therefore this study
should be viewed as a complement rather than a substitute for
these earlier surveys.

2. See Kydland and Prescott (1977), and Calvo (1978). Phelps
(1967), and Phelps and Pollak (1968) anticipated some of the
basic themes underlying the modern time consistency literature.
3. For a discussion of the relationship between time consistency
and subgame perfection, see Fershtman (1986). Subgame perfect
equilibrium (or more generally, sequential equilibrium), will be
the equilibrium construct used here.
4.   It is possible to restate the analysis below in terms of an
overlapping generations version of the model pesented in section
I of Fischer's (1986) survey. For efforts along these lines, see
Atkeson (1986) or Kehoe (1985).

5. In the underlying structural model, money can have real
effects either because of confusion between local and aggregate
disturbances, or because there are imperfectly-indexed wage
contracts. In the former case, there must be a temporal lag in
the diffusion of aggregate information.
6.  It is difficult to argue that anticipated inflation has an
effect of the same order of magnitude as unanticipated inflation.
(There are the "shoe-leather" costs resulting from lower holdings
of real money balances. Also, there may be some activities, such
as income tax accounting, which are costly to properly index.)
Our analysis does not require that the welfare effect of
anticipated inflation be large.

7. The specification (1), though used throughout the literature,
is not entirely satisfactory for stochastic versions of the
model. For then, if the level of inflation and the aggregate
prediction error do affect the individual's utility function
(because of externalities), he must take into account the
covariance of these factors with his own price prediction error.
                                     56

8. In a stochastic version of the model, the central bank may
choose to cause price-prediction errors, though private sector
expectations will be correct on average. [See Barro and Gordon
(1983a) or Rogoff (1985b).]

9. Because f", g" > 0, the same results would obtain if we
replaced (4) with the weaker c9ndition: (ne) = ft if
               , and (ne) = it otherwise. In the private
information example studied in section IV, it is necessary to
make this modification.
10.   If f() =   (it - e   -   k)2, g() = it2, and   3 =   1,   then ft = 0 is
a trigger-strategy equilibrium under (4).
11. It is easy to prove that zero inflation is always attainable
if the time interval between periods is small enough, provided
that the length of the punishment interval is unrestricted. In
(1) and (2), we have arbitrarily set the time interval at one.
As the interval approaches zero, the transitory output gains from
defecting become very short lived, whereas the punishment can be
held constant. [Grossman and Van Huyck make this point in the
context of an optimal seigniorage model. Their result requires
the restriction that there be some maximum rate at which the
central bank can print money. However, the constraint is not
binding along the equilibrium path, unless one introduces private
information as in section IV.] Hence, if one chooses to
rationalize (1) and (2) via an islands model, then a zero
inflation rate is always attainable unless there is an explicit
time lag in the diffusion of aggregate information.

12. Again, it is possible to define defections in terms of
inequalities instead of equalities, but this does not make any
qualitative difference in the case of symmetric information.
13. Some have criticized Barro and Gordon's trigger-strategy
equilibrium as being subject to a "free rider" problem. This
criticism is not well-founded.   As the discussion in the text
makes clear, the equilibrium is indeed Nash. There might be a
free rider problem if it was necessary to raise funds to improve
coordination of private-sector expectations.
14.   whether the central bank actually has any private
macroeconomic information is debatable. If the central bank's
forecast of money demand is based entirely on publicly available
data, then the private sector should be able to construct the
same forecast. It might be argued that the central bank has much
faster access to data on bank deposits, and that this information
is only released to the public with a long lag. Of course, if
the central bank does not discount the future too heavily, then
even the lagged release of data is still sufficient to have
trigger-strategy equilibria similar to those analyzed in section
II.
                                  57

15. The Keynesian flavor of Canzoneri'.s analysis is not an
essential ingredient. Barro and Gordon (1983a) discuss how to
extend their model to the case where the monetary authority has
imperfect control over the inflation rate, and where its control
error is private information. They, too, consider the class of
equilibria identified by Green and Porter (1984). In their
paper, however, they do not present their formal results.
16. Canzoneri only presents the first-order conditions necessary
to sustain an equilibrium with zero expected inflation. The
second-order conditions obtain because of restrictions on the
concavity of the distribution function of the monetary
authorities' forecast error.

17. Roberds (1985) gives a political interpretation to his model
of "stochastic replanning", in which the preferences of the
government randomly evolve over time. Alesina and Tabellini
(1985) provide a framework for analyzing the case where competing
political interests control different aspects of macroeconomic
policy.
18. Oudiz and Sachs (1985) consider repeated game solution
concepts in a two-country framework. In their example, and in
the stochastic version of Rogoff (1985a), cooperation between
governments can be beneficial.

19. The general approach builds on that of Milgrom and Roberts
(1982). Wood (1986) has applied the Milgrom-Roberts model to the
problem of speculative attacks in the foreign exchange market.
20. The analysis would only have to be modified slightly if the
fixed cost to inflating had to be paid every period that the
central bank inflates. To allow for the case where the cost of
inflating depends on the level of inflation would have to involve
a more substantial modification.

21. If we modify the analysis so that Z(rt) = c for it  0,
for any history of it,the recursion equation (A8) becomes
(Fl) Ct+l =      — (1/2)}   +   [(ji + 1)/213]at   —
                                                       (at)2/2
There exists a sequential equilibrium very similar to the one
analyzed in the main text.

22. See, for example, Cho and Kreps (1986).
                                 58

                             REFERENCES


Abreu, D.
     (1982)      Repeated Games with Discounting: A General Theory
                 and an Application to Oligopoly, mimeo, Princeton
                 University.
_________     Pierce, D. and Stacchetti, E.
     (1985)      Optimal Cartel Equilibria with Imperfect
                 Monitoring, mimeo, Harvard University.
Alesina, A.
     (1985)      Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a
                 Repeated Game, mimeo, Harvard University.
_________ and Tabellini, G.
     (1985)      Rules and Discretion with Non-coordinated Monetary
                 and Fiscal Policies, mimeo, Harvard University.
Atkeson, A.
     (1986)     Reputation and Time Consistency in a Macro Model,
                mimeo, Stanford University.
Axelrod, R.
     (1984)     The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic
                Books.

Backus, D. and Driff ill, 3.
      (1985)    Inflation and Reputation, American Economic
                Review, 75: 530—538.
Barro, R.J.
     (1983)     Inflationary Finance under Discretion and Rules,
                Canadian Journal of Economics, 16: 1-16.
     (1986)     Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy with
                Incomplete Information, Journal of Monetary
                Economics, 17: 3-20.
__________ and Gordon, D.B.
     (1983a)   Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of
               Monetary Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics,
               12: 101—121.

__________ and __________
     (1983b)   A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
               Rate Model, Journal of Political Economy, 91: 589-
                 610.

Benoit, J.P. and Krishna, V.
     (1985)    Finitely Repeated Games, Econoinetrica, 53: 905-
                922.
                                   59
Calvo, C.
     (1978)       on the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a
                  Monetary Economy, Econometrica, 46: 1411-1428.
Canzoneri, M.B.
     (1985)       Monetary Policy Games and the Role of Private
                  Information, American Economic Review, 75: 1056-
                  1070.

Cho, I.K. and Kreps, D.
     (1986)    Signalling Games and Stable Equilibria, Quarterly
               Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Crawford, V.P.
     (1985)       Dynamic Games and Dynamic Contract Theory, Journal
                  of Conflict Resolution, 29: 195-224.
Cukierman, A.                                                -


     (1985)       Central Bank Behavior and Credibility - Some
                  Recent Developments, mimeo, Tel-Aviv University.

_________ and Meltzer, A.H.
     (1986)       A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility and Inflation
                  Under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,
                  Econometrica, forthcoming.
Fershtman, C.
     (1986)       Fixed Rules and Decision Rules: Time Consistency
                  and Subgame Perfection, mimeo, Hebrew University.
Fischer, S.
     (1986)       Time Consistent Monetary and Fiscal Policies: A
                  Survey, mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of
                  Technology.
Friedman, J.W.
     (1971)       A Noncooperative Equilibrium for Supergames,
                  Review of Economic Studies, 38: 861-874.

     (1985)       Cooperative Equilibria in Finite Horizon
                  Noncooperative Supergames, Journal of Economic
                  Theory, 35: 390—398.
Green, E.3. and Porter, R.H.
     (1984)    Noncooperative Collusion Under Imperfect Price
               Information, Econometrica, 52: 87-100.
Grossman, H.I. and Van Huyck, J.B.
     (1986)    Seignorage, Inflation, and Reputation, Journal of
               Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
                                   60
Gui,   F., Sonnenschein, H. and Wilson, R.
       (1986)    Foundations of Dynamic Monopoly and the Coase
                 Conjecture, Journal of Economic Theory, 38,
                 forthcoming.
Horn, H. and Persson, T.
     (1985)    Exchange Rate Policy, Wage Formation and
               Credibility, Institute for International Studies
               Seminar Paper No. 325, Stockholm.
Kehoe, P.
       (1985)    Sequential Coordination of Policies May Make
                 Things Worse, mimeo, University of Minnesota.
Kreps, D.M. and Wilson, R.
     (1982)    Reputation and Imperfect Information, Journal of
               Economic Theory, 27: 253-279.
Kydland, F.E. and Prescott, E.C.
     (1977)    Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
               Optimal Plans, Journal of Political Economy, 85:
               473—492.

Milgrom, P. and Roberts, 3.
     (1982)    Predation, Reputation, and Entry Deterence,
               Journal of Economic Theory, 27: 280-312.
Oudiz, G. and Sachs, J.
     (1985)    International Policy Coordination in Dynamic
               Macroeconomic Models, in W. Buiter and R. C.
               Marston (eds.), International Economic Policy
               Coordination. Cambridge: Cambridge University
               Press.

Phelps, E.S.
       (1967)    Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and
                 Optimal Employment Over Time, Economica, 34: 254-
                 281.

________and Pollak, R.A.
     (1968)    Second-Best National Saving and Game-Equilibrium
               Growth," Review of Economic Studies, 2: 185-199.

Roberds, W.
       (1985)    Models of Policy under Stochastic Replanning,
                 Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research
                 Department Working Paper 282.
Rogoff,   K.
       (1985a)   Can International Monetary Policy Cooperation be
                 Counterproductive? Journal of International
                 Economics, 18: 199-217.
                                   61



     (1985b)     The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an
                 Intermediate Monetary Target, Quarterly Journal of
                 Economics, 100: 1169—1189.

__________ and Sibert, A.
     (1986)    Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles,
               National Bureau of Economic Research Working
               Paper No. 1838.

Rubinstein, A.
     (1985)      Finite Automata Play the Repeated Prisoner's
                 Dilemma, Journal of Economic Theory, 38,
                 forthcoming.

Stanford, W.G.
     (1986)      On Continuous Reaction Function Equilibria in
                 Duopoly Supergames with Mean Payoffs, Journal of
                 Economic Theory, 38, forthcoming.
Tabellini, G.
     (1983)      Accomodative Monetary Policy and Central Bank
                 Reputation, mimeo, UCLA.
Vickers, J.
     (1986)      signalling in a Model of Monetary Policy with
                 Incomplete Information, mimeo, Oxford University.
Wood, P.R.
     (1986)      Defending a Fixed Exchange Rate: The Central
                 Bank's Reputation and the Deterrence of
                 Speculative Attacks on its Foreign Reserves, Ph.D.
                 dissertation, University of Wisconsin.




                                                                      —ç
