NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HIGH DISCOUNTS AND HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT
Robert E. Hall
Working Paper 19871
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19871
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

The Hoover Institution supported this research. The research is also part of the National Bureau of
Economic Research's Economic Fluctuations and Growth Program. I am grateful to Jules van Binsbergen,
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, John Cochrane, Loukas Karabarbounis, Ian Martin, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau,
Leena Rudanko, Martin Schneider, and Eran Yashiv for helpful comments, and to Petrosky-Nadeau
for providing helpful advice and historical data on vacancies and Steve Hipple of the BLS for supplying
unpublished tabulations of the CPS tenure survey. Complete backup for all of the calculations is available
from my website, stanford.edu/~rehall. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

High Discounts and High Unemployment
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 19871
January 2014, Revised September 2014
JEL No. E24,E32,G12
ABSTRACT
In recessions, all types of investment fall, including employers' investment in job creation. The stock
market falls more than in proportion to corporate profit. The discount rate implicit in the stock market
rises, and discounts for other claims on business income also rise. According to the leading view of
unemployment–the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model–when the incentive for job creation falls,
the labor market slackens and unemployment rises. Employers recover their investments in job creation
by collecting a share of the surplus from the employment relationship. The value of that flow falls
when the discount rate rises. Thus high discount rates imply high unemployment. This paper does
not explain why the discount rate rises so much in recessions. Rather, it shows that the rise in unemployment
makes perfect economic sense in an economy where, for some reason, the discount rises substantially
in recessions.
Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com

The search-and-matching paradigm has come to dominate theories of movements of unemployment, because it has more to say about the phenomenon than merely interpreting
unemployment as the difference between labor supply and labor demand. The ideas of
Diamond, Mortensen, and Pissarides promise a deeper understanding of fluctuations in unemployment, most recently following the worldwide financial crisis that began in late 2008.
But connecting the crisis to high unemployment according to the principles of the DMP
model has proven a challenge.
In a nutshell, the DMP model relates unemployment to job-creation incentives. When the
payoff to an employer from taking on new workers declines, employers put fewer resources into
recruiting new workers. Unemployment then rises and new workers become easier to find.
Hiring returns to its normal level, so unemployment stabilizes at a higher level and remains
there until job-creation incentives return to normal. This mechanism rests on completely
solid ground.
The question about the model that is unresolved today, 20 years after the publication
of the canon of the model, Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), is: What force depresses the
payoff to job creation in recessions? In that paper, and in hundreds of successor papers, the
force is a drop in productivity. But that characterization runs into three problems: First,
unemployment did not track the movements of productivity in the last three recessions in
the United States. Second, as Shimer (2005) showed, the model, with realistic parameter
values, implies tiny movements in unemployment in response to large changes in productivity.
Third, productivity evolves as a random walk, and the DMP model predicts no response of
unemployment to the innovations in a random walk.
This paper considers a different driving force, the discount rate employers apply to
the stream of benefits they receive from a new hire. Discount rates rise dramatically in
recessions—a recent paper by two financial economists finds “...value-maximizing managers
face much higher risk-adjusted cost of capital in their investment decisions during recessions
than expansions” (Lustig and Verdelhan (2012)).
A simple model lays out the issues. The economy follows a Markov process between a
normal state, numbered i = 1, and a depressed state, numbered i = 2. I pick parameter
values to approximate the U.S. labor market. The probability of exiting the normal state is
π1 = 0.0083 per month and the probability of exiting the depressed state is π2 = 0.017 per
month. The expected duration of a spell in the normal state is 10 years and the expected

2

duration in the depressed state is 5 years. A worker has productivity 1 and receives a wage
w = 0.94. Workers separate from their jobs with monthly hazard s = 0.035. Agents discount
future profit 1 − w at the rate ri , with r1 = 0.0083 (10 percent per year) and r2 = 0.042 (50
percent per year). The value of a worker to a firm is
J1 =

1
{1 − w + (1 − s)[(1 − π1 )J1 + π1 J2 ]}
1 + r1

(1)

and similarly for J2 . The solution is J1 = 1.29 and J2 = 0.87.
The labor market operates according to the search-and-matching principles of DMP. The
matching function is Cobb-Douglas with equal elasticities for vacancies and unemployment.
The monthly cost of maintaining a vacancy is c = 1.53 . The market is in equilibrium when
the cost of recruiting a worker equals the value of the worker:
cT1 = J1

(2)

and similarly for i = 2. The expected duration of a vacancy is Ti months (T1 = 0.85
months and T2 = 0.57 months). The job-finding rate is fi = µ2 Ti , where µ is the efficiency
parameter of the matching function. Its values are f1 = 0.66 and f2 = 0.44. The stationary
unemployment rate is
ui =

s
,
s + fi

(3)

with u1 = 5.1 percent and u2 = 7.4 percent.
Unemployment rises in the depressed state because of the higher discount rate. This
paper is about the depressing effect in the labor market of higher discounts. Two major
research topics arise. First, I demonstrate that Nash bargaining cannot determine the wage.
Not only must the wage be less responsive to the tightness of the labor market than it would
be with Nash bargaining—a point well understood since Shimer (2005)—but the wage must
move in proportion to productivity. This finding is new. The proportionality property finds
support in an important new paper, Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2014), on the
time-series behavior of the opportunity cost of labor to the household.
Second, I demonstrate that the increase in the discount rate needed to generate a realistic
increase in unemployment in a depressed period is probably substantial, in excess of any
increase in real interest rates. Thus the paper needs to document high discount rates in
depressed times.
The causal chain I have in mind is that some event creates a financial crisis, in which risk
premiums rise so discount rates rise, asset values fall, and all types of investment decline. In
3

particular, the value that employers attribute to a new hire declines on account of the higher
discount rate. Investment in hiring falls and unemployment rises. Of course, a crisis results in
lower discount rates for safe flows—the yield on 5-year U.S. Treasury notes fell essentially to
zero soon after the crisis of late 2008. The logic pursued here is that the flow of benefits from
a newly hired worker has financial risk comparable to corporate earnings, so the dramatic
widening of the equity premium that occurred in the crisis implied higher discounting of
benefit flows from workers at the same time that safe flows from Treasurys received lower
discounting. In the crisis, investors tried to shift toward safe returns, resulting in lower
equity prices from higher discount rates and higher Treasury prices from lower discounts. In
other words, the driving force for high unemployment is a substantial widening of the risk
premium for the future stream of contributions a new hire makes to an employer.
Appendix A discusses some of the large number of earlier contributions to the DMP and
finance literatures relevant to the ideas in this paper. The proposition that the discount rate
affects unemployment is not new. Rather, the paper’s contribution is to connect the labor
market to the finance literature on the volatility of discount rates in the stock market and
to identify parameters of wage determination that square with the high response of unemployment to discount fluctuations and the low response of unemployment to productivity
fluctuations.
The paper makes a couple of side contributions to the empirical foundations of the DMP
model. First, it measures the separation hazard as a function of tenure and shows that it
declines rapidly, contrary to the universal assumption in DMP modeling that the hazard is
constant with tenure. Second, it shows that the average productivity per worker, the driving
force in the canonical DMP model, is a random walk, and therefore is an unlikely candidate
to serve as a driving force.

1

The Job Value

The job value J is the present value, using the appropriate discount rate, of the flow benefit
that an employer gains from an added worker, measured as of the time the worker begins
the job. A key idea in this paper is that information from the labor market—the duration of
the typical vacancy—reveals a financial valuation that is hard to measure in any other way.

4

1.1

The job value and equilibrium in the labor market

The incentive for a firm to recruit a new worker is the present value of the difference between
the marginal benefit that the worker will bring to the firm and the compensation the worker
will receive. In equilibrium, with free entry to job creation, that present value will equal
the expected cost of recruitment. The cost depends on conditions in the labor market,
measured by the number of job openings or vacancies, V , and the flow of hiring, H. A good
approximation, supported by extensive research on random search and matching, is that the
cost of recruiting a worker is
c
κ+ .
q

(4)

Here x is labor productivity and q is the vacancy-filling rate, H/V . The reciprocal of the
vacancy-filling rate 1/q is the expected time to fill a vacancy, so the parameter c is the perperiod cost of holding a vacancy open, stated in labor units. To simplify notation, I assume
that the costs are paid at the end of the period. The equilibrium condition is
κ+

c
¯
= J.
q

(5)

J¯ is the present value of the new worker to the employer. I let J = J¯ − κ, the net present
value of the worker to the employer, so the equilibrium condition becomes
c
= J.
q

(6)

The DMP literature uses the vacancy/unemployment ratio θ = V /U as the measure of
tightness. Under the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas matching function with equal elasticities
√
for unemployment and vacancies (hiring flow = µ U V ), the vacancy-filling rate is
q = µθ−0.5 .

1.2

(7)

Pre- and post-contract costs

The DMP model rests on the equilibrium condition that the employer anticipates a net
benefit of zero from starting the process of job creation. An employer considering recruiting
a new worker expects that the costs sunk at the time of hiring will be offset by the excess of
the worker’s contribution over the wage during the ensuing employment relationship. The
model makes a distinction between costs that the employer incurs to recruit job candidates
and costs incurred to train and equip a worker. In the case that an employer incurs training
5

costs, say K, immediately upon hiring a new worker, and then anticipates a present value J˜
from the future flow benefit—the difference x − w between productivity and the wage—the
equilibrium condition would be
c
J˜ − K − = 0.
q

(8)

In this case, the job value considered here would be the net, pre-training value, J = J˜ − K.
The job value J˜ rises by the amount K when the training cost is sunk.
Notice that training costs have a role similar to that of the constant element of recruiting,
κ. The definition of J used here isolates a version of the job value that is easy to observe and
moves the hard-to-measure elements to the right-hand side. Thus training and other startup
costs and the fixed component of recruiting cost are deductions from the present value of
x − w in forming J as it is defined here.
Costs not yet incurred at the time that the worker and employer make a wage bargain
are a factor in that bargain. The employer cannot avoid the pre-contract cost of recruiting,
whereas the post-contract training and other startup costs are offset by a lower wage and so
fall mainly on the worker under a standard calibration of the bargaining problem.

2
2.1

Discount Rates
Discount rates and the stochastic discount factor

Let Yt be the market value of a claim to the future cash flows from one unit of an asset,
where the asset pays off ρτ yt+τ units of consumption in future periods, τ = 1, 2, . . . . The
sequence ρτ describes the shrinkage in the number of units of the asset that occurs each
period, normalized as ρ1 = 1. Let mt,t+τ be the marginal rate of substitution or stochastic
discount factor between periods t and t + τ . Then the price is
Yt = Et mt,t+1 yt+1 + ρ2 Et mt,t+2 yt+2 + · · · .

(9)

The discount rate for a cash receipt τ periods in the future is the ratio of the expected value
of the receipt to its discounted value, stated at a per-period rate, less one:

ry,t,τ =

Et yt+τ
Et mt,t+τ yt+τ

1/τ
− 1.

(10)

For assets with cash payoffs extending not too far into the future, the assumption of a
constant discount rate may be a reasonable approximation: ry,t,τ does not depend on τ . In
6

that case, the value of the asset is
Yt =

Et yt+1
Et yt+2
+ ρ2
+ ··· .
1 + ry,t
(1 + ry,t )2

(11)

And if yt is a random walk,

Yt = y t


1
1
+ ρ2
+ ··· .
1 + ry,t
(1 + ry,t )2

(12)

Given the current asset price Yt and current cash yield, yt , one can calculate the discount
rate as the unique root of this equation.
Risky assets are those whose values are depressed by the adverse correlation of their
returns with marginal utility, with high returns when marginal utility is low and low returns
when it is high. They suffer discounts in market value relative to expected payoffs. Two
important principles flow from this analysis. First, each kind of asset has is own discount
rate. The stochastic discounter is the same for all assets, but the discount rate depends on
the correlation of an asset’s payoffs with the stochastic discounter. Second, discounts vary
over time. They are not fixed characteristics of assets.

2.2

Expected future values

Later in the paper I will show that productivity per worker, xt , is a trended random walk.
Exploiting this fact simplifies this paper’s model considerably. Productivity is a state variable
of the model. I assume that all of the variables taking the form of values are proportional
to x. I further assume that the only expected change in the economy is the trend growth in
productivity—the discount rate is a random walk. Later I discuss the foundations for these
assumptions. I derive the model under the normalization that x = 1. To put it differently,
average output per worker is the numeraire of the economy. The growth rate of the trend in
productivity is g, so, for example,
Et Jt+τ = (1 + g)τ Jt .

(13)

All of the discounted variables in the model grow at rate g, so growth and discounting can
be combined in a growth-adjusted discount,
rJ − g
.
1+g

7

(14)

2.3

The discount rate in the DMP model

For a firm’s investment in an employment relationship, the asset price is the job value, Jt .
For what follows, it is convenient to break the job value into the difference between the
present value of a worker’s productivity and the present value of wages:
J = P (rP ) − W (rW ).

(15)

In view of the assumption that the variables in the model are expected to remain unchanged
except for trend productivity growth, I drop the time subscript at this point. In general, the
discount rate for productivity, rP , and the discount rate for wages, rW , are different. Under
the assumptions that make all the values proportional to productivity, it seems reasonable
to assume that the two discount rates are the same. I denote their common value, adjusted
for growth, as r.
Forming the present value of productivity, P , requires the survival probability of a job—
the probability that a worker will remain on the job τ periods after being hired. Let ρτ
denote this probability. Let ητ be the probability that a job ends τ periods after it starts.
The survival probability is
ρτ = ητ +1 + ητ +2 + . . . .

(16)

The function for the present value of productivity is
P (r) =

1
1
1
+ ρ1
+
ρ
+ ···
2
1+r
(1 + r)2
(1 + r)3

(17)

One natural approach would be to form the present value of the wage, W (r), the same
way, based on the observed wage. I discuss the obstacles facing this approach later in the
paper. Instead, I use a model of wage formation to construct the function.

2.4

The present value of the wage of a newly hired worker

The original DMP model adopted the Nash bargain as the principle of wage formation. It
posits that a bargaining worker regards the alternative to the bargain to be returning to
unemployment. Shimer (2005) uncovered the deficiency of the resulting model. The Nashbargained wage is quite sensitive to the job-finding rate—if another job opportunity is easy
to find, the Nash bargain rewards the worker with a high wage. Hall and Milgrom (2008)
generalized the Nash bargain along the lines of the alternating-offer bargaining protocol of
Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1985). Our paper points out that a jobseeker’s threat to break
8

off wage bargaining and to continue to search is not credible, because the employer—in the
environment described in the basic DMP model with homogeneous workers—always has an
interest in making a wage offer that beats the jobseeker’s option of breaking off bargaining.
Similarly, the jobseeker always has an interest in making an offer to the employer that beats
the employer’s option of breaking off bargaining and forgoing any profit from the employment
opportunity. Neither party, acting rationally, would disclaim the employment bargain when
doing so throws away the joint value. We alter the bargaining setup in an otherwise standard
DMP model to characterize the alternative open to a worker upon receiving a wage offer
as making a counteroffer, rather than disclaiming the bargain altogether and returning to
search. Employers also have the option of making a counteroffer to an offer from a jobseeker.
Our paper shows that the resulting bargain remains sensitive to productivity but loses most
of its sensitivity to labor-market tightness, because that sensitivity arises in the Nash setup
only because of the unrealistic role of the non-credible threat to break off bargaining and
return to searching.
The model generates complete insulation from market conditions in its simplest form.
Our credible-bargaining model adds a parameter, called δ, which is the per-period probability
that some external event will destroy the job opportunity and send the jobseeker back into
the unemployment pool. If that probability is zero, the model delivers maximal insulation
from tightness, whereas if it is one, the alternating-offer model is the same as the Nash
bargaining model with equal bargaining weights. Notice the key distinction between a sticky
wage—one less responsive to all of its determinants—and a tightness-insulated wage. The
latter responds substantially to driving forces by attenuating the Nash bargain’s linkage of
wages to the ease of finding jobs. Something like the tightness-insulated wage is needed
to rationalize the strong relation between the discount rate and the unemployment rate
discussed in this paper. With δ = 0, tightness-insulation is maximal.
I sketch the model here in a simple version—see our paper and Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1985) for deeper explanations. A crucial and realistic simplification is the assumption
that productivity evolves as a random walk whose trend is absorbed into the discount rate.
Current values and expected future values of the variables that move in proportion to productivity are the same. I normalize productivity at one. Bargaining occurs over W , the present
value of wages over the duration of the job. During alternating-offer bargaining, the worker
may formulate a counteroffer WK to the employer’s offer WE . The counteroffer makes the

9

worker indifferent between accepting the pending offer or making the counteroffer—a failure
of indifference would imply that either the worker or the employer was leaving money on the
table. The equation expressing the indifference has, on the left, the value of accepting the
current offer from the employer; and on the right, the value of rejecting the employer’s offer
and making a counteroffer:



1
WK + V = δU + (1 − δ) z +
(WE + V ) .
1+r

(18)

Here V is the value of the worker’s career subsequent to the job that is about to begin and
U the value associated with being unemployed, δ is the per-period probability that the job
opportunity will disappear, and z is the flow value of time while bargaining. I take z to
be constant, meaning that it moves in proportion to productivity. See Appendix C for a
rationalization of this assumption, which rests on the constancy of the elasticity of utility
with respect to hours of work and constancy of the elasticity of the production function with
respect to labor input.
The indifference condition for the employer has, on the left, the value of accepting the
current offer from the worker; on the right, the value of rejecting the worker’s offer and
making a counteroffer.

1
(P − WK ) .
P − WE = (1 − δ) −γ +
1+r


(19)

Here γ is the flow cost to the employer of delay in bargaining. This is also a constant, so the
cost moves in proportion to productivity.
The difference between the two indifference conditions, with W , the average of the two
offers, taken as the wage paid, is
2W = WK + WE =

1+r
[δU + (1 − δ)(z + γ)] + P − V.
r+δ

(20)

Here P is the present value of productivity, from equation (17). The Bellman equations for
the unemployment value and the subsequent career value are:
U =z+

1
[φ · (W + V ) + (1 − φ)U ].
1+r


1
1
V = η1
+ η2
+ . . . U.
1+r
(1 + r)2

(21)



(22)

Given the value of P from equation (17) and the observed value of labor-market tightness θ,
together with a specified value of r, equation (20), equation (21), and equation (22) form a
10

linear system of three equations in three unknowns defining the function W (r). The discount
rate is the unique solution to
J = P (r) − W (r).

(23)

Notice that this solution imposes the zero-profit condition:
(P − W )q = c

(24)

because q(θ)J = c. The cost of maintaining a vacancy, c, is constant in productivity units.
Thus the vacancy-filling rate, q(θ), and consequently tightness θ itself, are unaffected by
changes in productivity. This property of the model cuts across the grain of almost all
earlier thinking about the DMP model—I discuss it further in the empirical part of the
paper.

2.5

Graphical discussion

Figure 1 illustrates how the model responds to discount increases for different values of the
tightness-response parameter δ. Both graphs show an upward-sloping job creation curve
that relates the employer’s margin, P − W , to market tightness θ. It is
P −W =

c
.
q(θ)

(25)

The job-creation curve does not shift when the discount rate rises.
The graphs also show the function P (r) − W (r) derived earlier, labeled wage determination, which is a function of market tightness θ. A rise in the discount rate shifts this curve
downward—the increase shown is from 10 percent per year to 30 percent per year. Graph
(a) describes the model with Nash bargaining (δ = 1) hit by an increase in the discount
rate. The wage curve shifts downward only slightly, reflecting the strength of the negative
feedback through the tightness effect on the wage. Graph (b) describes an economy where
wage determination is less responsive to tightness (δ = 0.05). The downward shift in the
wage-determination curves is large, so the effect of a discount increase is large.
In the Nash case, with δ = 1, it takes huge movements in the discount rate to explain
the observed volatility of tightness. A calculation of the implied discount rate needed to
rationalize the observed movements in labor-market tightness, with strong feedback from
tightness, will have huge volatility. The finding of high volatility with δ = 1 is a restatement
of Shimer’s point. On the other hand, δ = 0.05 kills most of the tightness feedback and
11

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.2

1.0

Employer margin, P‐W

Employer margin, P‐W

1.6

Wage
determination

0.8
0.6
0.4

1.0

Wage determination

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.2

Job creation

0.2

Job creation

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.0

Tightness, θ

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Tightness, θ

(a) Nash: δ = 1

(b) Tightness-isolated: δ = 0.05

Figure 1: Effects of Increase in the Discount Rate for Nash and Tightness-Isolated Wage
Determination
makes tightness highly sensitive to the discount rate. With that value of δ, the implied
volatility of the discount rate is correspondingly lower.
In the decade since Shimer’s finding altered the course of research in the DMP class
of models, numerous rationalizations of sticky wages have appeared—way too numerous
to list here. Many achieved the needed stickiness by limiting the response of the wage to
labor-market tightness, as in this model with low δ.

2.6

Assumptions

Here I summarize and comment on the assumptions underlying the analysis in this paper:
1. Productivity is a trended random walk. I present evidence that supports this assumption in the next section.
2. The term structure of discounts is flat. Measurement of discounts is sufficiently elusive
that I have no direct evidence on their term structure. The mean reversion rate of
measured discounts is essentially the same as for labor-market tightness. Under standard financial models, that fact would imply declining forward discount rates when
the current rate is high. However, given the finding of substantial isolation of wage
determination from labor-market conditions, so that the discount in long forward discount in V is unimportant, the one that matters is in J, and the evidence in the next
section shows that little long-forward discounting occurs because of the low incidence
of long-lasting jobs.
12

3. The following values move in proportion to productivity: the flow value z associated
with unemployment, the flow cost c of maintaining a vacancy, and the employer’s
bargaining-delay cost γ. The absence of a trend in unemployment is generally supportive of the assumption. Evidence in Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2014)
supports the assumption for z.

3

Measuring the Implied Volatility of the Discount
Rate

3.1

Measuring the job value

The labor market reveals the job value from the condition that the value equals the cost
of attracting an applicant, which is the per-period vacancy cost times the duration of the
typical vacancy: J = c/q. Later in this section I estimate the cost c of maintaining a
vacancy to be $4811 per month. The BLS’s Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey
(JOLTS) reports the hiring rate and number of vacancies. The vacancy filling rate q is the
ratio of the two. Figure 2 shows the result of the calculation for the total private economy
starting in December 2000, at the outset of JOLTS, through the beginning of 2013. The
average job value over the period was $3,919 per newly hired worker. The value started at
$5,155 in late 2000, dropped sharply in the 2001 recession and even more sharply and deeply
in the recession that began in late 2007 and intensified after the financial crisis in September
2008. The job value reached a maximum of $4,882 in December 2007 and a minimum of
$2,480 in July 2009. Plainly the incentive to create jobs fell substantially over that interval.
Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2013) compare the hiring flows from JOLTS to the total flow into
new jobs from unemployment, those out of the labor force, and job-changers. The level of
the flows is higher in the CPS data and the decline in the recession was somewhat larger as
well. But none of the results in this paper would be affected by the use of the CPS hiring
flow in place of the JOLTS flow.
Figure 3 shows similar calculations for the industries reported in JOLTS, based on the
assumption that vacancy costs are the same across industries. Average job values are lowest
in construction, which fits with the short duration of jobs in that sector. The highest values
are in government and health. Large declines in job values occurred in every industry after
the crisis, including health, the only industry that did not suffer declines in employment

13

$6,000

$5,000

$4,000

$3,000

$2,000

$1,000

$0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 2: Aggregate Job Value, 2001 through 2014
during the recession. The version of the DMP model developed here explains the common
movements of job values across industries, including those that have employment growth, as
the common response to the increase in the discount rate.
Lack of reliable data on hiring flows prevents the direct calculation of job values prior
to 2001. Data are available for the vacancy/unemployment ratio. I will discuss this source
shortly. From it, the vacancy-filling rate is
q = µθ−0.5 ,

(26)

using the years 2001 through 2007 to measure matching efficiency µ (efficiency dropped
sharply beginning in 2008). Figure 4 shows the job-value proxy. It is negatively highly
correlated with unemployment.

3.2

The relation between the job value and the stock market

Kuehn, Petrosky-Nadeau and Zhang (2013) show that, in a model without capital, the
return to holding a firm’s stock is the same as the return to hiring a worker. In levels, the
same proposition is that the value of the firm in the stock market is the value of what it
owns. Under a policy of paying out earnings as dividends, rather than holding securities or
borrowing, the firm without capital owns only one asset, its relationships with its workers.
14

$9,000
Accomodation

$8,000

Construction

Job value, dollars

$7,000

Education
Entertainment

$6,000

Health

$5,000

Manufacturing
Prof services

$4,000

Retail

$3,000
State and Local

$2,000

Wholesale,
transport, utilities

$1,000
$0
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Figure 3: Job Values by Industry, 2001 through 2013

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

1929

1939

1949

1959

1969

1979

1989

1999

2009

Figure 4: Proxy for the Job Value, 1929 through 2014

15

The stock market reveals the job value of workers (the amount c/q) plus any other costs
the firm incurred with the expectation that they would be earned back from the future
difference between productivity and the wage. Of course, in reality firms also own plant
and equipment. One could imagine trying to recover the job value by subtracting the value
of plant and equipment and other assets from the total stock-market value. Hall (2001)
suggests that the results would not make sense. In some eras, the stock-market value falls
far short of the value of plant and equipment alone, while in others, the value is far above
that benchmark, much further than any reasonable job value could account for. Appendix A
discusses Merz and Yashiv’s (2007) work relating plant, equipment, and employment values
to the stock market.

3.3

Comparison of the job value to the value of the stock market

Figure 5 shows the job value calculated earlier, together with the S&P 500 index of the
broad stock market, deflated by the Consumer Price Index scaled to have the same mean as
the job value. The S&P 500 includes about 80 percent of the value of publicly traded U.S.
corporations but omits the substantial value of privately held corporations. The similarity
of the job value and the stock-market value is remarkable. The figure strongly confirms
the hypothesis that similar forces govern the market values of claims on jobs and claims on
corporations.
Figure 6 shows the relation between the job-value proxy and the detrended S&P stockmarket index (now the S&P 500) over a much longer period. I believe that the S&P is the
only broad index of the stock market available as early as 1929. The figure confirms the
tight relation between the job value and the stock market in the 1990s and later, and also
reveals other episodes of conspicuous co-movement. On the other hand, the figure is clear
that slow-moving influences differ between the two series in some periods. During the time
when the stock market had an unusually low value by almost any measure, from the mid-70s
through 1991, the two series do not move together nearly as much.
Figure 7 shows the co-movement of the job value and the stock market at business-cycle
frequencies. It compares the two-year log-differences of the job-value proxy and the S&P
index. It supports the conclusion that the two variables share a common cyclical determinant.
The similarity of the movements of the two variables indicates that the job value—and
therefore the unemployment rate—shares its determinants with the stock market. This

16

Job value

S&P 500 in real terms, rescaled

$6,000

$5,000

$4,000

$3,000

$2,000

$1,000

$0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 5: Job Value from JOLTS and S&P Stock-Market Index, 2001 through 2014

$8,000

Job value proxy

$7,000
$6,000
$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000

S&P stock price

$1,000
$0
1929

1939

1949

1959

1969

1979

1989

1999

2009

Figure 6: Job-Value Proxy and the S&P Stock-Market Index

17

1.0

0.5

0.0

‐0.5

‐1.0

S&P stock price
‐1.5
1931

1941

1951

1961

1971

1981

Job‐value proxy

1991

2001

2011

Figure 7: Two-Year Log-Differences of the Job Value and the S&P Stock-Market Price Index
finding supports the hypothesis that rises in discount rates arising from common sources,
such as financial crises, induce increases in unemployment. In both the labor market and
the stock market, the value arises from the application of discount rates to expected future
flow of value. The next step in this investigation is to consider the discount rates and the
value flows subject to discount separately.

3.4

The random walk of productivity

I calculate output per worker in the business sector as the ratio of BLS series PRS84006043
to series PRS84006013. Output per worker is the appropriate concept for the DMP class of
models, rather than output per hour, because the payoff to an employer is the profit margin
earned from hiring a worker. Figure 8 shows the resulting time series. Its units are arbitrary
because it is the ratio of two indexes.
Though there are occasional episodes of possible mean reversion around an upward trend,
statistical testing shows that the random character of the series is quite close to, and statistically indistinguishable from, a trended random walk. The p value for the Dickey-Fuller
test with a linear time trend is 0.98, indicating no perceptible evidence in favor of mean
reversion.

18

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
1947

1955

1963

1971

1979

1987

1995

2003

2011

Figure 8: Output per Worker, U.S. Business
Many authors in the DMP tradition have used the higher-frequency component of a
filter that separates low from high frequency movements. They treat that component as the
driving force of the business cycle. An inevitable consequence of that procedure is mean
reversion in the high-frequency component. That mean reversion is not evidence in favor of
the view that productivity itself is mean-reverting.
The finding that productivity evolves as a random walk takes it off the table as a potential driving force for unemployment in almost any DMP-type model. The current value of
productivity is the long-run level, apart from the trend. If unemployment responds positively
to the permanent level of productivity, there would be a downward trend in unemployment
to accompany the upward trend in productivity. But unemployment has no trend.

3.5

Other data and parameter values

I use annual data for 1948 through 2013. JOLTS measures the stock of vacancies. I divide
the number of vacancies in all sectors including government (BLS series JTU00000000JOL)
by the number of unemployed workers (BLS series LNS13000000), to obtain θ for the years
after 2000. For the earlier years, Petrosky-Nadeau and Zhang (2013) have compiled data on
the job vacancy rate beginning in 1929. For these years, I take the ratio of their vacancy
rate to the unemployment rate as a proxy for θ, which I rescale to match the JOLTS-based
19

0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008

Figure 9: The Vacancy/Unemployment Ratio, θ
estimates of θ during the later years. The resulting series for θ has a downward trend,
reflecting declining matching efficiency. I remove the trend with a regression of log θt on a
time trend and restate earlier years at the average level of recent years. Figure 9 shows the
resulting series.
Tightness θ and productivity have low correlation. In first differences, the correlation
is 0.28 and in deviations from trend, -0.02. Plainly x is not the sole determinant of labormarket tightness. Figure 10 shows the scatter plot of the first differences of the two variables
from 1948 through 2013. The low correlation is not the result of a highly nonlinear close
relationship, but must be the result of other influences, notably shifts in the discount rate.
The job-survival function plays an important role in the calculations of the discount
rate. To my knowledge, all work in the DMP framework has taken the separation hazard
to be a constant, though it is well known that the hazard declines dramatically with tenure.
Appendix B describe how I derive the distribution from the periodic tenure surveys in the
Current Population Survey.
I calibrate the model at a monthly frequency. I take r = 0.10/12. The average vacancy/unemploment ratio starting in 1948 is θ = 0.397, which I use as the calibration
point for tightness. The implied values of the turnover parameters are: matching efficiency
µ = 0.88, job-finding rate φ = 0.55 per month, job-filling rate q = 1.39 hires per vacancy per
20

Annual change in labor‐market tightness

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
‐0.1
‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.4
‐0.5
‐0.02

‐0.01

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

Annual change in productivity index

Figure 10: First Differences of Tightness θ and Productivity x, 1948 through 2013
month, and vacancy duration T = 0.72 months. I take the flow value of unemployment to
be z = 0.41. See Appendix C for the rationale. For δ < 1, I choose the flow delay cost γ to
yield the same wage as for δ = 1, where γ is irrelevant. Details about the calibration appear
in Appendix D.

3.6

Results on implied volatility of the discount rate

For any value of δ, the time series rt that solves the equilibrium condition,
Jt = P (rt ) − W (rt ),

(27)

is the discount rate that accounts for the values of tightness θt in each year. For example,
if the labor market is tight, with a high θt , the calculation infers that a low discount rate
accounts for employers’ enthusiasm in recruiting workers.
Figure 11 shows the implied percent standard deviations at annual rates of the discount
rate as a function of δ. The results reject values of δ above about 0.05 per month. The
evidence in favor of stickiness in the sense of isolation of wages from tightness is strong.
At δ = 0, the credible-bargaining model makes tightness extremely sensitive to the driving
forces, which is why the observed volatility of θ can be explained by a discount rate with
a standard deviation of less than one percent. The evidence that discount rates for other
21

Standard deviation of discount, annual percent

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0

0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09

0.1

0.11 0.12

δ, monthly frequency of bargaining interruption

Figure 11: Standard Deviations of Implied Discount Rates as a Function of δ, Percents at
Annual Rates
claims on business income have standard deviations around 7 percent suggests that the wage
is somewhat more flexible, so the driving force needs higher volatility to explain the observed
volatility of tightness, perhaps around δ = 0.05. Figure 12 shows the calculated discount
rate for that value.
The calculation of the implied discount creates a driving force that, by construction,
does a good job of explaining the movements of tightness. The ultimate test of the model is
whether the implied discount rate resembles discount rates constructed from other sources.
The next section provides evidence that this series resembles discounts for financial instruments, not only in volatility, but in its individual movements over the business cycle.

4

Discount Rates in the Stock Market

An intuitive but not quite obvious result of finance theory is that the discount rate for a
future cash flow is the expected rate of return to holding a claim to the cash flow. Discount
rates are specific to a future cash flow—the discount rate for a safe cash flow, one paying as
much in good times as in bad times, is lower than for a risky cash flow, one paying more in
good times than in bad times. The discount rate reflects the risk premium associated with
a future cash flow.
22

30

Discount, percent per year

25
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008 2013

Figure 12: Discount Rate for Wage Flexibility Parameter δ = 0.05
This paper does not explain why risky flows receive higher discounts in recessions (but see
Bianchi, Ilut and Schneider (2012) for a new stab at an explanation). Rather, it documents
that fact by extracting the discount rates implicit in the stock market.

4.1

The discount rate for the S&P stock-price index

The issue of the expected return or discount rate on broad stock-market indexes has received
much attention in financial economics since Campbell and Shiller (1988). Cochrane (2011)
provides a recent discussion of the issue. Research on this topic has found that two variables,
the level of the stock market and the level of consumption, are reliable forecasters of the
return to an index such as the S&P. Figure 13 shows the one-year ahead forecast from a
regression where the left-hand variable is the one-year real return on the S&P and the righthand variables are a constant, the log of the ratio of the S&P at the beginning of the period
to its dividends averaged over the prior year, and the log of the ratio of real consumption
to disposable income in the month prior to the beginning of the period. The graph is quite
similar to Figure 3 in Cochrane’s paper for his equation that includes consumption.
The standard deviation of the discount rate in Figure 13 is 7.2 percentage points at
an annual rate. This is an understatement of the true variation, because it is based on an

23

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 13: Econometric Measure of the Discount Rate for the S&P Stock-Price Index
econometric forecast using only a subset of the information available at the time the forecasts
would have been made.
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) created a variable, cay, from consumption, asset, and income data, that has considerable forecasting power for the return to the S&P index. It is
available from Lettau’s website for years starting in 1952. The standard deviation of the
discount rate measured as the fitted value from the regression of the annual real return to
the S&P index on the value of cay at the end of the previous year is 5.8 percent.
Another source of evidence on the volatility of expected returns in the stock market
comes from the Livingston survey, which has been recording professional forecasts of the
S&P stock-price index since 1952. The standard deviation of the one-year forward expected
change in the index in real terms plus the current dividend yield is 5.8 percent.
So far I have considered the volatility of the expected return in the stock market for an
investment held for one year. The future cash flow subject to discount is the value from
selling the stock in a year, inclusive of the dividends earned over the year reinvested in the
same stock. Most of the risk arises from fluctuations in the price of the stock rather than
from the value of the dividends, so the risk under consideration in calculating the expected
return arises from all future time periods, not just from the year of the calculation. The
stock market looks much further into the future than does a firm evaluating the benefit from
24

hiring a worker, as most jobs last only a few years. One way to deal with that issue is to
study the valuation of claims to dividends accruing over near-term intervals. Such claims
are called “dividend strips” and trade in active markets. Because dividends are close to
smoothed earnings, values of dividend strips reveal valuations of near-term earnings. Jules
van Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2012) and van Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen and Vrugt
(2013) pioneered the study of the valuation of dividend strips, with the important conclusion
that the volatility of discount rates for near-term dividends is comparable to the volatility
of the discount rate for the entire return from the stock market over similar durations.
These authors study two bodies of data on dividend strips. The first infers the prices
from traded options. Buying a put and selling a call with the same strike price and maturity
gives the holder the strike price less the stock price with certainty at maturity. Holding
the stock as well means that the only consequence of the overall position is to receive the
intervening dividends and pay the riskless interest rate on the amount of the strike price.
The second source of data comes from the dividend futures market. The latter provides data
for about the last decade, whereas data from options markets are available starting in 1996.
Jules van Binsbergen et al. (2012) published the options-based dividend strip data on the
AER website, for six-month periods up to two years in the future.
The market discount rate for dividends payable in 13 through 24 months is
P24
Et
τ =13 dt+τ
rt =
− 1,
pt

(28)

where dt is the dividend paid in month t and pt is the market price in month t of the claim to
future dividends inferred from options prices and the stock price. Measuring the conditional
expectation of future dividends in the numerator is in principle challenging, but seems not to
matter much in this case. I have experimented with discount rates for two polar extremes.
First is a naive forecast, taking the expected value to be the same as the sum of the 6
most recently observed monthly dividends as of month t. The second is a perfect-foresight
forecast, the realized value of dividends 13 through 24 months in the future. The discount
rates are very similar. Here I use the average of the two series.
The main point of van Binsbergen et al. (2012) and van Binsbergen et al. (2013) is
that the discounts (expected returns) embodied in the prices of near-future dividend strips
are remarkably volatile. Many of the explanations of the volatility of expected returns in
the stock market itself emphasize longer-run influences and imply low volatility of nearterm discounts, but the fact is that near-term discount volatility is about as high as overall
25

Measures

Correlation

Years

Dividends, stock price

-0.32

1996-2009

Dividends, Livingston

0.37

1996-2009

Stock price, Livingston

-0.14

1952-2012

Table 1: Correlations among the Three Measures of Discount Rates
discount volatility. In the earlier years, some of the volatility seems to arise from pricing
errors or noise in the data. For example, in February 2001, the strip sold for $9.37 at a time
when the current dividend was $16.07 and the strip ultimately paid $15.87. The spike in
late 2001 occurred at the time of 9/11 and may be genuine. No similarly suspicious spikes
appear in the later years.
Over the period when these authors have compiled the needed options price, from 1996
through 2009, the standard deviation of the market discount rate on S&P 500 dividends to
be received 13 to 24 months in the future, stated at an annual rate in real terms, is 10.1
percent. The standard deviations of the discount rate for the stock market over the same
period are 5.4 percent for the econometric version of the return forecast and 6.2 percent for
the return based on the Livingston survey.
Figure 14 shows the three series for the discount rates implicit in the S&P stock price
and in the prices of dividend strips for that portfolio. On some points, the three series
agree, notably on the spike in the discount rate in 2009 after the financial crisis. In 2001, the
Livingston forecasters and the strips market revealed a comparable spike, but the econometric
forecast disagreed completely—high values of the stock market and consumption suggested
a low expected return. From 1950 to 1960, the reverse occurred. The Livingston panel had
low expectations of a rising price, whereas the econometric forecast responded to the low
level of the stock price relative to dividends, normally a signal of high expected returns.
Table 1 shows the correlations of the three measures.
The three measures of discount rate related to the S&P portfolio all have similar volatility,
in the range from 6 to 10 percent at annual rates. Contrary to expectation, the three are not
positively correlated. Two of the three correlations are negative, though measured over a
brief and partly turbulent period. Finance theory imposes no restrictions on the correlations
of discount rates for different claims on future cash, because the discounts incorporate risk
premiums that may change over time in different ways for different claims. Explaining
26

S&P return

S&P future dividend

Livingston survey

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 14: Three Measures of Discount Rates Related to the S&P Stock Price Index Portfolio
the dramatic differences between regression-based measures of expected returns and those
obtained from surveys of experts about the same expected returns involves many other
considerations about the limitations of the information available to the econometrician, biases
from specification search, and the use of information not available to market participants,
together with questions about the reliability of an expert panel’s forecasts if they are not
actively involved in trading the portfolio. See Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) for a discussion
of this finding. Their study does not include the Livingston survey, however.
For this paper, the key conclusions from this review of financial discount rates are, first,
their fairly high volatilities, and, second, their low and negative correlations correlations
with each other. In view of this evidence, it would not be realistic to adopt any one of the
measures derived from the stock market and plug it into the DMP model.

5

The Plausibility of the Calculated Discount Rate for
Hiring

Table 2 shows the correlations of the labor-market discount rate corresponding to the preferred case δ = 0.05, as discussed in Section 3, and the three discounts inferred from the
stock market. By the standard of the correlations among those three, the correlations with

27

Measure

Correlation
with labor
market

Years

Dividends

0.10

1996-2009

Stock price

0.18

1950-2009

Livingston

0.30

1952-2012

Table 2: Correlations of the Discount Rate in the Labor Market with Stock-Market Rates
Labor market

Livingston

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 15: Discount Rate for the Labor Market and the Livingston Panel’s Rate for the
Stock Market
the labor market are impressive. Figure 15 plots the time series for the labor-market rt and
the discount rate derived from the Livingston forecasts. The relation between the two is
quite apparent after 1970. Spikes in both discount rates occur regularly in recessions, in
1970, 1974-75, 1980-82 (two recessions), 1990, 2001, and 2008-09.
Lustig and Verdelhan (2012) demonstrate that realized returns in the stock market spike
after recessions and argue that expected returns do as well. Their work supports the proposition that discounts are not only quite volatile, but that they rise in times of low hiring and
other forms of investment.
Because the choice of δ = 0.05 roughly matched the volatility of the S&P discount, the
expected return in the labor market rises about the same amount in response to an adverse
28

shock as does the expected return in the stock market. As Figure 5 shows, the job value and
stock price also have roughly equal volatility. The job value is the expected flow value of
a new worker discounted by the expected return in the labor market; the stock price is the
expected flow of dividends or profit discounted by the expected return in the stock market.
Nothing in the construction of the discount rate for the labor market guarantees the fairly
high correlation visible in Figure 15, however. Both discounts reflect valuations of cash flows
derived from business activities. Their similarity is moderately persuasive evidence that the
construction of the discount for employment relationships is on the right track.
I conclude that financial economics confirms the visual impression in Figure 5 that the
same principles influence the valuation of the employer’s net flow value from an employment
relationship as influence the stock market’s valuation of corporate profits. Thus events
such as a financial crisis increase the discount rates applied to both flows. In the labor
market, employers respond by cutting back on job creation because the capital value of a
new employment relationship is the driving force for job creation. The data support this
view without any stretch in terms of parameter values.
The DMP framework provides a robust way to measure the discounted value of an employment relationship, the job value J, through its revelation as the cost of recruiting a new
worker. A direct comparison of J with the value of the U.S. stock market shows a remarkable
similarity over the past two decades. The comparison based on finance theory confirms what
the naked eye sees—that the job value fell after the financial crisis in line with the discounts
implicit in the stock market. To put it differently, the crisis caused a large increase in the
equity premium that applied to the net benefit of hiring a new worker as well as to the stock
market.

6

Direct Measurement of the Flow Value of a New
Worker

This paper uses the model of Section 2 to find the relation between the discount rate and
the present value of the worker’s flow contribution. A natural question is the feasibility of a
direct attack on the measurement of the flow value. Why not measure the wage from data
on employee earnings instead? I am skeptical that such an approach would work. Most of
workers’ earnings are Ricardian rents to a primary factor. Thus the gross benefit of a new
hire is just a bit higher than the wage. The difference between a necessarily noisy measure
29

of the gross benefit (the product) and the wage, also measured with noise, would be almost
entirely noise.
Suppose that a newly hired worker faces a constant monthly hazard s = 0.035, of separation, as documented earlier, and the discount rate applicable to the financial risk of the
worker’s contribution is 10 percent per year or 0.0083 per month. The capitalization factor
for a monthly flow is then
1
= 23
0.035 + 0.0083

(29)

From Figure 2, the decline in the job value that occurred in the Great Recession was about
$800. Thus the decline in the monthly net flow to the employer was 800/23 = $35 per month.
The median hourly wage in 2011 was $23, so the decline in the monthly flow was equal to
about 90 minutes of wage earnings or a fraction 0.009 of monthly full-time earnings.
Because the change in the net flow value of a newly hired worker needed to rationalize
the observed increase in unemployment following the crisis is tiny compared to earnings
and other flows, it appears hopeless to measure the job value by determining the flow and
calculating its capital value to the employer. Haefke, Sonntag and van Rens (2012), in an
ambitious attempt to estimate the response of wages to productivity, concluded that it was
not possible to pin it down with a sufficiently small standard error to resolve the subtle
question of the cyclical variability of the flow.
Other reasons that direct measurement of the flow value of worker is impractical are (1)
training costs are a deduction from productivity and so need to be measured separately, and
(2) as Yashiv (2013) observes, labor adjustment costs are a deduction from the flow value.

7

Concluding Remarks

The suggestion in this paper that the discount rate is a driving force of unemployment is not
new. In addition to the work of Pissarides, Yashiv, and Merz in the DMP framework already
mentioned, Phelps (1994), pages 61 and 171, considers the issue in a different framework.
Mukoyama (2009) is a more recent contribution focusing on discount volatility in the stock
market. Still, most recent research in the now-dominant DMP framework concentrates on
productivity as the driving force. The conclusion of this paper with respect to fluctuations
in productivity is rather different. Because the evidence favors sticky wages in the sense
of almost complete insulation of the wage from tightness, if productivity fell by one or two
percentage points while the flow value of unemployment, z, remained unchanged, unemploy30

ment would rise sharply. But the conclusion of the paper and the work of Chodorow-Reich
and Karabarbounis (2014) is that z falls in proportion to productivity, implying that such a
decline in productivity has little effect on unemployment. Sticky wages co-exist with small
responses of unemployment to the modest changes in productivity that occur in the U.S.
economy. I believe that no researcher has tried to make the case that any actual decline in
productivity occurred following the financial crisis is anywhere near large enough or timed
in the right way to explain the high and lingering unemployment rate in the U.S., much less
in countries like Spain where unemployment rose into the 20-percent range.
The novelty in this paper is its connection with the finance literature that quantifies
the large movements in the discount rates in the stock market. This literature has reached
the inescapable conclusion that the large movements in the value of the stock market arise
mainly from changes in discount rates and only secondarily from changes in the profit flow
capitalized in the stock market. The field is far from agreement on the reasons for the
volatility of discount rates.
In view of these facts, it is close to irresistible to conclude that whatever forces account for
wide variations in the discount rates in the stock market also apply to the similar valuation
problem that employers face when considering recruiting. If so, even the highly stable net
flow value of a worker found in this paper generates fluctuations consistent with the observed
large swings in unemployment.

31

References
Bai, Yan, José Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, and Kjetil Storesletten, “Demand Shocks as Productivity
Shocks,” September 2012. University of Minneapolis.
Bianchi, Francesco, Cosmin Ilut, and Martin Schneider, “Uncertainty Shocks, Asset Supply
and Pricing over the Business Cycle,” December 2012. Duke University, Department of
Economics.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1988, 1 (3),
195–228.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Loukas Karabarbounis, “The Cyclicality of the Opportunity
Cost of Employment,” Working Paper 19678, National Bureau of Economic Research,
June 2014.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Jounal of Political Economy,
2005, 113 (1), 1–45.
, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt, “Unemployment and Business Cycles,”
Working Paper 19265, National Bureau of Economic Research August 2013.
Cochrane, John H., “Presidential Address: Discount Rates,” Journal of Finance, 2011, 66
(4), 1047 – 1108.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Rob Valletta, “A Rising Natural Rate of
Unemployment: Transitory or Permanent?,” Working Paper 2011-05, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, September 2011.
Danthine, Jean-Pierre and John B. Donaldson, “Labour Relations and Asset Returns,” The
Review of Economic Studies, 2002, 69 (1), 41–64.
Farber, Henry S. and Robert G. Valletta, “Do Extended Unemployment Benefits Lengthen
Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the U.S. Labor Market,” Working Paper 19048, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2013.

32

Farmer, Roger E.A., “The Stock Market Crash of 2008 Caused the Great Recession: Theory
and Evidence,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2012, 36 (5), 693 – 707.
Favilukis, Jack and Xiaoji Lin, “Wage Rigidity: A Solution to Several Asset Pricing Puzzles,” September 2012. Dice Center WP 2012-16, Ohio State University.
Fujita, Shigeru, “Effects of Extended Unemployment Insurance Benefits: Evidence from the
Monthly CPS,” January 2011. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari, “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
Wage Bargaining,” The Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117 (1), 38–86.
, Luca Sala, and Antonella Trigari, “An Estimated Monetary DSGE Model with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage Bargaining,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 2008, 40 (8), 1713–1764.
Gourio, François, “Labor Leverage, Firms’ Heterogeneous Sensitivities to the Business Cycle,
and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” July 2007. Department of Economics,
Boston University.
, “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, September 2012,
102 (6), 2734–66.
and Leena Rudanko, “Customer Capital,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2014.
forthcoming.
Greenwald, Daniel L., Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, “The Origins of Stock
Market Fluctuations,” Working Paper 19818, National Bureau of Economic Research
January 2014.
Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer, “Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns,”
Review of Financial Studies, 2014.
Haefke, Christian, Marcus Sonntag, and Thijs van Rens, “Wage Rigidity and Job Creation,”
April 2012. IZA Discussion Paper No. 3714.
Hagedorn, Marcus, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman, “Unemployment
Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects,” October 2013. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19499.
33

Hall, Robert E., “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” American Econmic Review,
December 2001, 91 (5), 1185–1202.
, “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American Economic
Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 50–65.
, “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More Output?,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2009, (2), 183–231.
, “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the Marginal
Product of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2009, 117 (2), 281–323.
, “What the Cyclical Response of Advertising Reveals about Markups and other
Macroeconomic Wedges,” March 2013. Hoover Institution, Stanford University.
and Paul R. Milgrom, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage Bargain,”
American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1653–1674.
and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, “Measuring Matching Effciency with Heterogeneous Jobseekers,” November 2013.
Kaplan, Greg and Guido Menzio, “Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Unemployment
Fluctuations,” September 2013. Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Kehoe, Patrick, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino, “Debt Constraints and Employment,” August 2014. University of Minnesota.
Kuehn, Lars-Alexander, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Lu Zhang, “An Equilibrium Asset
Pricing Model with Labor Market Search,” January 2013. Carnegie Mellon University,
Tepper School of Business.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, “Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected
stock returns,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56 (3), 815–849.
Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan, “Business cycle variation in the risk-return trade-off,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, October 2012, 59, Supplement, S35 – S49. Supplement
issue: Research Conference on ’Directions for Macroeconomics: What did we Learn from
the Economic Crises’.
34

Merz, Monika and Eran Yashiv, “Labor and the Market Value of the Firm,” American
Economic Review, 2007, 97 (4), 1419–1431.
Mortensen, Dale T., “Comments on Hall’s Clashing Theories of Unemployment,” July 2011.
Department of Economics, Northwestern University.
and Christopher Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of
Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61, 397–415.
Mukoyama, Toshihiko, “A Note on Cyclical Discount Factors and Labor Market Volatility,”
September 2009. University of Virginia.
Nakajima, Makoto, “A Quantitative Analysis of Unemployment Benefit Extensions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59 (7), 686 – 702.
Nekarda, Christopher J. and Valerie A. Ramey, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-Cost
Markup,” Working Paper 19099, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2013.
Petrosky-Nadeau, Nicolas, “Credit, Vacancies and Unemployment Fluctuations,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 2014, 17, 191 – 205.
and Etienne Wasmer, “Macroeconomic Dynamics in a Model of Goods, Labor, and
Credit,” February 2014. Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University.
and Lu Zhang, “Unemployment Crises,” November 2013. Carnegie Mellon University.
Phelps, Edmund S., Structural Slumps: The Modern Equilibrium Theory of Unemployment,
Interest, and Assets, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Pistaferri, Luigi, “Anticipated and Unanticipated Wage Changes, Wage Risk, and Intertemporal Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2003, 21 (3), 729–754.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs,”
in John Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1B,
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1999, chapter 16, pp. 1051–1135.
Rubinstein, Ariel and Asher Wolinsky, “Equilibrium in a Market with Sequential Bargaining,” Econometrica, 1985, 53 (5), pp. 1133–1150.

35

Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 24–49.
Uhlig, Harald, “Explaining Asset Prices with External Habits and Wage Rigidities in a
DSGE Model,” American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 239–243.
Valletta, Rob and Katherine Kuang, “Extended Unemployment and UI Benefits,” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, April 2010, pp. 1–4.
van Binsbergen, Jules, Michael Brandt, and Ralph Koijen, “On the Timing and Pricing of
Dividends,” American Economic Review, September 2012, 102 (4), 1596–1618.
, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph Koijen, and Evert Vrugt, “Equity Yields,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2013, 110 (3), 503 – 519.
Walsh, Carl E., “Labor Market Search and Monetary Shocks,” in S. Altug, J. Chadha, and
C. Nolan, eds., Elements of Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis, Cambridge University
Press, 2003, pp. 451–486.
Yashiv, Eran, “Hiring as Investment Behavior,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2000, 3 (3),
486 – 522.
, “Capital Values, Job Values and the Joint Behavior of Hiring and Investment,”
December 2013. Tel Aviv University.

36

Appendix, for online publication (at least in major parts)
A

Related Research

A.1

Driving forces

Research in the DMP framework has considered five driving forces, apart from productivity:
• Declines in product demand cause firms to move down their marginal cost curves.
The firms have sticky prices, so the marginal revenue product of labor falls. The
consequences in the DMP model are then the same as for a decline in productivity.
• Declines in price inflation raise real wages. If the bargain between a newly hired worker
and an employer involves an expected rise in the nominal wage that is sticky, but the
growth of prices falls to a lower level, the benefit of a new hire to an employer falls and
unemployment rises, according to standard DMP principles.
• Increases in the flow value of unemployment, z, on account of more generous unemployment insurance benefits, raise unemployment.
• Frictions in product markets lower the value of the contribution of a newly hired worker.
• Financial frictions lower the value of a new hire or raise the cost of recruiting new
workers.
A.1.1

Sticky prices

Walsh (2003) first brought a nominal influence into the DMP model. Employers in his
New Keynesian model have market power, so the variable that measures the total payoff
to employment is the marginal revenue product of labor in place of the marginal product
of labor in the original DMP model. Price stickiness results in variations in market power
because sellers cannot raise their prices when an expansive force raises their costs, so the
price-cost margin shrinks. Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) give a definitive discussion of
the mechanism, but see Nekarda and Ramey (2013) for negative empirical evidence on the
cyclical behavior of margins. Hall (2009a) discusses this issue further. The version of the New
Keynesian model emphasizing price stickiness suffers from its weak theoretical foundations
and has also come into question because empirical research on individual prices reveal more

37

complicated patterns with more frequent price changes than the model implies. Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2013) uses the wage-setting model of Hall and Milgrom (2008)
to amplify effects of sticky prices. Hall (2013) finds evidence against higher margins in
slumps because advertising should rise substantially with margins but in fact advertising
falls dramatically in recessions.
Walsh adopts the Nash wage bargain of the canonical DMP model, which implies that his
model may generate low unemployment responses for the reason that Shimer (2005) pointed
out. Conceptually, it remains the case that Walsh was the first to resolve the clash between
Keynesian models with excess product supply and the DMP model of unemployment.
Mortensen (2011) established a direct connection between drops in product demand and
the payoff to new hires. The paper makes the simple assumption that firms stick to their
earlier prices when demand drops, so that firms are quantity-takers. It uses a Dixit-Stiglitz
setup to map the consequences back into the labor market and shows that the fixity of output
results in potentially large declines in the net benefit of a new hire.
A.1.2

Sticky wages

Another approach introduces a nominal element into wage determination. The canon of
the modern New Keynesian model, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), has workers
setting wages that are fixed in nominal terms until a Poisson event occurs, mirroring price
setting in older versions of the New Keynesian model. That paper does not have a DMP
labor market. Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008) (GST) embed a DMP labor-market model
in a general-equilibrium model, overcoming Shimer’s finding by replacing Nash bargaining
at the time of hire with a form of wage stickiness. Gertler and Trigari (2009) developed the
labor-market specification. A Poisson event controls firm-level wage bargaining, which takes
the Nash form. Between bargaining times, the wage of newly hired workers adheres to the
most recent bargain. If labor demand turns out to be higher than expected at bargaining
time, the part of the surplus captured by the employer rises and the incentive to recruit
workers rises. By standard DMP principles, the labor market tightens and unemployment
falls. Though the model is Keynesian in the sense of sticky wages, it describes an equilibrium
in the labor market in the sense of Hall (2005)—the relation between workers and an employer
is privately efficient. GST build a model of the general-equilibrium response to monetary
and other shocks in a version of the Gertler-Trigari setup where the wage bargain is made

38

in nominal terms. The GST paper resolves the clash by making the DMP determination of
unemployment sensitive to the rate of inflation.
A key idea in Gertler and Trigari (2009), put to work in the GST paper, is that workers
hired between bargaining times inherit their wage terms from the most recent bargain. In
principle, this setup could violate the private efficiency criterion by setting the wage too high
to deliver a positive job value to the employer or too low to deliver a job value below the job
candidate’s reservation level, but, again, in practice this is not likely to occur. If it were an
issue, the introduction of state-dependent bargaining would solve the problem, at the cost
of a more complicated model.
The GST model assumes that the wage bargain is made in money terms, as the traditional
Keynesian literature likes to say. The substance of the assumption is that a state variable—
the most recently bargained nominal wage—influences the job value for new hires until the
next bargain occurs. This assumption has had a behavioral tinge in that literature—the role
of the stale nominal wage arises from stubbornness of workers or employers or from money
illusion. From the perspective of bargaining theory, however, as long as the stale wage keeps
the job value in the bargaining set, that wage is an eligible bargain. See Hall (2005) for
further discussion, not specifically in the context of a nominal state variable. There’s no
departure from strict rationality in the GST model.
The implications of a model linking the current job value to a stale nominal variable are
immediate: The more the price level rises from bargaining time to the present, the higher is
the job value in real terms.
A.1.3

Unemployment insurance

Recent papers by Nakajima (2012), Valletta and Kuang (2010), Fujita (2011), and Daly,
Hobijn, Şahin and Valletta (2011), culminating in Farber and Valletta (2013), ask whether
higher UI benefits result in lower search effort and higher reservation wages, both of which
would raise unemployment in a standard DMP model. This research compares the jobfinding rates of covered workers to uncovered workers. The answer is fairly uniformly that
the effects of UI enhancements during times of high unemployment in raising unemployment
still further are quite small, in the range of 0.3 percentage points of extra unemployment.
Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii and Mitman (2013) (HKMM) tackle a more challenging
question, whether more generous UI benefits result in higher wages and higher unemployment
by raising the flow value of unemployment z and thus shrinking the gap between productivity
39

and z that measures the fundamental force that determines the unemployment rate. They
compare labor markets with arguably similar conditions apart from the UI benefits regime.
In their work, the markets are defined as counties and the similarity arises because they focus
on pairs of adjacent counties. The difference in the UI regimes arises because the two counties
are in different states and UI benefits are set at the state level and often differ across state
boundaries. The research uses a regression-discontinuity design, where the discontinuity is
the state boundary and the window is the area of the two adjacent counties. The authors
conclude that, absent the increase in UI benefits, unemployment in 2010 would have been
about 3 percentage points lower.
Many commentators have dismissed HKMM’s conclusion on the grounds that the research
implies that unemployment would have hardly risen at all absent the extension of UI benefits,
despite the financial crisis and resulting collapse of product demand. But the dismissal is
unwarranted. HKMM’s work fully recognizes that the enhancements of UI benefits was itself
the result of the forces that caused the Great Recession. The proper interpretation, with
the framework of the paper, is that feedback from enhanced UI benefits was a powerful
amplification mechanism of a negative impulse arising from the crisis.
The issues that arise in evaluating the paper are those for any regression-discontinuity
research design: (1) Are there any other sources of discontinuous changes at the designated
discontinuity points that might be correlated with the one of interest? (2) Is the window
small enough to avoid contamination from differences that do not occur at the discontinuity
point but rather elsewhere in the window? The authors explore a number of state-level
economic policies that could generate cross-border effects that might be correlated with the
UI effects, but none seem to matter. The authors are less persuasive on the second point.
Many counties are large enough to create substantial contamination. Far from being atoms,
single counties are often large parts of their states, both geographically and in terms of the
share of the population. The extreme case is Washington, DC, treated as a state with only
one county.
The HKMM paper rests on the hypothesis that the extension of benefits raised the
flow value of unemployment z, contrary to Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis’s (2014)
conclusion that z was close to unchanged after the crisis.
HKMM have ignited an important debate. Further evidence may help resolve the issue
of the reliability of their finding of such large effects on wages and unemployment.

40

A.1.4

Product-market frictions

Bai, Rı́os-Rull and Storesletten (2012) study product-market frictions with a Walrasian labor
market. Gourio and Rudanko (2014) develop a DMP-style product market with directed
search. Petrosky-Nadeau and Wasmer (2014) is a comprehensive model with product and
financial frictions, linked to a DMP model of the labor market. Kaplan and Menzio (2013)
develop a model with both product- and labor-market frictions, with sufficiently strong
complementarity to generate multiple equilibria.
A.1.5

Financial frictions

Petrosky-Nadeau (2014) considers the cost of maintaining a vacancy as a driving force for
unemployment fluctuations. In his model, rising credit frictions discourage recruiting and
thus raise unemployment through standard DMP principles.
Kehoe, Midrigan and Pastorino (2014) follows up the basic idea in this paper by considering the amplification of the discount effect that arises if the cash flows from a new hire are
backloaded. The paper derives the volatility of the discount from financial frictions.

A.2

Forming the present value of a newly hired worker’s net benefit to the employer

Yashiv (2000) undertook the task I declare to be impossible in the body of this paper:
forming the present value of the difference between a worker’s marginal product and wage.
Equation (4) in his paper is equivalent to equation (6) here. On page 492, Yashiv notes
the analogy between the valuation of a worker’s net contribution and valuation in the stock
market of a stream of dividends. One important difference between his approach and mine is
that he takes the hiring cost to be strongly convex in the flow of hires at the level of the firm,
whereas I adopt the linearity that is that standard property of the DMP class of models.
Under linearity, the asset value of the employment relationship is observed directly. By
contrast, Yashiv uses GMM to infer the marginal hiring cost. A second important difference
is that Yashiv’s approach does not distinguish between hiring costs incurred prior to a wage
bargain and those following the bargain.

41

A.3

Variations in discounts

The basic proposition that the stock market varies largely because of changes in discount
rates is the conclusion of a famous paper, Campbell and Shiller (1988). Cochrane (2011)
discusses the finding extensively.
Greenwald, Lettau and Ludvigson (2014) decompose movements of expected stock-market
returns and assign a large fraction of the variation to shifts in discounts not affiliated with
other variables, such as consumption growth.
Gourio (2012) builds a model where a small probability of a disaster generates substantial
variations in discounts, which influence employment through a standard labor-supply setup.
The model does not include unemployment.

A.4

Joint movements of labor-market variables and the stock market

Kuehn et al. (2013) is an ambitious general-equilibrium model that combines a DMP labor
market with a full treatment of financial markets. Its goal is roughly the reverse of the goal of
this paper. It makes the case that volatility in real allocations resulting from amplification of
productivity shocks in the labor market causes financial volatility. In particular, the model
can generate episodes that look like financial crises, with dramatic widening of the equity
premium. The paper provides an endogenous source of economic disasters, an advance over
the existing literature that takes large declines in output and consumption to be the result
of exogenous collapses of productivity.
Kuehn and coauthors build in a number of the ideas from the post-Shimer literature to
gain high amplification in the labor market from productivity shocks. These include (1)
adding a fixed cost to the pre-bargain recruiting cost, on top of the cost that varies with the
time required to fill a job, (2) assigning the worker a tiny bargaining weight, and (3) assigning
a high value to the worker’s activities while unemployed, apart from the value of search. They
also build in ideas from modern finance that generate a high and variable equity premium
along with a low and stable real interest rate. These are (1) an extremely high coefficient of
relative risk aversion and (2) a quite high elasticity of intertemporal substitution. The paper
briefly surveys related earlier contributions linking asset-price volatility to unemployment
volatility: Danthine and Donaldson (2002), Uhlig (2007), Gourio (2007), and Favilukis and
Lin (2012).
42

Farmer (2012) noted the relationship between the levels of the stock market and unemployment. He adopts the traditional view that unemployment is simply the difference
between labor supply and demand, thus sidestepping the issues considered in this paper.
Merz and Yashiv (2007) study investment, hiring, and the stock market jointly. Adjustment costs for both inputs result in values of Tobin’s q for both inputs. They estimate a
three-equation system comprising dynamic first-order conditions for investment and hiring
and the equality of the market value of the firm to its capital stock and employment level
valued by their respective qs. They find a high correlation of their fitted value of the U.S.
corporate sector with the actual value.
Hall (2001) considered the same evidence about the market value of the corporate sector
as Merz and Yashiv (they adopted my data for the value), but reached rather a different
conclusion. My paper rejected the assumption that the value arises only from rents associated
with investment adjustment costs. It entertained the hypothesis that the corporate sector
acquired highly valuable intangible capital during the run-up of the stock market in the
1990s. The value of that inferred intangible capital collapsed between the writing of the first
version of the paper and its appearance in print.
The relation between Merz and Yashiv’s work and the approach in this paper is that
they rely on the strong assumption that the market value of a firm arises solely from its
investments in plant, equipment, and employees. This paper makes the weaker assumption
that corporate profits arise from many sources, including its capital stocks, and uses evidence
about how the stock market discounts the profit stream to rationalize the observed value of
one element of the one part of the profit flow, that arising from the pre-bargain investment
that employers make in recruiting workers.
Yashiv (2013) extends his earlier work using a similar specification for joint adjustment
costs of investment and hiring. In place of employment levels, the specification uses hiring
flows, capturing gross rather than net additions to employment. The hiring costs combine
a quadratic term and a DMP-style vacancy holding cost. He computes a Campbell-Shillerstyle decomposition of the returns on capital and labor that confirms the importance of
variations in discount rates. The paper holds out the promise of helping DMP-type models
better characterize the flow value of a newly hired worker to a firm.

43

B

The Survival Distribution for Jobs

Let ρ(τ ) be the survival probability, the fraction of workers still on the job τ months after
hiring. The job duration density is −ρ̇(τ ). The separation rate (or separation hazard) is the
density of separations in month τ conditional on not having separated as of the beginning
of that month:
−ρ̇(τ )
.
(30)
ρ(τ )
The universal assumption in the DMP literature is a constant separation hazard s. In that
s(τ ) =

case, the survival probability is ρ(τ ) = e−sτ and the duration distribution is se−sτ .
A quite separate body of research studies the distribution of tenure among workers and
invariably finds large departures from the assumption of a constant separation hazard, in
the direction of lower hazards for higher tenure. Suppose that Nτ,t workers have τ months
of tenure at time t. Hires are Ht . The survival rate is ρτ = Nτ,t /Ht−τ . Actual observations
are made over intervals of tenure and corresponding intervals of earlier hire dates.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics collected data on employment by tenure in the Current
Population Survey on an irregular schedule until 1996, and every two years since then. The
BLS tabulates the results in a reasonably fine set of categories of tenure, though the agency
only publishes data on broad categories. The data tend to clump at salient points, so it would
probably not be worthwhile to use the microdata to refine the categories beyond those in
the unpublished tabulations.
To make use of the data by categories, I assume that the survival distribution ρ(τ ) is
piecewise exponential and continuous. Thus the separation hazard si (τ ) is constant at si
within a category running from τi to τi+1 . The previously calculated probability of being
employed in month τi is ρ(τi ), with ρ(0) = 1. The survival probability within category i is
ρ(τ ) = ρ(τi )e−si (τ −τi ) .

(31)

Under the assumption that the density of hiring is constant over the relevant interval, the
average survival probability within the category is
ρ̄i =

ρ(τi ) 1 − e−si (τi+1 −τi )
τi+1 − τi
si

(32)

From the tabulated data on ρ̄i , one can solve this equation for the si s recursively.
The Matlab and Excel code available from my website best explain the details of the
calculations. For the period 1996 through 2012, the BLS produces a tabulation of workers
44

by tenure in 13 categories of tenure. To determine the number of historical hires, I use
the JOLTS new hire data starting with the onset of JOLTS at the end of 2000. For the
period from July 1967 through November 2000, I use the fitted value from a regression of
the JOLTS hire rate (ratio of hires to workers) on unemployment, employment growth, and
new unemployment benefit claims. For the earlier months beginning in August 1948, I use
a similar regression with unemployment in the lowest duration category replacing new UI
claims, a series that began in 1967.
The resulting survival probabilities by tenure category, ρ̄i , have a good deal of random
variation, together with anomalies relating to challenges in interpreting answers to the tenure
question that may be in either months or years. Taking the average of the probabilities over
the nine surveys helps with the sampling errors. The primary anomaly is a substantial
shortfall in the survival probability for the category for 13 to 23 months. I raise it from
0.79 to 0.300, so that it falls on a smooth curve defined by its neighbors. I apply the
method derived above to calculate the separation hazards from the adjusted average survival
probabilities. The results have a saw-tooth pattern across the tenure categories. I accept the
high separation hazard (0.153 per month) for the first 6 months. For categories 2 through
13 I apply a moving-average filter with weights of 0.25 to the adjacent categories and 0.5 to
the calculated figure for the category to recover a smooth curve. For all of the remaining
categories, I use the average hazard of 0.017 per month across the categories. Figure 16
shows the resulting survival distribution. It departs substantially from the survival function
implied by a constant hazard of around 0.035 per month used in existing DMP models, also
shown in the figure.

C

Measuring z

Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2014) (CRK) study the movements of the flow value
of unemployment, z, or, as they term the concept, the opportunity cost of work. I believe
that theirs is the only contribution on this subject. They conclude that z moves at cyclical
frequencies in proportion to productivity. They start from an expression for z in Hall and
Milgrom (2008) with two components. The first is the level of unemployment-conditioned
benefits. The second measures the remaining impact on family welfare from shifting a worker
from non-market to market activities, counting the lost flow value of home production, the
increase in consumption allocated to workers compared to non-workers, and the change in
45

1.2

Fraction Remaining on the Job

1.0

0.8

0.6

Constant
separation rate

0.4

0.2

Separation rate
from tenure data

0.0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Years since Hire

Figure 16: Job Survival Probability Estimated from CPS Tenure Data Compared to Constant
Separation Rate
flow utility for a family member moving from non-market activities to market work. Though
unemployment insurance rises dramatically in recessions, some of which occur at the same
time as drops in productivity, a decline in other types of unemployment-conditioned benefits
offsets this effect. And the second component rises in proportion to productivity. Their
research supports the hypothesis that the wage is a markdown on productivity because x − z
is stable at cyclical frequencies.
The formula in Hall and Milgrom, further developed by CRK, gives the opportunity
cost of taking a job, in a family large enough to provide full insurance against individual
unemployment risk, as
z = b + ∆c −

∆U (c, h)
.
λ

(33)

Here b is the flow of unemployment benefits, ∆ refers to the difference between employed
and unemployed family members, c is consumption per person, h is hours of work per
person (taken as zero for the unemployed), and λ is the marginal utility of consumption. It
appears that taking utility to be separable between consumption and hours gives a reasonable
approximation to z, though the evidence in favor of complementarity is fairly strong. Under
separability,
U (c, h) = χ(c) − v(h).
46

(34)

I normalize v(0) at zero. Further, ∆c = 0 under separability. Thus
z =b+

v(h)
.
λ

(35)

The Frisch (λ-constant) first-order condition for the choice of hours is
v 0 (h) = λw.

(36)

Combining the two to eliminate λ yields
v(h)
v 0 (h)
v
= b + wh 0
hv (h)
wh
=b+
,


z =b+w

(37)

where  is the elasticity of v(h) with respect to h. In the case where v(h) has constant
elasticity, so  is a parameter and
v(h) = h = h1+1/ψ ,

(38)

where ψ is the Frisch elasticity of hours supply. Thus if v(h) is constant-elastic, the Frisch
elasticity is 1/( − 1). If v(h) is not constant-elastic, there is no fixed relation between its
elasticity at a point h and the Frisch elasticity at that point—the Frisch elasticity is the
reciprocal of the elasticity of marginal utility.
The quantity wh is the wage per worker and is the same as the worker’s contribution to
the employer, x, under competition and with the wage measured in output units, so
z =b+

x


(39)

and
z
b 1
= + .
(40)
x
x 
Variations over time in z/x occur only because of variations in the replacement rate b and
in the elasticity of the disamenity of hours of work, .
CRK add another term to their version of the formula for z, measuring the home production the household foregoes when a member enters market work. They do not try to
measure the term. They implicitly assume that U (c, h) measures the pure disamenity of
time spent in the market, h, and not the foregone home production. In my view, the utility
47

function is a reduced form for family decisions about the allocation of time. It presumes
that the reduction in total time that occurs when h rises takes the form of some foregone
leisure and some foregone work at home, where the disamenity of work at home may be less
than the disamenity of market work. The utility function accounts for foregone leisure and
the foregone gap between the two disamenities as a function of market hours. No separate
accounting for home production is needed.
CRK make an intensive investigation of the value of the unemployment benefits, b. An
important factor in their estimate is the evidence that most of the unemployment insurance
benefits paid to jobseekers are offset in value by the time costs and disamenities of collecting
benefits. Their average estimate of b is only 0.04. They find some cyclical variations, but
they are small because the level of b is so small.
I use the estimate of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply from Pistaferri (2003) of 0.7.
Hall (2009b) discusses the evidence on the size of this parameter. The resulting value of z
is 0.41.

D

Calibration

The calibration strategy is to start with values for r, θ, z, and q, then solve the Nash version
(δ = 1) of the model for µ and c together with the values of the variables.
The equations are:

P =

q = µθ−0.5

(41)

φ = µθ0.5

(42)

1
1
1
+ ρ1
+
ρ
+ ...
2
1+r
(1 + r)2
(1 + r)3

(43)

qJ = c

(44)

J =P −W

(45)

W = 0.5(P + U − V )

(46)

48




1
1
V = η1
+ η2
+ ... U
1 + rJ
(1 + rJ )2
U =z+

1
[φ · (W + V ) + (1 − φ)U ].
1+r

This system of 8 equations has 8 unknowns: µ, φ, c, P , J, W , U , and V .

49

(47)

(48)

