NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC EVENTS AND KEYNESIAN IDEAS:
THE 1930s AND THE l9lOs

Michael R. Darby

James R. Lothian

Working Paper No. 1987

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1986

Forthcoming in: For Fifty Years On: The Relevance and Irrelevance of
Keynes' General Theory to Modern Times edited by John Burton. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1987
July 1986

Economic Events and Keynesian Ideas:
The 1930s and the 1970s

ABSTRACT

Keynes' General Th&ry was a brilliant

attanpt to plain the paradox

of 1CM interest rates, ineffectual easy rn,netaxy policy, and low investrtnt
during the Great Depression. We argue that Keynes' failure to distinguish

between low naninal and high real interest rates led hint to misinterpret a
tight and ail too effective nonetary policy and unnecessarily hypothesize
a downward shift in investhent dnand. Keynesian ideas in tux profoundly
influenced econanic policy in the 1960s and 1970s. The resulting postwar

inflation — rather than scholarship on what actually happened in the
1930s -- appears to be the primary reason for the waning influence of the
ideas derived frcin the General TheOry.

Michael R. Darby
Department of Economics
Uriiversty of California
Los Angeles, CA 90024

James R. Lothian
Citicorp Investment Bank
55 Water Street - 42nd Floor

New York, NY 10043

Like the proverbial chicken and the egg, economic events and
macroeconomic theory have borne an ongoing ambiguous relationship to

one another. Keynes himself, in his scathing indictment of the
influence of "academic scribblers" on actual policy, pointed to one

such avenue of impact.1 George Stigler in his Nobel lecture "The
Process and Progress of Economics" pointed to a channel leading in

the exact opposite direction. Singling out macroeconomics as
"notorious" for "its responsiveness to contemporary events," Stigler
cited the unemployment of the 1930s as the reason for the success of
Keynes' General Theory and the inflation of the 1970s as the reason
for its demise.2

This paper explores and develops Stigler's hypothesis: We first
examine the economic experience of both the United States and the
United Kingdom during the interwar years, contrasting Keynes'
perceptions of those events with the findings of subsequent empirical

research. We then turn to the growing influence of Keynesian ideas
on economic policy in the 1960s and 1970s, the international
transmission of that influence through the Bretton Woods system, and
the resultant discrediting of those ideas.

I. The Inter-War Years
To most American observers, the Great Depression seemed to defy

explanation. Its extraordinary severity, substantial duration, and
almost world-wide scope, combined to give it the aura of an entirely

new species of economic animal. Reinforcing this view for many
British observers, no doubt, was experience in the previous decade.

The Macmillan Report, published in 1931, described the 1920s in
Britain as a period of "abnormal industrial depression and extensive

unemployment."3 Other accounts paint an equally bleak picture of
—1—

those years, from Orwell's classic narrative, The Road to WicTan Pier,

to the more workaday annual summaries of the Economist. And even
thoughmore recent analyses of movements in aggregate income place
the decade in a somewhat better light, it was by no means an ordinary
period.

From the beginning of 1920 to the end of 1929, there were three
full cyclical contractions and the start of a fourth, the Great

Depression -— an historical record.4 Moreover, these four
contractions, taken j1 toto, added up to seven years of business
decline in the thirteen years ending in 1932 ——

another

historical

first. Unemployment throughout this period ran continually high, an
average rate for the years 1921 to 1929 of 9.1%, with a peak in 1921
of 12.2%, a decrease of close to 5 percentage points between then and
1927 and finally a spike to a record 17% in 1932.
In the United States the twenties, though also beginning with a
severe business downturn in 1920—21, were a period of strong real

growth and low average unemployment. Not until 1929 did things turn
sour, but then they turned sour indeed. When the Great Depression
ended in the United States in 1933, real income was nearly 45% below
its 1929 level and the level of unemployment stood at 20.6%.

Pre—Keynesian monetary theory had two major concerns. One, the
long-run

relationship between money and the price level -- the

"neutrality" of money -— is well
overlooked, was no less central.

known. The other, though very

often

It is the question of the dynamic

process by which monetary disturbances were transmitted to prices,

and employment in the shorter run. Figuring prominently in
the expositions of eighteenth and early nineteenth century British
output

—2—

writers such as David Hume and Henry Thornton, this question received
its fullest treatment prior to the rebirth of quantity theory in the

latterhalf of this century in the work of the American economist
Irving Fisher who in 1926 undertook a statistical study of U.S.
cyclical fluctuations the like of which did not become common in the
literature until 40 years later.5
This developed schema of analysis, however, was abandoned -—

particularly

in Cambridge --

with

little more than nod to the

empirical evidence. Assertions by officials of the Federal Reserve
System in the United States and of the central banks of other
countries that monetary policy was loose but ineffectual and the low
financial market interest rates of the Depression years appear to
have been the only evidence taken into account.6
Keynes' General Theory can be seen as his explanation of why
monetary ease did not work and what ——

if not money —— caused the

Great Depression. Fisher had proclaimed the business cycle "a dance

of the dollar". Keynes declared it a dance of investment.7
With both real government spending and real consumer spending
relatively stable in magnitude over the course of the trade cycle,
investment is the component of aggregate real income that accounts

for most of its cyclical variation. The pre-Keynesian monetary
theory we have just reviewed and the modern quantity theory explain
this cyclical variation in investment as a movement along a stable
demand function in which expectations play a crucial but predictable
(endogenous) role in the transmission of (predominantly) monetary

disturbances. Keynes expected lower interest rates to increase
investment in the Depression. When the increase did not occur, he
concluded that an overwhelming shift in the demand curve itself must
—3—

have taken place.

The conclusion, however, did not follow. Underlying it was a
confusion between Fisher's (and Thornton's) distinction between

nominal and real rates of interest. Real investment is a function of
real rates of interest, not of nominal rates. The latter were
certainly low in the Depression but price levels in both America and

Britain were falling. Real interest rates, the difference between
nominal rates and the rates of inflation that investors anticipate
will prevail over the lives of the particular instruments, must
almost certainly have been high. -

This

failure to distinguish between nominal and real interest

rates also led Keynes to accept the characterization of monetary

policy as loose but ineffective.8 Keynes rationalized this alleged
ineffectiveness of monetary policy by the notion of a liquidity trap.
At low levels of interest rates, Keynes hypothesized, money and bonds

would be near-perfect substitutes. An open market purchase,
therefore, would simply give rise to a substitution of bonds for

money. Nothing else would happen. Monetary policy under these
circumstances would be impotent.

Keynes explicitly stated that this liquidity trap was a limiting
case —— one that was not known ever to have occurred in practice.9

Nevertheless, he went on to treat it as true to a first

approximation. The economic variables in his model Keynes defined in
terms of wage units. Given Keynes' related assumption of a fairly
stable ratio between the level of product prices and the level of

wages, the overall price level, which in the classical quantity
theory analysis was the outcome of the interaction between the supply
of and the demand for money, was implicitly held constant.
—4—

This set of assumptions, as it has turned out, was untenable --

the

"facts" of the situation that Keynes apparently took as a given

were not facts at all. One of the major contributions of Milton
Friedman's and Anna J. Schwartz's (1963)

Monetary History of the

United States, 1867—1960 was to explode forever this myth of an
expansionary yet ineffective monetary policy in the United States.

Their data show that the supply of money in the United States in the
1930's far from increasing, fell by an unprecedented amount, slightly

over 40% between 1929 and 1933. The only other period during in
which a near-similar decline in the U.S. money stock has been

recorded was 1839-43, when M2 fell by close to 28%) This, too, was
called a "great depression".

The reason that the Great Depression of the 1930s was so severe,
Friedman and Schwartz concluded, was that monetary policy in the

United States was so inept. Confronted by a series of bank failures
that were causing substantial declines in the stock of money, the

Federal Reserve took virtually no offsetting actions. Their own
monetary liabilities -- high-powered money or the monetary base --

actually

declined by 3% between 1921 and 1930 and from 1930 until

1932 rose by only a little over 10%. This passivity came in
a time of banking panics and resultant frantic scrambles for currency

by money holders and for reserves by banks. It was as if the history
of the Bank of England's actions in times of financial crisis in the

nineteenth century had never been known and Bagehot had never
written.

Analyses subsequent to that of Friedman and Schwartz have only
served to buttress their conclusions. Investigations of money deirtand

behavior have uncovered no evidence of a liquidity trap in either the
—5—

aggregate time series data or the richer cross—state data for the

United States.11 Other studies have shown that given the greater
decline in money supply in the Depression the decline in U.S. nominal
income was in line with historical experience during other cyclical
contractions.12 In a similar vein, Darby and Michael Melvin (1986,
pp. 374-384), like Clark Warburton much earlier (1951), emphasize the
substantial reduction in money growth beginning in April 1928, long
before the summer 1929 downturn in business activity, as a result of
a conscious restrictive decision of the Federal Reserve System.

A related argument, that money supply in the Depression was
purely passive, responding to rather than exerting an independent
influence on real output, has also been shown to be of dubious

validity. Two studies examining the data for other contractionary
episodes in both the United States and the United Kingdom have
concluded that banking panics --

the

mechanism by which such induced

changes in money supply supposedly occurred —— were not primarily a
response to the cycle.13 These studies show further that a strong
association between financial panics and substantial cyclical
contractions only exists when the fluctuations in money supply were
themselves substantial.

A final body of evidence is provided by international

comparisons. Countries like Spain and China that were not on the
gold standard and, hence, were immune to the direct monetary effects

of the U.S. money supply decline escaped the full force of the

Depression.14 Those that were on the gold standard did not.
Similarly, and we turn to some of this evidence iituuediately below,

countries that left the gold standard earliest recovered the
quickest.

—6—

Particularly illustrative is the interwar experience of the

United Kingdom.15 In the United Kingdom year-to-year, money supply
growth declined from 2.1% in 1928 to .6% in 1929 and continued at
roughly the sante pace in 1930 before turning slightly negative in

1931. Then, after the abandonment of gold in 1931, money supply
again began to grow, increasing at a 3.5% per year average rate over

the next two years. Real income between 1929 and 1931 fell by nearly
8.0%. At that point the recovery began, slowly at first but by 1932
gathering momentum.

In the United States during these years, money supply declined
much more sharply and for a longer period than in the United Kingdom.
The average decrease was 1% per annum from April 1928 to April 1930,
5% during the next 12 months, 20% from April 193]. to April 1932, and

17.5% during the next 12 months, at which time money supply growth
resumed. Both real income and industrial production fell
precipitously ——

real

income by close to 35% from 1929 to 1932 and

industrial production by over 60%. Real income in the United States,
moreover, continued to fall through 1933 and, unlike the United
Kingdom, failed to reach its 1929 level until almost the end of the
decade.

From a cyclical standpoint, this was an exact reversal of roles

from those that the two countries played in the previous common

severe interwar contraction of 1920-21. What makes this
juxtaposition particularly interesting, with regard both to the Great

Depression itself and to the experience of the United Kingdom in the
1920s, is that the two countries' monetary roles were also reversed.
In both countries, money supply growth had averaged somewhat over 12%

per year from 1914 until 1920. In the United States, it turned
—7—

negative in 1921, then picked up substantially during the next two
years and in the process more than cancelled the 1920-21 decline in

the stock of money. In the United Kingdom, a monetary reversal of
this sort did not take place. The money supply actually continued to
decline between 1921 and 1923 after growing by less than 1% in 1921.
The reason for the disparity in monetary behavior in the two
countries was the desire of the British government to return to the
gold standard at the 1914 parity.

The real sides of the two economies reacted as might be

expected.16 Real income and industrial production in 1921 fell in

each by substantial amounts. But in the United States —with the post-contraction expansion in money —-

both

the

country

measures of real

activity picked up much more rapidly and thus made up their initial
declines much sooner than in the United Kingdom.

Keynes' General Theory, therefore, was written to explain

perceived empirical paradoxes which did not exist. Contrary to
contemporaneous impressions, monetary disturbances were of
appropriate magnitude and timing to explain both the general pattern

and much -- though certainly not all --

of

the important details of

the inter-war cyclical movements in America and Britain. Focussing
on nominal interest rates, Keynes misdiagnosed the thrust of monetary

policy and entirely missed the channel from low money growth to high
real interest rates to a low quantity of investment demanded.

II. The Post—WWII Inflation

If Keynes' model obfuscated rather than illuminated the Great
Depression, its application to policy during our own era has had even

more deleterious effects. One can debate the extent to which
—8—

economic ideas have consequence --

whether they do in fact exert a

strong independent influence on official policy or whether they
merely provide rationalizations for government officials to pursue
the policies they deem expedient and would have pursued in any case.
But one thing is clear, the inflationary policies followed in both
the United Kingdom and the United States for much of the postwar
period would not have commanded the intellectual respect that they

did were it not for

General Theory and the later theorizing in

the same vein that it engendered.

In the model of

General Theory the price level was constant.

Money, therefore, wac precluded from having any inflationary impact.
In later versions of the model, it had no impact so long as the

economy was below the level of full employment. Underlying the
implementation of both sets of models, moreover, was a belief in full
employment as a desideratum and a stress on the manipulation of
financial market interest rates as the means to achieve that goal.
The consequences of this line of reasoning were predictable and

in broad outline were predicted well before the fact. Inflation,
said the critics of such models, would eventually rise and in one
sophisticated analysis of the problem would most likely end up rising
at faster and faster rates.17

This is, of course, what happened. In the United Kingdom,
inflation started on its upward trend earlier than in the United

States and ultimately reached higher peaks. Nevertheless, the basic
process was the same.

Money supply growth increased and inflation rose. At some
juncture, the economy went into recession, whether because the
monetary authorities tightened to counteract the inflation, some
—9—

other factors intruded, or both. For a time thereafter inflation
temporally abated.

Confronted with the now lower inflation and the higher
unemployment, the monetary authorities shifted gears back to

expansion and thus set the next round of the process into motion. In
this round, though, policy had to become more expansive than in the

early stages of the previous one. The reason is that economic
participants caught on to what was happening. They adjusted their
expectations with regard to inflation and hence ultimately policy.
The policy stimulus to nominal spending and income had to be greater
to continue to affect real income and not simply go into higher

prices. Inflation thus was put on an accelerating track.
Inflation in the United Kingdom, in the last half of the l950s

averaged 2.1% per year.18 By the first half of the '60s it had risen
to an average annual rate of 3.6%. In the United States during the
late '50s and early '60s, in contrast, inflation was still low —— an

average of 1.6% per year between 1955 and 1965. By the end of the
decade, however, it had reached a peak of 5.2% and, although falling
somewhat in the aftermath of the 1969-70 recession was soon to be

headed higher. In the United Kingdom inflation continued to run a
cycle ahead of the rate in the United States, moving up sharply to a

peak of close to 9% in 1971, before dropping back slightly a year
later.

During this period, moreover, inflation became worldwide.
Prices in other industrial countries followed much the same course,

with only the absolute levels of inflation rates but not their
tendency to drift upwards differing among countries.
—10—

At the time, the popular view among economists writing in the
Keynesian tradition was that the inflation was the result of outside

forces; special factors. Initially, increased militancy of trade
unions and spreading monopoly power of the business sector were the

two most often cited. Then in the early 1970s, when prices of
agricultural products and other raw materials began to soar,
proponents of this general class of explanations keyed in on these

increases as the specific factors driving inflation. The oil-price
shocks of the early and late 1970$ and the firther increases in
inflation in the United Kingdom and in the United States that came in
their wakes only served to confirm those beliefs.

The argument --

except by pure serendipity -- does not explain

the ability of economists who viewed the world in pre-Keynesian
quantity-theory terms to project the drift of inflation during these

years well beforQ the fact. More important, it runs counter to the

bulk of the empirical evidence amassed afterwards. Our own research
on inflation in the United States, the United Kingdom and six other

major industrial countries is a prime example.19 The results of that
study are fully consistent with the quantity-theory view.

The major factor accounting for the world inflation through the
early 1970s, we found, was the upward trend in American monetary

growth. Through a variety of channels operable under fixed exchange
rates, the expansionary policy in the United States spilled over
abroad, leading to increases in monetary growth and subsequently in

inflation too. Some countries, like Germany, appear to have been
unwilling participants in the process. Others like the United
Kingdom apparently would have pursued expansionary policies on their
own.

Indeed,

this divergence in goals between the United States and
—11—

other countries was the major reason that the Bretton Woods system of

fixed exchange rates broke down. Oil prices in the early l970s, we
found, played a limited role.

During the late 1970s the same thing also appears to have been

true. Most countries did experience a more or less similar increase
in inflation following the second oil-price shock in 1979.20 But
these fluctuations in inflation rates in the various countries were
about markedly different average rates of inflation for the period as

a whole. These average rates of inflation, in turn, bore a striking
correspondence to the degree of policy expansiveness under the

floating exchange rate system then in existence. Countries that
engineered a decrease in their trend rates of monetary growth rates
during the floating-rate period relative to the fixed-rate period on
average saw a near one—to-one decrease in their trend rates of

inflation. Countries that, in contrast, engineered an increase in
monetary growth on average saw a near one—to—one increase in trend

inflation.21 Oil price increases, therefore, either generated these
changes in trend monetary growth rates in the various countries,

which seems implausible given the differences in their monetary
institutions and in their policy goals, or had little substantial
lasting effects.

III Conclusions

Keynes' General Theory was a brilliant explanation of

fundamentally misappreciated events. Subsequent research has found
evidence neither of the loose but ineffective monetary policy in the
Depression nor of the substantial downward shift in the investment

function in that episode that were central to the message of Thg
—12—

General Theory. Appearances to the contrary seem to have been rooted
in a major confusion between nominal and real interest rates. Had
Keynes' thinking incorporated this distinction, the events of the

Depression would have seemed much less paradoxical and Th neral
Theory might never have been written.
Discrediting as later scholarship has been to Keynes' analysis,

it is the events of the past two decades that have proven most

damning. Keynes' theories were applied, but found extremely wanting.
The post war inflation stands as their monument, a monument to an
ingenuous structure based upon a nearly total misinterpretation of
what actually happened slightly more than half a century ago.

—13—

RE FERENCES

Benjamin, Daniel K., and Levis A. Kochiri, "Searching for an
Explanation of Unemployment in Interwar Britain," Journal of

Political Economy, June 1979, : 441—478.
Burns, Arthur F., and Wesley C. Mitchell, Measuring Business Cycles,
New York: NBER, 1946.

Cagan, Phillip, Determinants and Effects i Changes in the Stock of
Money 1875-1960, New York: Columbia University Press for NBER,
1965.

Choudhri, Ehsan U., and Levis A. Kochin, "The Exchange Rate and the
International Transmission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some
Evidence from the Great Depression", Journal p1 Money. Credit
and Banking, November 1980, j.: 565—74.

Committee on Finance and Industry, Report [the Macm1lan Report],
cmnd.389, London: I1SO, 1931
Darby, Michael R., "Three—and-a-Half-Million U.S. Employees Have Been
Mislaid; or, An Explanation of Unemployment, 1934-1941," Journal

p1

Political

Economy, February 1976, : 1—16.

Darby, Michael R., James R. Lothian and Arthur E. Gandolfi, Anna J.
Schwartz and Alan C. Stockman, The International Transmission of
Inflation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1983.
Darby, Michael R., and Michael T. Melvin, Intermediate
Macroeôonomics, Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman and Co., 1986.
The Economist, various issues, 1921—1929.
Feinstein, C.H., National Income Expenditures and Output of the
United Kingdom, 1855—1965, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1972.
Fisher, Irving, "A Statistical Relation between Unemployment and
Price Changes," International Labor Review, June 1926, :
785—792. (Reprinted Journal p1 Political Economy, March/April

1973, : 496—502.)
_______________,

"Are Booms and Depressions Transmitted

Internationally Through Monetary Standards?," Bulletin p1
International Statistical Institute, 1935, : 1—29.
Friedman, Milton, "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic

Review, March 1968, : 1—17.
Monetary History of the
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz,
United States, 1867—1960, Princeton: Princeton University Press
for NBER, 1963.

—14—

Monetary Trends jj the United States
the ited
Kingdom, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1982.

______________

Gandolfi, Arthur E., "Stability of the Demand for Money during the
Great Contraction -— 1929-1933," Journal p Political Economy,

September/October 1974, : 969-83.
Gandolfi, Arthur E., and James R. Lothian, "Did Monetary Forces Cause
the Great Depression? A Review Essay," Journal i Monei Credit
Banking, November 1977, , 679-91.
_______________, "The Demand for Money from the Great Depression to

the Present," American Economic Review, May 1976, j: 46-51.
Huffman, Wallace E. and James R. Lothian, "The Gold Standard and the
Transmission of Business Cycles, 1833—1932," in Michael D. Bordo
and Anna J. Schwartz, eds., A Retrospective on the Classical
Gold Standard, 1821—1931, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
for the NBER, 1984.
Hume, David, "Of Money" E1752J, reprinted in Eugene Rotwein, ed.,
David Huine Writings
Economics, Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1970, 33—46.
International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics,
various issues.

Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory
Money, London: Macmillan, 1967.

Employment Interest and

Lothian, James R., "Comments on 'Monetarist Interpretations of the
Great Depression'," in Karl Brunner ed.,
Great Depression
Revisited, Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishing for Rochester
Studies in Economics and Policy Issues, 1981, 134—147.

______________ "Equilibrium Relationships Between Money and Other
Economic Variables" American Economic Review, September 1985,
75, 828—835.
Meltzer, Allan M., "The Demand for Money: The Evidence from the Time
Series," Journal
Political Economy, June 1963, 21, 219—246.
Nobay, A. Robert, and Harry G. Johnson, "Nonetarism: A HistoricTheoretic Perspective," Journal g Economic Literature, June

1977, : 470—485.
Orwell, George, The Road
Ltd., 1937.

Wician Pier, London: Victor Gollanez

Schwartz, Anna J., "Understanding 1929-1933", in Karl Brunner ed.,
The Great Depression Revisited, Boston: Martinus Nijhoff
Publishing for Rochester Studies in Economics and Policy Issues,
1981.

—15—

Stigler, George, "Nobel Lecture: The Process and Progress of
Economics" Journal j Political Economy, August 1983, 91:
529—545.

Temin, Peter, p Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression?, New
York: Norton, 1976.

Effects Q
Parer
Thornton, Henry, fl Enauirv into the Nature
Great Britain [1802], reprinted with additional
Credit
material in F.A. von Hayek, ed., London: Allen and Unwin, 1939.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis,
Long-Term Economic Growth, 1860-1970, washington D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1973.

Warburton, Clark, "The Misplaced Emphasis in Contemporary
Business-Fluctuation Theory," in Friedrich A. Lutz and Lloyd W.
Mints, eds. Readings jfl Monetary Theory, Homewood, Ill.:
Richard D. Irwin, Inc., for the American Economic Association
1951. [An expanded reprint of his article in the Journal g
Business, 1946, ]9: 199—220.]

—16—

NOTES
1
2

General Theory, pp. 383—384.

Journal g Political Economy, August 1983,

p. 534.

Committee on Finance and Industry, Report, p. 6.

Sources of the interwar data reported here and below were as
follows: reference cycle dates, Arthur F. Burns and Wesley C.
Mitchell (1946); real income (net national product) for both
countries and yearly U.K. money supply (M2), Milton Friedman and Anna
J. Schwartz (1982); U.K. industrial production and unemployment (as a
percent of total employees), C.H. Feinstein (1972); monthly U.S.
money supply (M2) and the monetary base (high-powered money),
Friedman and Schwartz (1963); U.S. industrial production, U.S.
Department of Commerce (1973); U.S. unemployment, Darby (1976).
Note that all percentage changes referred to below were computed on a
continuously compounded basis.
Fisher investigated the effects of changes in the price level on
output using an empirically based version of the modern Lucas supply
function.
The early pre-Keynesian analysis is typified by David Hume "Of
Money" [1752], reprinted in Eugene Rotwein, ed., David Huine Writins
Economics (1970) and Henry Thornton,
Nature
Encruiry into
Effects g Paper Credit
Great Britain [1802], F.A. von
Hayek, ed. (1965).
A. Robert Nobay and Harry G. Johnson (1977, pp. 471-476) have an
excellent discussion of the thrust of pre-Keynesian monetary theory
and its emphasis on the dynamics of the "transition period."

g

6

Clark Warburton (1951) details the apparent ignorance of an
astonishingly large number of prominent economists of the period to
the factual evidence on money supply changes in the ].920s and l930s.
(See, especially, his note 10).
This characterization is taken from a lecture by Milton Friedman.
8

This same confusion is present in Peter Temin's (1976) attempt to
resuscitate Keynes' explanation of the Depression. See Arthur E.
Gandolfi. and James R. Lothian (1977) for a further critique of
Temin's analysis.
Thg General Theory p. 207.
10

The figures cited are from Wallace E. Huffman and Lothian (1984).

11

Gandolfi, (1974) and Gandolfi and Lothian (1976) contain estimates
of money demand functions from cross-state data. Meltzer (1963) and
Friedman and Schwartz (1982) provide estimates from time series data
for the United States and for the United States and the United
Kingdom, respectively. None of these studies shows a liquidity trap
to be characteristic of the data.
—17—

12 See Lothian (1981) for estimates of one such relationship. Also

see the discussion in Schwartz (1982).
13

Phillip Cagan (1965) analyzes the relationships among cyclical
contractions, monetary contractions and financial crisis for the
United States during the late nineteenth and early •twentieth
centuries. Huffman and Lothian (1984) make comparisons similar to
Cagan's using data for both the United Kingdom and the United States
for the period beginning in 1833 and ending with the Great Depression
of the 1930$.
14 Experiences of non—gold standard countries and of countries that

left the gold standard are analyzed by Ehsan Choudhri and Levis
Kochin (1980). Also see Irving Fisher (1936) for an earlier, and in
many respects similar, analysis.
15 This discussion draws on Lothian (1982), pp. 142 to 145.

16
This painful process of slow monetary growth that began in 1921
and continued throughout the l920s in the United Kingdom is one

factor responsible for the high unemployment. Daniel Benjamin and
Levis Kochin (1979) provide evidence of another: unemployment
benefits were substantially raised in real terms, which by their
calculations, increased the normal (non-cyclical) level of
unemployment 2 to 3 percentage points.
17 The forecast of accelerating inflation is contained in Friedman's
(1969) American Economic Association Presidential Address.
18 The source of post-World War II data cited here and below is the
International Monetary Fund's International Financial Statistics.
19

Darby, Lothian, et al, flg International Transmission
Inflation. The other six countries analyzed in that study were
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the Netherlands.
20 The increase in annual inflation rates in the same eight countries
covered in our International Transmission study averaged 4.9%
percentage points between 1978 and 1980 -- the years surrounding the

second oil—price shocks. Average rates of inflation in the period
1976 to 1980, however, differed substantially among these countries.
Japan and Germany, the two countries with the least expansive
monetary policy experienced relatively low average rates of inflation
—— an average of 5.3% per year for the two combined. France, Italy
and the United Kingdom, the countries with the most expansive policy,
experienced the highest rates —- an average of 15.4% per year for
Italy and the United Kingdom combined and 19.4% per year in France.
The other three countries Canada, the Netherlands and the United
States fell somewhere in between in terms of both policy
expansiveness and inflation.
21 See Lothian (1985) for an analysis of the relationship between
changes in average money supply growth rates and in average inflation
rates in 20 OECD countries over the periods 1956 to 1973 and 1974 to
1980.
—18—

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Michael R. Darby was born in 1945 in Dallas, Texas, and educated
at Dartmouth College (A.B. 1967) and the University of Chicago (M.A.

1968, Ph. D. 1970). In 1972 Darby joined the economics faculty of
the University of California, Los Angeles, where he is now Professor
of Economics, after a two-year stint as assistant professor at the

Ohio State University. He has had visiting appointments at the
National Bureau of Economic Research, of which he currently is a
Research Associate, and the Hoover Institution at Stanford

University. He serves as Editor of the Journal

International

Money and Finance and on the Editorial Board of the American Economic

Review. He is the author or coauthor of seven books and monographs
and of numerous professional articles on macroeconomics and

international finance. His leisure interests include art and naval
history, music, and swimming.

—19—

James R. Lothian

Vice President and Economist with Citicorp Investment Bank since
1983, Lothian joined Citibank in 1972, receiving his doctorate in

economics from the University of Chicago a year later. He has been a
Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research, is a
member of the editorial board of the Journal

International Money

and Finance and has held teaching positions at Queens College of the

City of New York, the University of Illinois in Chicago and Lake

Forest College. He is coauthor of the International Transmission of
Inflation, has published in numerous scholarly journals and

collections and has written regularly on financial and economic

topics for the business press and for business periodicals. At
Citicorp he is author and editor of Economics

Markets, a regular

series of monographs on current economic and financial topics.

—20—

