                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                TRIAL AND SETTLEMENT:
                           A STUDY OF HIGH-LOW AGREEMENTS

                                             J.J. Prescott
                                           Kathryn E. Spier
                                            Albert Yoon

                                        Working Paper 19873
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19873


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




The authors are grateful to the American Bar Association Litigation Research Fund and the Searle
Center on Law, Regulation, and Economic Growth for supporting this research, and would like to
thank Jim Dana, Andrew Daughety, John DiNardo, Jim Greiner, Sam Gross, Eric Helland, Kyle Logue,
Jennifer Reinganum, Jesse Rothstein, Steve Shavell, Jeff Smith, Kathy Zeiler, and seminar participants
at the Harvard Law School, the NBER, the University of Michigan, the University of Tel Aviv, Columbia
Law School, and the Searle Center’s Research Symposium on Empirical Studies of Civil Liability
(at Northwestern Law School). Kathryn Spier acknowledges financial support from the John M. Olin
Center for Law, Economics, and Business at the Harvard Law. Albert Yoon would like to thank the
Russell Sage Foundation and the Law School Admissions Council for their generous financial support.
We would also like to thank Jennifer Allen, Grady Bridges, Pier DeRoo, Rachel Goldstein, Michael
Gough, Ray Magnum, Jon Markman, Michael Mulvania, and Jesse Taylor for excellent research assistance.
Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by J.J. Prescott, Kathryn E. Spier, and Albert Yoon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trial and Settlement: A Study of High-Low Agreements
J.J. Prescott, Kathryn E. Spier, and Albert Yoon
NBER Working Paper No. 19873
March 2014
JEL No. D86,K41

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper presents the first systematic theoretical and empirical study of high-low agreements in civil
litigation. A high-low agreement is a private contract that, if signed by litigants before the conclusion
of a trial, constrains any plaintiff recovery to a specified range. Whereas existing work describes litigation
as a choice between trial and settlement, our examination of high-low agreements—an increasingly
popular phenomenon in civil litigation—introduces partial or incomplete settlements. In our theoretical
model, trial is both costly and risky. When litigants have divergent subjective beliefs and are mutually
optimistic about their trial prospects, cases may fail to settle. In these cases, high-low agreements can
be in litigants’ mutual interest because they limit the risk of outlier awards while still allowing an optimal
degree of speculation. Using claims data from a national insurance company, we describe the features
of these agreements and empirically investigate the factors that may influence whether litigants discuss
or enter into them. Our empirical findings are consistent with the predictions of the theoretical model.
We also explore extensions and alternative explanations for high-low agreements, including their use
to mitigate excessive, offsetting trial expenditures and the role that negotiation costs might play. Other
applications include the use of collars in mergers and acquisitions.


J.J. Prescott                                         Albert Yoon
University of Michigan Law School                     University of Toronto Faculty of Law
950 Legal Research                                    84 Queen's Park Blvd
625 South State Street                                Toronto, ON M5S 2C5
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1215 USA                    albert.yoon@utoronto.ca
jprescott@umich.edu

Kathryn E. Spier
Hauser Hall 302
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kspier@law.harvard.edu
1.        Introduction
        In the summer of 2004, a semi-trailer truck cruising at 65 miles per hour rear-ended a
Ford pickup truck that was stopped in a line of traffic. The pickup truck was in flames as
witnesses pulled the driver, Delbert Sanders, from the wreckage. The driver of the semi, who
had been searching for his dropped cell phone at the time of the accident, was unharmed. The
semi driver and his insurer admitted liability for the accident, but they disputed the alleged
severity of Sanders’ claimed back injury. Settlement negotiations reached an impasse—the
defendants’ offer of $500,000 was far below the $1.3 million that Sanders demanded. Both
sides were shocked when the jury returned a $5.25 million verdict. Sanders never received
$5.25 million, however. Instead, defendants paid only $1.5 million, all that was owed under a
“high-low agreement” signed by the parties before the jury rendered its verdict.1

       A high-low agreement is a contract “in which a defendant agrees to pay the plaintiff a
minimum recovery in return for the plaintiff’s agreement to accept a maximum amount
regardless of the outcome of trial.”2 High-low agreements allow both sides to hedge their bets
and appear to have become increasingly popular over the last 30 years.3 Although some
lawyers and judges have expressed reservations about their use,4 high-low agreements have
found significant support among litigants and legal practitioners, including judges. In the
words of Pennsylvania appeals judge, “[a]s a tool commonly utilized in litigation, a high/low
agreement guarantees a plaintiff a minimal recovery while concomitantly circumscribing a
defendant’s potential exposure. Court, counsel, and litigants favor them.”5



      1
          Their agreement specified a low of $300,000 and a high of $1.5 million. See Emerick (2007).
      2
       Black’s Law Dictionary, 8th ed. (2004). A related form of agreement involves giving factfinders a choice
between two awards. In high-low cases, however, factfinders often remain unaware of the agreement.
      3
        McDonough (2005). In Cook County, Illinois, Judge Richard Elrod estimated that high-low agreements
are discussed in 20 to 30 percent—and actually used in 10 percent—of the claims he sees. The exact origins of
high-low agreements are unknown. A mid-1970s article by a New York State judge described high-low
agreements and their advantages to litigants, including risk reduction and appeal delay avoidance (Finz, 1976).
      4
         For example, according to one plaintiffs’ attorney, a high-low agreement “reduces the whole concept of
a judicial proceeding to a wager…” and “make(s) a mockery of the system” (Riner, 1989). While typically
enforceable, high-low agreements have received greater scrutiny in situations involving multiple defendants and
minors. See Hoenig (2006) and Faley and Alonso (1998). See also McDonough (2005).
      5
         Thompson v. T.J. Whipple Const. Co., 985 A.2d 221, 229 (Pa. Super. 2009). High-low agreements are
also featured in several state-sponsored alternative dispute programs. For example, they are specifically defined
and applied in the statuary language of California’s expedited jury trial program, CAL. CIV. PRO. CODE §§
630.01(c), 630.03 (West), and in New York’s summary jury trial program, NY R KINGS SJT Rules 12, 17
(West). Survey information from Charleston County, North Carolina suggests that “virtually all parties enter into
a high-low agreement when opting for a [summary jury trial].” See Paula L. Hannaford-Agor et al. (2012).


                                                        1
         In this paper, we present the first systematic study of high-low agreements in civil
litigation,6 beginning with a theoretical model in which litigants can enter into contracts prior
to risky and costly trials. When opposing litigants are both optimistic about their chances at
trial and when litigation costs are not too large, both parties would prefer to go to trial rather
than settle. These litigants will not necessarily prefer a “naked” trial, however. A high-low
agreement that places a ceiling and a floor on any damages award can be optimal when the
risk from going to trial is large and at least one litigant is sufficiently risk averse. High-low
agreements can serve these litigants’ joint interests by limiting risk exposure at trial—thereby
reducing the risk premiums they bear—while still allowing them to benefit from their
confidence in their own cases.

        We then explore the actual use of high-low agreements using claims data from a large,
national insurer. More than five percent of litigated claims in our sample involved discussions
of high-low agreements; almost four percent had high-low agreements in place when they
were resolved at trial or arbitration; and hundreds of settled claims also involved high-low
discussions or agreements. We demonstrate that litigant behavior in our data set is consistent
with the basic predictions of our model. Specifically, claims that are expected to be low cost
and highly volatile are more likely, relative to baseline probabilities, to involve high-low
discussions and/or result in a high-low agreement during litigation. Importantly, we do not
claim that litigants seek high-lows for the reasons we identify—only that the patterns in the
data are consistent with their doing so.

          Our paper contributes to the large literature on the resolution of litigation.7 Most civil
cases in the U.S. settle out of court. In state courts, fewer than four percent of filed cases go to
trial. In federal courts, the figure is closer to two percent.8 “Opting out” of formal litigation
generally makes economic sense: litigation is expensive, time-consuming, and risky. Given
the obvious advantages of settlement, most scholarship has focused on the factors that
motivate most parties to settle yet result in some parties proceeding to trial despite the benefits
of avoiding the costs and uncertainties of adjudication.



      6
         Coulson (1968) contains the first academic mention of high-low agreements. No detailed treatment of
high-low agreements exists in either the legal or economics literatures, although articles briefly discuss them.
See, e.g., Gross and Syverud (1996, pp. 61–62). Because settlement discussions occur in private, and litigants are
protective of litigation-related information, the empirical study of high-low agreements is challenging. To our
knowledge, disclosure of high-low agreements is not a codified requirement in any jurisdiction.
      7
          See Spier (2007), Daughety (2000), Cooter and Rubinfeld (1989), and Hay and Spier (1998).
      8
        See Ostrom, Kauder, and La Fountain (2001, p. 29) and Judicial Business of the United States Courts
(2001, p. 154 table C-4).


                                                        2
         Beginning with the early theoretical work of Landes (1971), Posner (1973), and Gould
(1973), commentators have suggested that settlement may fail when litigants have different
subjective beliefs about the likely outcome at trial.9 More recent work shows that cases may
fail to settle when litigants are asymmetrically informed about certain aspects of the
litigation.10 An active empirical literature explores why and when litigants will settle out of
court, examining, for example, the role of the damages at stake, litigants’ appetites for risk,
and the possibility of reputation effects.11 In these literatures, settlement is almost always
viewed as a simple transfer payment from a defendant to a plaintiff in exchange for forgoing
further pursuit of a claim.12 In contrast, we allow litigants to commit to future transfer
payments that are conditional on an outcome at trial, and we show that partial settlements in
the form of high-low agreements can serve the parties’ joint interests.13

         Our analysis may also provide insight into contracting practices outside of litigation,
such as the use of “collars” in corporate merger agreements. Collars are common in stock
mergers in which target shareholders are paid in bidders’ stock.14 A fixed exchange ratio
collar, for example, specifies a constant ratio of exchange over a pre-specified range of bidder
       9
         This is the approach taken here. This so-called “mutual optimism” framework has been used to explore
the selection of cases for trial (Priest and Klein, 1984), fee-shifting (Shavell, 1982), conflicts between lawyers
and clients (Miller, 1987), and bifurcation of trials (Landes, 1993). It has also served as a foundation for
empirical work on settlement (see Waldfogel, 1998). Experimental and anecdotal evidence indicates that litigants
tend to exhibit self-serving biases (Loewenstein et al., 1993). Plaintiffs may overestimate expected judgments at
trial while defendants may underestimate them. See Bar-Gill (2006) on the strategic advantages of self-serving
biases, and Yildiz (2003, 2004) for more recent theoretical work on bargaining without common priors.
       10
            See P’ng (1983), Bebchuk (1984), Reinganum and Wilde (1986), Nalebuff (1987), and Spier (1992).
       11
          See, for example, Danzon and Lillard (1983), Farber and White (1991), Kessler et al. (1996), Fournier
and Zuehlke (1996), Fenn and Rickman (1999), Viscusi (1988) and the survey by Kessler and Rubinfeld (2004).
Sieg (2000) and Watanabe (2005) present structural econometric models of settlement. Yoon (2001), Snyder and
Hughes (1990), and Hughes and Snyder (1995) explore the effects of various tort reforms. Other work examines
the selection effects at trial. See Waldfogel (1995), Kessler, Meites, and Miller (1996), Eisenberg and Farber
(1997), and Siegelman and Waldfogel (1999).
       12
         A notable exception is a literature that applies the mechanism-design techniques of Myerson (1979) and
Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) to settlement. Spier (1994) and Klement and Neeman (2005) consider direct
revelation mechanisms where the transfer payments depend on the litigants’ pretrial announcements as well as
the outcome at trial. Legal scholars have cautioned against the use of the trial-settlement dichotomy (Eisenberg
and Lanvers, 2008; Clermont and Schwab, 2008; Hadfield, 2004).
       13
          Donohue (1991) studies the idea that parties who are not content with the fee-shifting rule in their
jurisdiction can privately contract for an alternative rule. He noted, however, the dearth of evidence of these
contracts in practice. We find ample real-world evidence of high-low agreements.
       14
          There is a large literature exploring the choice between cash offers and stock offers in mergers and
acquisitions. Myers and Majluf (1984) argue that bidders will make a stock offer when they believe their stock to
be overvalued; Hansen (1987) argues that stock offers can mitigate the lemons problem when targets are
privately informed. Relatively little has been written on collars, however. Using data on abnormal bidder returns
at the time of merger announcements, Houston and Ryngaert (1997) argue that the use of collars is consistent
with the asymmetric information theories. See also Fuller (2003) and Officer (2004).


                                                         3
stock prices—with restrictions outside of this range. To illustrate, when First Union bid to
acquire BancFlorida in 1994, it promised BancFlorida’s shareholders 0.669 shares of its stock
for each BancFlorida share if First Union’s stock price was between $41.875 and $44.875. If
the stock was trading below $41.875 or above $44.875, however, shareholders would instead
receive $28 or $30 worth of stock per share, respectively.15 Thus, BancFlorida shareholders
were assured between $28 and $30 per share, with the exact price in that range determined by
First Union’s stock value at the time of the transaction. Following the logic of our paper, fixed
exchange ratio collars may allow both the bidder and target shareholders to speculate based
on their divergent priors about the future price of the bidder’s stock (due perhaps to different
beliefs about any synergies resulting from the merger) while at the same time insulating
potentially risk averse parties (e.g., large block shareholders or owners of closely held target
firms) from bearing excessive risk from the transaction.16

        We begin the rest of the paper in the next section by augmenting the standard out-of-
court settlement model to allow litigants to modify future trial outcomes by contract, and we
identify the conditions under which parties would find high-low agreements optimal. Section
3 describes our insurance litigation data. Section 4 examines whether the patterns in high-low
discussions and agreements in our data are consistent with our model’s predictions. Section 5
extends our model by showing that litigants can also use high-low agreements to prevent the
excessive rent-seeking that can occur when litigation costs are endogenous and offsetting in
their effects on expected trial outcomes. Section 6 concludes.


2.          The Model

        Two litigants, a plaintiff and a defendant, engage in settlement negotiations prior to a
risky civil trial. If negotiations fail, the case proceeds to trial, where the court enters a
judgment for either high damages, , or low damages, , where                       . The plaintiff and
defendant assess the probability of a high damages award before settlement negotiations. The
plaintiff believes that this probability is      ∈ 0,1 while the defendant believes it is        ∈
 0,1 . These beliefs are subjective and may diverge from one another. When                     the
litigants are mutually optimistic about their lawsuits, and when                the litigants are
mutually pessimistic. The plaintiff’s and defendant’s preferences are represented by CARA
(constant absolute risk aversion) expected utility functions                 exp           and

       15
         See BancFlorida Financial Corporation’s 8-K filing with the SEC on January 17, 1994. Officer (2004)
also uses this example and describes other types of collars as well.
       16
        Interest rate collars in loan agreements, in which the borrower’s interest rate is permitted to “float”
between a ceiling and a floor, provide another example. See Briys, Crouhy, and Schobel (1991).


                                                         4
            exp          , where     and     are the coefficients of absolute risk aversion,17
although all results continue to hold when one of the litigants (e.g., the defendant) is risk
neutral.18 The litigation costs of the plaintiff and defendant are and , respectively. The
damages, beliefs, preferences, and costs are all assumed to be common knowledge.

         Contracts signed before trial may take one of two forms. An ordinary settlement
contract is a simple transfer payment, , from the defendant to the plaintiff. By agreeing to
settle, litigants can avoid both the risk and costs of trial.19 Alternatively, litigants may
negotiate an award modification contract that specifies two payments,            and . Specifically,
when the court awards high damages, the defendant agrees to pay            under the contract to the
plaintiff instead of . Similarly, when the court awards low damages, the defendant agrees to
pay to the plaintiff instead of . Negotiating award modification contracts may be costly:
in addition to bearing the litigation costs at trial, and , the parties incur costs         and
when they negotiate an award modification contract.

            A Pareto optimal award-modification contract would satisfy:

                                                                               .                                  (1)
             1                                1

Equation (1) defines a locus of points,       , ), where the litigants’ indifference curves are
                        20
tangent to each other. Note that if              then Pareto optimality implies          . When
the litigants have the same beliefs, it is jointly optimal for them to insure each other fully
against the risk at trial. The next Lemma characterizes the set of Pareto-optimal modification
contracts when litigants have potentially different beliefs (see Appendix A for a proof).



       17
          See Farmer and Pecorino (1994) and Heyes et al. (2004) for settlement models with risk averse parties.
CARA functions, commonly used in finance and macroeconomics, allow no income or wealth effects, generating
straightforward comparative statics, as litigation costs drop out when calculating the optimal agreement.
       18
          Large insurers are diversified across claims, and may be considered risk neutral. Formally, this is
captured in the limit as     approaches zero. Interestingly, one can view the provision of high-low contracts to
plaintiffs as a natural extension of their core business of providing insurance to others.
       19
          Note that if litigants have the same subjective assessments of the probability that the plaintiff will win,
then they would be jointly better off settling out of court for the expected damages,                    1          .
If the parties are both sufficiently optimistic about their own cases, so πp is significantly higher than , then
there may be no ordinary settlement contract, , that makes both the plaintiff and defendant better off.
       20
          Equation (1) results if the plaintiff has the bargaining power and chooses     and to maximize
                                                   1                        , subject to
 1                                                              1                          . It would also be
obtained if the defendant has the bargaining power and chooses the terms to maximize his expected utility
subject to the plaintiff’s individual rationality constraint.


                                                          5
      LEMMA (1): With CARA expected utility, the set of unconstrained Pareto-optimal
award modification contracts satisfy     ∆∗ where

                     1             1⁄           1
            ∆∗                                      .                                                                (2)
                                   1⁄           1

        The implications of equation (2) are intuitive. When litigants are very risk averse,
meaning            is large, then and will be close together, reflecting the strong desire
for insurance by the parties. Conversely, when litigants are not very averse to risk, so
         is small, then and will be far apart.

        Equation (2) also implies that when litigants are “mutually optimistic” (           ) they
have an incentive to speculate or gamble on the outcome at trial by increasing the stakes at the
margin: the plaintiff receives a higher contractual payout when actual damages are found to
be high instead of low (            0 . When litigants are “mutually pessimistic” (            ),
this ordering is reversed: the contract specifies a higher payout to the plaintiff when the court
finds that damages are low, and a lower payout when actual damages are found to be high
(            0).21 Contracts with            0 might lead litigants to sabotage their own cases,
however, and may therefore be unwise in practice.

       In order to focus attention on “realistic” award-modification contracts, we impose the
following contractual restriction:

            ASSUMPTION (1):                                       .

        This assumption allows for many contracts we observe in practice. It permits ordinary
settlement agreements where            ; high-low agreements in which the defendant agrees to
a higher award in the low state,          , if the plaintiff agrees to a lower award in the high
state,         ; and no agreement at all, in which              and          . This assumption does
rule out contracts in which         , however, because such contracts would distort incentives,
encouraging litigants to sabotage their own cases. Assumption (1) also eliminates contracts
that amplify trial risk by making the high outcome, , even higher than the actual damages in
the high state, , or by making lower than the low-state damages, .22

       21
          In the extreme case of        0 and           1, the plaintiff and defendant would blissfully agree to a
contract that had      ∞ and            ∞.
       22
         Optimistic, risk-neutral litigants would certainly want to amplify risk—indeed, they would want to
spread the awards as far apart as possible. Some degree of amplification would be jointly desirable even for risk-
averse parties when a plaintiff believes it is much more likely that the court will award high damages than a
defendant does. Imagine an extreme case in which both parties believe with certainty that they will prevail and
so sign contract with      0        and         2        . The defendant pays zero in expectation and the plaintiff


                                                              6
       We now characterize the litigants’ jointly optimal decision to settle out of court or
proceed to trial, either with a high-low contract (that specifies how any damages award would
be modified) in place, or without any contract at all. In the proposition, the function
   , which is characterized in the appendix, captures the joint benefit of the plaintiff and the
defendant from trial without an award-modification contract.23

        PROPOSITION (1): If the litigants are mutually pessimistic,                                      , then they
settle out of court for a fixed amount. If the litigants are mutually optimistic,                              , then
trials may occur.
    (i) If             ∆ where ∆ ∆∗ is defined by ∆                 ∆∗           , then the
        litigants proceed to trial without any modification of the court’s award when
                          and settle out of court for a fixed amount otherwise.
    (ii) If            ∆ then the litigants proceed to trial with a high-low contract specifying
                     ∆∗ when                            ∆∗ and settle out of court for a fixed
           amount otherwise.

        Assumption (1) prevents mutually pessimistic litigants (those with                   ) from
“shorting their own stock” with contracts with                 , so mutually pessimistic litigants will
never go to trial. These cases will simply settle out of court. If the litigants are mutually
optimistic, however, some sort of trial may occur. In part (i), the risk associated with a naked
trial,         , is relatively small and so the optimistic litigants gladly bear the full risk
associated with a naked trail when the total litigation costs,              , are smaller than the joint
                                                        24
gross benefit from naked litigation,                   . In part (ii), where the risk associated with a
naked trial,           , is large, the litigants choose to limit this risk through a high-low contract
                     ∗
with               ∆ . The mutually optimistic litigants proceed to trial when their joint
transactions costs,                         , are smaller than the joint gross benefit from going to
trial with an optimal high-low contract, Δ∗ .25



expects twice as much as he would have otherwise received. Indeed, with these extreme beliefs and absent
liquidity constraints, the litigants would agree to      – ∞ and      ∞. Such contracts might violate anti-
gambling statutes or face other legal barriers when attempts at enforcement were made, but betting on lawsuit
outcomes is not purely hypothetical. Jolly (1883) describes how the taxation of such wagers was a source of
revenue for the judiciary under ancient Hindu law. See Donohue (1991) for a discussion of these issues in the
context of contracting over the allocation of legal fees.
      23
           This function takes on value zero when            0 and reaches its maximum value ∆∗ when
              ∗
             ∆ as defined in Lemma (1). The parties prefer a costly trial to any out-of-court settlement when
                   .
      24
           Assumption (1) prevents these litigants from amplifying the risk at trial.
      25
          If                Δ∗ then this condition is not satisfied for any   and       and so high-low contracts will
not be signed.


                                                           7
        Figure 1 depicts the results of Proposition 1 when litigants are mutually optimistic,
          .26 Cases settle out of court when the litigation costs,        , are large but proceed to
trial when the litigation costs are small. Holding the litigation costs fixed, one can see that
“naked” trails arise in an intermediate range where the spread               is neither too high nor
too low. When the spread              exceeds a threshold,             ∆, then parties proceed to
                                   27
trial with a high-low agreement.

                                                Figure 1


                                                    Out-of-Court
                                                     Settlement
                   Δ∗
                                                                      ∙
                                            Trial without
   ∆∗                                        High-Low
                                                                             Trial with
                                                                             High-Low


                                                 Δ∗                 Δ

       The next result follows immediately from Proposition (1) and from the properties of
the function            .

        PROPOSITION (2): When                   rises, the likelihood of the parties agreeing to an
out-of-court settlement increases and the likelihood of trials (with or without high-low
agreements) falls. When            rises, (i) the likelihood of settlement falls when           is
small and rises when           is large; (ii) the likelihood of a trial without a high-low
agreement rises when            is small and falls when              is large; and, (iii) the
likelihood of a high-low agreement increases.


        26
           When              0, the litigants’ joint benefit of a naked trial is zero, 0    0. As the spread
increases, naked trials become more risky for both litigants, creating both benefits and additional costs for the
litigants. The larger spread is jointly beneficial ex ante because the parties are mutually optimistic and so there
are mutual gains from trade from speculating at trial. At the same time, the litigants are made relatively worse off
by the increased risk premium, which augments the direct costs of litigation. When                is close to zero and
rising, the benefit of speculation initially grows faster than the risk premium (it is second order), so
is increasing. When            reaches ∆∗ , the risk premium is rising faster than the benefit from speculating at
trial so              is decreasing.
        27
         When               ∆∗ , a high-low agreement provides no advantage over a “naked” trial since the trial
outcome itself is Pareto optimal. When            ∈ ∗ , the trial outcome is not Pareto optimal, but the
additional costs of drafting the high-low agreement outweighs its benefits.




                                                            8
3.         Data Description

        The empirical study of settlement behavior is challenging because many parameters of
interest (notably, appetites for risk and subjective beliefs) are unobservable; parties are small
(making data collection difficult) or unwilling to share litigation-related information; and,
even when a public entity collects data on final outcomes, facts about underlying settlement
negotiations and features of any agreement are rarely accessible. Our data, by contrast, consist
of extensive proprietary information about all claims made to a large national auto and
general liability insurer that closed between January 1, 2004, and March 31, 2009, beginning
with specifics of the underlying loss event, ending with the final resolution, and including
comprehensive details about all disputes and any litigation.

         We extracted our data on high-low discussions and agreements from detailed
narrative records that the insurer maintains (entered both by claim handlers and lawyers) on
its management and resolution of each claim in dispute.28 Using a text-mining algorithm, we
were able to identify claims that involved, at least on the insurer’s side, some consideration of
a high-low arrangement—including negotiations over high-low terms and even instances in
which the insurer considered but decided against making a high-low proposal.29 For each of
these claims, we recorded the context of the high-low conversation or deliberation, whether
the parties reached an agreement, the number of back and forth proposals, the relevant dates,
and the proximity of the discussion to trial or arbitration, if apparent. In the event of an actual
agreement, we recorded the high and low terms.

        In these insurance cases, plaintiffs allege that injurers caused harm covered by the
insurer’s policies. If the plaintiff asserts damages within policy limits or declines to pursue the
insured individually for any excess, the insurer effectively replaces the injurer as the
defendant. Table 1(a) presents summary statistics for disputed claims with known resolutions,
broken down by whether or not a claim involved high-low activity.30 As a group, the 935
cases involving high-low discussions and agreements took longer to conclude, ended with

      28
         Unfortunately, the insurer does not maintain electronic copies of its settlement or high-low agreements,
including whether any high-low agreement was a written or oral contract. We obtained example copies of a
number of the insurer’s high-low agreements, redacted versions of which are available upon request.
      29
         See Appendix B for a description of the search algorithm, the information we collected, the coding
process we employed, and the procedures we used to ensure accuracy.
      30
           Of the approximately 45,000 claims that resolved without high-low activity, almost 2,500 claims (or
about five percent) went to trial or arbitration. This class of litigated cases was more likely to include general
liability claims, involved more corporate claimants, resulted in lower ultimate payouts, and involved higher
insurer litigation costs when compared to the claims that settled without high-low activity. Table A1 provides
additional information for all litigated claims (n=2,636), for all claims involving a high-low discussion (n=935),
and for all claims involving a high-low agreement (n=246). These groups overlap with each other.


                                                        9
larger payouts, generated higher insurer litigation costs, and were less likely to involve a
fatality or a corporate claimant than an average disputed claim, whether settled or litigated.31
Table 1(b) breaks down claims involving high-low activity into those involving just
discussions and those involving actual agreements and, further, by how claims ultimately
resolved (settlement or trial/arbitration). Of the 246 claims with high-low agreements, 99
were resolved at trial or in arbitration (an overall litigation rate of forty percent).

        Table 2 reports claim, contract, and resolution details for the 246 claims in which the
parties agreed to a high-low contract, including those that were subsequently settled out of
court. Highs and lows average close to $161,000 and $44,000, respectively, and parties
typically finalized their high-low agreements in the latter stages of these disputes. Although
high-low agreements are clearly drafted in anticipation of trial or arbitration (indeed, as
reflected in Table 1(b), approximately one hundred of them went to a factfinder), litigants
actually settled a majority of cases carrying high-low agreements prior to any adjudicated
resolution. Finally, although our data include only limited information on the actual damages
awarded by a factfinder, we do observe every insurer payout. Most payments in the
adjudicated high-low cases—68 percent—fell between the upper and lower bounds, but
payouts at the low and at the high both happened in 15 percent of the cases.32

        Table 3 displays information about the 935 claims in which the parties at a minimum
discussed the possibility of entering into a high-low agreement.33 Unconditional averages
across three types of these cases—claims in which a high-low agreement was raised by one
party, claims in which a high-low was seriously discussed by both parties, and claims in
which a high-low was formally executed—reveal no particularly unusual differences or
patterns, suggesting that although claims that are candidates for high-low agreements may
differ significantly from a typical claim in dispute, the line that separates claims in which a
high-low agreement is just suggested by a party from claims in which such a contract is
signed, may turn on chance circumstances.


       31
          The alleged harm’s relationship to the policy limit can influence high-low discussions because a
judgment that exceeds the policy limit places the policyholder at risk for the excess. However, insurers that
refuse to settle for the policy limit typically pay any excess rather than risk liability for exercising bad faith in
rejecting such an offer. See State Farm Auto Ins. v. Campbell, 538 U.S. 408 (2003).
       32
         The coincidence that the proportion of cases paying out at the high equals the proportion paying out at
the low does not imply that litigants are somehow equal in bargaining power, equally able to predict extreme
outcomes, or even behaving rationally. Damages are bounded below (by zero), so an insurer’s gains from a
single binding high term might easily exceed the costs of paying out on dozens of binding low terms.
       33
        The insurer at least internally discussed offering high-low terms in more than 300 additional claims (we
found no evidence that any discussions with plaintiffs occurred in these cases).


                                                          10
4.          Empirical Strategy and Results

        We do not observe litigants’ beliefs about likely damages awards, and we cannot
directly measure their levels of risk aversion. As a result, we are unable to test the validity of
our model directly. Comparative statics derived from the theoretical analysis in Section 2,
however, demonstrate that if our theoretical account is valid, we may be able to detect its
influence on settlement behavior. Consequently, our empirical strategy employs two of our
model’s conjectures about litigant behavior under varying exogenous conditions to predict a
particular pattern in how parties approach and resolve claims.34

        First, our model suggests that when expected litigation costs are high, we should
observe more settlement and fewer trials, including fewer high-low agreements, all else equal.
Therefore, if the insurer’s expected costs, , are high, and and are not too negatively
correlated,35 we should witness fewer settlements. Second, when adjudication outcomes are
sufficiently unpredictable (or, the variance in the award/payout amount is high because its
distribution has a larger spread—that is,           is sufficiently large), we should see litigants
considering, discussing, and agreeing to high-low agreements more often.36

         Combining these two predictions, we can rank four categories of cases in terms of how
likely they are to involve high-low discussions and agreements, from most likely to least
likely: (1) cases with low expected litigation costs and high expected outcome variance (LC-
HV), (2) cases with low expected litigation costs and low expected outcome variance (LC-
LV) or with high expected litigation costs and high expected outcome variance (HC-HV),37
and finally (3) cases with high expected litigation costs and low expected outcome variance
(HC-LV). In what follows, we examine whether behavior is consistent with this ranking by
empirically evaluating (using a number of approaches) the relative likelihood that parties will
prefer high-low agreements to settlement or naked adjudication.

       34
          Demonstrating a causal relationship—that parties use high-low agreements to reduce risk-associated
losses—requires more than a pattern in the data that is consistent with the model. We must also rule out all
alternative explanations for the pattern. Although we are not aware of any obvious alternative explanations for
what we find, our empirical claim must remain descriptive in nature.
       35
                   ,        0 is sufficient and requires simply that litigation costs be weak complements, which is
surely true in the vast majority of cases. Ideally, we would include expected in our analysis, but we only have
data from a single, repeat defendant.
       36
          In a general model, risk-averse parties would attempt to reduce risk when damages become more
variable, through either settlement or the use of high-low agreements. But, in the context of our model, an
increase in          can either increase, decrease, or not affect the likelihood of settlement, depending on the
level of         .             ∆ defines the line between cases that are optimally resolved (from the perspective of
the parties) with a naked trial and those that are optimally resolved using a high-low agreement.
       37
         The rank ordering of LC-LV and HC-HV is theoretically ambiguous, depending on the level of risk
aversion of one or both parties, and therefore the “rate of exchange” between risk and costs for each party.


                                                        11
        In carrying out this empirical work, we construct a proxy for expected litigation costs
for each dispute using the actual litigation costs of cases with similar exogenous
characteristics. Our reliance on defendant cost data to study settlement behavior is not a major
limitation. Opposing parties’ litigation costs are highly correlated because they are
complementary (e.g., Shepherd, 1999);38 moreover, our approach depends only on ordinal
comparisons and not on absolute cost levels. We approximate outcome variance for each
claim using the exogenous variation over time in the claim’s reserve. The construction of
these variables is described and defended in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. The central intuition behind
this measurement approach is that settlement behavior is rooted in the parties’ beliefs about
the likely consequences of available choices (in particular, litigation costs and outcome
variability); that litigants (typically represented by legal counsel with insurance litigation
experience) form these expectations from the trial, arbitration, and settlement of prior disputes
involving similar claims; and that, therefore, outcomes in other cases with similar
characteristics can serve proxies for these beliefs.39

            4.1.   Measuring Expected Litigation Costs

        When deciding whether to propose or accept a settlement offer or a high-low
agreement, a litigant must consider the likely costs of continued litigation. Although we have
multiple claim-level measures of monthly litigation expenditures (including fees paid to
outside counsel, internal transfers to the insurer’s legal department, and fees paid to courts),
we cannot use actual costs as a measure of expected costs because a claim’s actual costs and
how parties resolve that claim are jointly determined.40 Indeed, litigants choose whether to
settle and how to manage their cases in part to avoid costs they would otherwise incur.

         To estimate each claim’s expected total litigation costs, therefore, we make use of the
relationship between the costs of fully litigated claims (i.e., those resolved through arbitration
or trial) and the exogenous characteristics of those claims. We begin by estimating
           , where represents total actual defendant litigation costs for a fully adjudicated
claim (involving no high-low activity) and is a comprehensive set of exogenous

       38
          Certainly the litigation costs of opposing sides will diverge over short periods of time, especially in the
context of an insurer defendant (with staff attorneys and other fixed costs) and an individual plaintiff represented
by a sole practitioner. Still, using as a proxy for           makes sense because we are concerned only with
total (not monthly) expected litigation costs per claim.
       39
         We implicitly investigate this assumption by checking to see whether litigants behave in ways that are
consistent with their being rational and informed about their own case and prior similar cases.
       40
         For example, if claims that settle tend to settle early, costs will be correlated with settlement, and a
regression of resolution outcomes on costs would suggest that lawyers prefer to litigate expensive cases when a
more likely explanation is that settlement dramatically reduces overall litigation costs.


                                                         12
characteristics about the dispute, including insured and claimant details, the injury or damage
sustained, the insurance policy, the location of the suit, etc.41 We exclude any characteristic
(for example, the duration of the case) that litigants might manipulate to lower their costs
(including attempts to improve settlement prospects) or to raise their opponents’ costs (see
Gruber and Yelowitz, 1999). We then take these estimated coefficients and the values of the
exogenous variables for every claim in dispute and use them to generate a “predicted cost” for
each claim had it been resolved through naked trial or arbitration.42 We view this measure as
appropriate because we focus on a litigant’s desire to avoid the costs of a naked trial or
arbitration thought would occur by default.43

        Building our expected litigation costs measure using only fully litigated claims (i.e.,
those without high-low activity) may introduce sample selection bias into our cost
estimates—by assumption, cases that proceed all the way to trial or arbitration are likely to be
less costly, all else equal. Fortunately, this step of our empirical strategy relies only on the
ordinal rank of cases and case characteristics in terms of their relationship to actual litigation
expenses. More precisely, we assume that the exogenous characteristics that make fully
litigated cases more expensive also make settled cases more costly.44 Given that we rely only
on pre-existing claim attributes to estimate expected costs and that significant expenditures
occur before settlement, we view this assumption as reasonable. Nevertheless, we produced
alternative expected cost measures using all claims “in dispute” to estimate regardless of


       41
           More specifically, we include different subsets (four in total) of the following: a pre-suit estimation of
liability by the insurer, the year in which the loss was reported, the year in which the lawsuit was filed, the
number of individuals injured in the “loss event,” the types of injuries and/or losses, whether a fatality occurred,
whether the claim was in the auto or general liability line of business, the state and region of the accident, the
state in which the litigation occurred, the policy limit, the population density where the insured lived and where
the claimant lived, the early estimates (in months 2, 3, and 4) by the insurer of its “incurred losses” or reserve
amount on the claim, demographic data for the area in which the insured lived, and the type of claimant
(individual or company).
       42
         We use four sets of exogenous characteristics to model the actual litigation costs of fully litigated
claims (see Table 4 for a description of Sets #1 through #4). The associated    statistics (adjusting for lost
degrees of freedom) run from 0.18 (Set #1) to over 0.20 (Set #4) as additional covariates are included.
       43
          We also considered using “jackknife” estimates of in which we would run a separate regression on all
adjudicated observations except one (claim ) to estimate       and then use     ∀ to predict so that claim ’s
actual costs play no role in our estimate of expected costs. We found, however, that our expected cost regression
replications occasionally dropped different variables as collinear, making jackknifing impossible without
eliminating some exogenous regressors. We decided against this approach. Our cost regressions involve
thousands of observations, and therefore any single claim has very little influence on our estimate of .
       44
          For example, if litigation is more expensive in a particular state, we assume that settling in that state is
at least not less expensive than it would be in other states. Likewise, if litigating a head injury case is more costly
than litigating a leg injury case, we assume that settling head injury case will, on average, entail higher costs than
settling a leg injury case.


                                                         13
how they were resolved. This approach is less attractive, as we explain in Section 4.5, but, in
any event, both measures lead to similar results.45

            4.2.   Measuring Expected Outcome Variance

        A litigant deciding whether to offer or accept high-low or out-of-court settlement
terms must also determine whether the case is sufficiently “risky” or unpredictable, all else
equal, to make the terms under consideration worthwhile. Certain types of claims are more
likely (and are known to be more likely) than others to evolve at irregular times and in
unpredictable ways. In particular, for each category of disputed claim, it may be more or less
common for new information about the claim, the evidence relating to the claim, the opposing
party, or the opposing party’s strategy to emerge in ways that significantly alter the litigation
landscape and therefore the likely outcome of any trial or arbitration.46

        Our data include each claim’s monthly “reserve” amount (or incurred loss) —the then-
current, but conservative, “best guess” of the claim’s litigation value. The reserve is a claim-
specific amount an insurer allocates to cover its potential obligations under an insurance
contract.47 All insurers are required by state law to set reserve amounts.48 In theory, when
setting the reserve, the insurer balances legal and economic factors: ensuring sufficient
liquidity to cover any required payout on a claim while at the same time not forgoing more
profitable investments for its capital any more than is necessary.49 Importantly, the insurer

       45
          One way to address the selection problem directly is to identify an exogenous cost shifter—some
characteristic that makes certain claims more or less expensive to litigate, regardless of the stage at which the
claims are resolved—and employ an instrumental variables framework. We explored many candidate
instruments, including federal civil and criminal case loads and durations, state civil and criminal per-capita case
loads, state-specific cost averages, state-fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the case was being litigated in
a state other than where the loss occurred, but our first-stage results were too weak to pursue an IV strategy.
Variation in litigation expenses appears to be driven much more by to claimant-, insured-, or claim-specific
differences than exogenous cost shocks or shifters such as a change in state law or state-wide patterns.
       46
         For example, in the context of our model, if – is large, then even small changes in           (the
likelihood that the plaintiff prevails in court) could lead to large changes in the expected payout.
       47
         Grace (1990) finds evidence that deviations between the reserves and future losses are not random, and
may be a mechanism for smoothing income. Other work shows that financially secure insurers tend to be more
conservative in setting reserves than their less secure counterparts (Petroni, 1992; Gaver and Paterson, 2007;
Petroni et al., 2000). These papers do not look at claim-level reserves, as we do here, however. Black et al.
(2008) detect no relationship between defense costs and reserves in claim-level medical malpractice data, leading
the authors to question insurers’ rationality, despite finding such a relationship in other claim types.
       48
         “All states impose reserve requirements on insurers to provide protection to policyholders, assuring that
assets will be available to pay claims.” (McGuire, 1996 p. 38). Salzmann (1984) discusses common methods for
estimating reserves.
       49
        Because a reserve is an estimate of a filed claim’s likely value and is determined internally for
recordkeeping and regulatory compliance, there is no strategic reason—at least with respect to any individual
claim—for the insurer or its employees to manipulate the valuation process. We asked the insurer’s officers


                                                         14
that made its data available to us has reported that it evaluates its claim handlers’ abilities in
part by the accuracy of their reserve determinations.

        Over the course of any dispute, the insurer adjusts the reserve amount over time to
account for new information about the underlying loss event or the litigation. A claim’s
reserve amount can change dramatically month-to-month as newly relevant information
comes to light. We use the variance of the reserve amount over the course of the claim’s life,
conditional on the claim’s duration, as a proxy for expected claim volatility.50 In adopting this
strategy, we continue to assume that litigants are knowledgeable about their own cases and
other cases with similar characteristics, and are therefore able to use exogenous case
characteristics to ascertain the likely variance of a claim’s monthly reserve.51

        Finally, we note that although variance in the reserve amount can account for
“riskiness” due to unanticipated information shocks during litigation, our measure does not
proxy for any predictable randomness in judge or jury verdicts.52 Even a case that is expected
to develop “predictably” between when a claim is filed and when the presentation of evidence
ends and the factfinder’s deliberations begin—that is, a claim that in theory should have
predictably stable reserves throughout the course of litigation—may still be considered very
risky from beginning to end if the factfinder involved is known to behave unpredictably when

whether there was a more precise meaning to the “best guess” description and learned only that the reserve is the
expected value, viewed conservatively. We interpret this to mean that the reserve is set at some point between
the 50th and 60th percentile of the insurer’s estimated distribution of likely damages.
       50
          This measure also has a clear link to the value            from our model. Suppose that a reserve amount
set aside for a claim at any point in time is the estimated expected value of the claim if the dispute is resolved
by a court. Denote this reserve by . Suppose further that               is certain and known to both parties, and that
         , ,…,        is the time series representing the evolving probability of high damages. Then, at time the
reserves are a linear function of given by                         1                                . Therefore, if
denotes the volatility of , then the volatility of the time series of reserves is given by             , and the
volatility of the reserves process is a linear function of         . Note that related measures of volatility are
possible using the reserve information, including the total number of changes to the reserve amount, the
difference between the first reserve amount and the last reserve amount, and so on.
       51
          We also constructed a number of candidate volatility instruments. For example, we considered tort
reforms designed to limit “excessive verdicts” (e.g., laws that cap damages and joint-and-several liability
reform), but the first stage was too weak. We also examined changes to offer-of-judgment rules, because a law
that shifts attorneys fees will increase outcome variance, but there was too little within-state legal variation for
this to be a productive strategy (only one or two states made significant reforms during our sample period).
       52
          If reserves are truly set at the 55th or 60th percentile of a symmetric damages distribution (or, really,
anything strictly above the median), one could also measure a claim’s expected outcome volatility by using a
quantile regression framework and exogenous claim characteristics to estimate the 90th and the 50th percentiles of
the reserve amount distribution in, say, the fifth month of every claim’s life. The larger the ratio of the 90th to the
50th percentile estimates, the greater the expected outcome variance should be. One advantage of this approach is
that claim types that have constant reserves but are nevertheless risky because of factfinder unpredictability may
have greater spreads in their fifth month reserves, all else equal. The same approach could be used to predict the
spread in the final “loss paid” amount, although this method may suffer from sample selection bias.


                                                          15
faced with the type of claim at issue. Because these two types of uncertainty are likely to be
independent of each other, however, and at a minimum because there is no reason to believe
that they are negatively correlated, failing to capture latent factfinder unpredictability is
unlikely to confound our empirical results.

           4.3.   Defining Claim Resolution Outcomes

        The simple model presented in Section 2 implied a clear categorization of how claims
move toward resolution: parties either proceed directly to naked adjudication, agree to settle
out of court, or enter into a high-low agreement before they adjudicate their dispute. In reality,
however, litigants may initiate negotiations or renegotiate their agreements at any time—e.g.,
when new facts about the litigation come to light or litigant preferences or resources change.
In our data, for instance, litigants regularly revisit their high-low agreements, often replacing
them with out-of-court settlements.53 This potential for renegotiation of course complicates
any attempt to categorize cases by how they resolved, as shown in Figure 2.54

                                                  Figure 2
                                                                     Trial

                                                  Settlement         High-Low
                                                                    Agreement
                          Claim
                          Begins                    Trial
                                                                    Trial

                                                High-Low            Settlement
                                                Agreement
                                                                   Renegotiate
                                                                    High-Low



       In our empirical work, we categorize claims as involving a high-low discussion or
agreement if the parties ever enter into a high-low discussion or agreement during the
dispute—even if the claim in question is ultimately resolved by out-of-court settlement or
naked adjudication. We take this approach because we are fundamentally interested in the

      53
         Theoretically, if both litigants were to become more optimistic ex post, they might prefer to unwind a
settlement or void a high-low agreement and pursue a full-blown trial instead, but we see no evidence of this
behavior in our data and it strikes us as likely to be extremely rare.
      54
          This two-stage settlement process (i.e., first a high-low agreement, then full settlement) may have a
behavioral explanation, as well. Rather than being a “rational” response to new information about litigation
costs, settlement might follow a high-low agreement because litigants bound by a high-low agreement view their
range of options differently than they did prior to concluding the high-low arrangement, a change in perspective
that the parties may not have anticipated. For example, after agreeing to a high-low arrangement to guarantee a
minimum recovery, a plaintiff may come to believe that, given a huge damages award is no longer possible, full
settlement is simply more attractive than he had predicted it would seem before the high-low.


                                                        16
conditions that lead litigants to consider entering into a high-low agreement, even one that
may ultimately be renegotiated and therefore temporary. After all, renegotiating from a high-
low agreement to full settlement may occur only as a result of a cost shock that makes
continuing the litigation too expensive,55 and once a high-low agreement is in place, the game
changes—both parties must agree to any superseding contract.

         The consideration, discussion, and negotiation of a potential high-low agreement
between the parties is a meaningful and important outcome in its own right. Discussions often
do not graduate to agreements because of transactions costs or chance factors; parties who
discuss a high-low agreement are more interested in such an arrangement than those who do
not; and a high-low discussion may proxy for an agreement that was not included in the
litigation notes we examined. High-low discussions also have the advantage of being far more
numerous than actual agreements, allowing for more reliable statistical testing.56

           4.4.    Predicting High-Low Discussions and Agreements

        Our empirical strategy seeks to identify the claim-specific factors associated with each
of three mutually exclusive claim-resolution outcomes—1) naked trials or arbitrations; 2)
high-low discussions or agreements; and 3) out-of-court settlements. Because these categories
are not ordered in any meaningful sense and because other assumptions underlying the
approach are likely to be satisfied, we adopt a multinomial logit framework, which allows us
to calculate the probability of a particular outcome relative to a baseline category. More
precisely, we estimate:
                                      ′
                                              .                                                                (3)
                             ∑            ′


The matrix      denotes claim ’s characteristics, which are associated with each of the
alternative dispute outcomes, and is the         1 vector of estimated coefficients that
characterizes the relationship between expected litigation costs and expected payout variance
to the claim-resolution outcome. Because a full-blown trial occurs absent some agreement,
resolution through naked trial or arbitration serves as our baseline category.57


      55
          On the other hand, temporary high-low agreements may exist, for instance, because artificial time
constraints (imposed by settlement conferences, for example) make it impossible to negotiate full settlements all
at once. A high-low agreement may be easier to obtain (although our model actually considers the opposite
possibility explicitly—that high-low agreements may be relatively costly to negotiate), and may be viewed
optimistically as temporary, but valuable protection against extreme trial outcomes.
      56
          In unreported work, we also consider a narrower definition, defining a claim as involving high-low
activity only if the litigation resolved at trial or in arbitration with that agreement still in place.
      57
           This modeling approach generated a host of thorny technical issues when we attempted to use IV


                                                       17
         To keep our analysis simple, we incorporate expected litigation costs and expected
volatility into our primary regressions as indicator variables ( ) that we construct in the
following way:58 Using all disputed claims, we calculate the median expected litigation costs
and the median expected outcome volatility. We then categorize claims by whether they are
above or below the median in each category. Finally, we use the interactions of these two
measures to define four groups: HC-HV, LC-HV, HC-LV, and LC-LV. For the contracting
behavior in our data to be consistent with our model’s predictions, claims with below-median
expected litigation costs and above-median outcome variance (LC-HV) should be relatively
more likely to involve a high-low discussion or agreement. Although parsimonious, our
empirical approach is an intuitive way to examine our theory and generates results that are
straightforward in their interpretation.

           4.5.   Empirical Results

         In Table 4, we present evidence that high-low discussions and agreements are much
more likely to occur when a claim’s expected litigation costs are relatively low and its
expected outcome volatility is relatively high, a finding consistent with the predictions of our
model. With HC-LV claims serving as our omitted category, the top panel reports the relative
difference in the likelihood that litigants engage in high-low discussions and agreements
(versus adjudication with no such discussion) between a case that has high costs and low
volatility and cases from the other three groups. To make the interpretation of these estimates
more concrete, the risk ratios in the first row, for example, imply that moving from below-
median variance to above-median variance when litigation costs are expected to be high (in
other words, replacing HC-LV claims with HC-HV claims) increases the odds of a high-low
discussion or agreement on average by more than four times, and possibly more than five



methods to remove any selection effects. Estimating a multinomial logit model with endogenous regressors is, to
say the least, non-trivial. We employed the control function approach described in Terza, Basu, and Rathouz
(2008), although this approach is not fully satisfactory. See Imbens & Wooldridge (2007), at http://www.nber.
org/WNE /lect_6_controlfuncs.pdf (“Allowing endogenous explanatory variables (EEVs) in multinomial
response models is notoriously difficult, even for continuous endogenous variables…. First, multinomial probit
(MNP), which mixes well [with] a reduced form normality assumption for D(y2|z), is still computationally
difficult for even a moderate number of choices. Apparently, no one has undertaken a systematic treatment of
MNP with EEVs…. The multinomial logit (MNL)… is much simpler computationally with lots of alternatives.
Unfortunately, the normal distribution does not mix well with the extreme value distribution, and so, if we begin
with a structural MNL model…, the [control function approach’s] estimating equations are difficult to obtain,
and MLE is very difficult, too, even if we assume a normal distribution in the reduced form(s).”)
      58
          Our framework makes use of generated regressors and, as a consequence, the usual approach to
calculating standard errors results in biased estimates (Murphy and Topel, 1985). To remedy this concern, we
report standard errors calculated by bootstrapping.


                                                       18
times, depending on how the expected litigation costs are calculated.59 Although the overall
base likelihood of a high-low discussion occurring in these cases is fairly small, this
difference is nevertheless dramatic and substantively important.

        In the third row of Table 4, our data show no statistically significant difference in the
likelihood of high-low activity between claims with above-median expected costs and claims
with below-median costs when outcome volatility is expected to be low, although the point
estimate in column (4) indicates that a discussion is approximately fifty percent more likely.
This result, too, makes sense in the context of our model because shifting from a naked trial to
a high-low agreement does not, in our model, reduce litigation costs. Only fully settling a case
has that consequence. Therefore, the preferred choice between a high-low agreement and full
adjudication should not differ across claims if only the expected cost of litigation varies,
unless high-lows offer some means of lowering costs. The point estimate in the third row
hints at that possibility, and we explore the idea explicitly in Section 5 by modeling high-low
agreements as commitment devices to restrain wasteful expenditures.

         Finally, in the second row, we assess the difference between HC-LV claims and LC-
HV claims in the relative likelihood of generating a high-low discussion or agreement (versus
proceeding to naked adjudication without a discussion). In line with our model, we find that
lower expected costs and higher expected volatility increase the odds of a high-low discussion
between five and ninefold. Taken together, the results in the first and third rows point to claim
volatility as the likely source for this increase: the differences in the risk ratios between the
first and second row are not statistically significant, and the numbers in the third row show
that, as between naked adjudication with and without high-low activity, costs may be
irrelevant. Still, one could hypothesize that the differences in the point estimates between the
first and second rows imply some interaction between costs and volatility with high litigation
costs magnifying the role any difference in outcome volatility may play.

        With respect to settlement, our model also performs well, although not as well as it
seems to explain high-low discussions and without the same level of statistical precision. In
the bottom panel of Table 4, with settlement as the outcome, we expect the relative risk ratios
on HC-HV to be larger than they are on LC-HV, whereas with high-low activity as the
outcome we expect the opposite relationship. We find this to be true only in column (1).

       59
          In Table 4, we use only fully litigated cases (without high-low agreements) to calculate expected
litigation costs. Columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) use four different sets of exogenous variables (fixed at the time the
claim is filed) to predict expected litigation costs. We show all four sets of results because adding variables to
our prediction regressions results in the loss of observations, including cases with high-low agreements, but
improves the overall performance of these regressions in accounting for variation in litigation costs.


                                                         19
Nevertheless, the estimates in all columns are similar and statistically indistinguishable from
the value of one. Only the coefficient on LC-LV regularly approaches statistical significance:
LC-LV claims are only 75 to 85 percent as likely as HC-LV claims to settle (as opposed to
going to trial or arbitration without the parties discussing the possibility of a high-low
agreement), a result that is fully consistent with our model’s predictions.
           4.6.   Robustness Checks
       We perform a number of specification and other checks within the context of our
multinomial framework and find that our results are robust.

        The previous section included high-low discussions and agreements (rather than just
high-low agreements) because, in our view, high-low negotiations are arguably just as
relevant in thinking about settlement behavior and are more numerous (n=935), reducing the
likelihood of any bias resulting from high-low agreements being relatively rare events.60
Nevertheless, claims with low expected costs and high expected volatility should generate
relatively more agreements as well as more discussions. In fact, the relationship with respect
to agreements may be stronger if we happen to identify agreements in our data more
accurately than we do claims involving discussions or if discussions occur before parties have
had the ability to conduct a full investigation into the essential details of a claim (leading to
greater uncertainty about the claim’s likely litigation costs and volatility).

        The relationship of litigation costs and claim volatility to the likelihood actual high-
low agreements (n=246) is shown in Table 5. Our findings again align with our model’s
predictions about litigant claim-resolution behavior. Table 5’s estimates are slightly less
precise than the ones presented in Table 4. Nevertheless, we find statistically significant
coefficients on LC-HV and even larger relative risk ratio magnitudes. We also repeated the
analysis while restricting attention to only those claims resolved through trial or arbitration
with high-low agreements in place (n=99).61 Finally, to insure against the possibility that
selection bias in our calculation of expected litigation costs might account for our findings

      60
          See King and Zeng (2001). High-low discussions are not especially rare events in our sample. More
than two percent of all of the disputed claims in our data involved high-low discussions. More importantly, even
if our estimates were to suffer from rare events bias, theoretical and Monte Carlo work by King and Zeng show
that logits tend to underestimate the probability of rare events (i.e., high-low discussions or high-low
agreements), a bias that should run against the results we find. Moreover, the extent of possible bias when the
total number of observations (disputed claims) is almost 50,000, as it is here, is unlikely to explain the large
coefficients we find on LC-HV. Alternative approaches to building our sample, such as endogenous stratified
sampling, would more likely than not simply increase the magnitude of our estimates.
      61
         We wind up with relatively few high-low claims to study with this approach, and the standard errors we
estimate via bootstrapping are too large for us to say anything definitive. We view these results as consistent
with and weakly corroborative of the evidence we present above.


                                                      20
(see Section 4.1), we also reconstructed our expected litigation costs covariates using the
actual costs of all claims in dispute (rather than just fully litigated claims).62 The results of
these last two exercise are similar to those reported in Tables 4 and 5, and the magnitudes and
patterns of the high-low estimates remain consistent with our model’s predictions.

        One concern with our empirical framework is the loss of information that accompanies
our discretizing the initially continuous litigation cost and outcome variance measures into
dichotomous variables to create just four “types” of claims to compare. We find this approach
attractive for two primary reasons. First, without loss of generality, these simplifying steps
make the presentation of our results straightforward and the interpretation intuitive. More
importantly (and yet less obviously), the nature the empirical problem we face actually
precludes any simple use of continuous measures of expected costs and outcome variance as
independent variables in a straightforward regression framework.

        Specifically, our work hinges crucially on the facts that we have three unordered
outcomes (settlement, high-low, naked adjudication) and complicated predictions about how
costs and variance (and, in particular, their interaction) influence the relative likelihood of
these outcomes. High-low activity should be more likely, according to our model and all else
equal, when expected litigation costs are low and when expected outcome variance is high.
With three unordered outcomes, an interaction term is necessary, but after normalizing to
make results interpretable, a cost-variance interaction term can take on the same value when
expected litigation costs are low and outcome variance is high or when costs are high and
variance is low, frustrating alternative approaches to hypothesis testing.

        To test the robustness of our results and to make better use of the information
contained in our data, we take the simple nonparametric approach of mapping the likelihood
of particular outcomes onto a space defined by expected litigation costs and outcome variance
quantiles and oriented to match the layout of Figure 1. In Table 6, the more common a
particular outcome (e.g., high-low discussion, high-low agreement, or adjudication under a
high-low agreement) in a quantile cell (relative to that same outcome in other cells), the

       62
          The high-low results of this test (reported in Table A2) show relative risk ratios that are similar to those
in Tables 4 and 5, but our findings on the relative likelihood of settlement (versus naked adjudication) differ.
Specifically, an HC-HV claim appears to be 15 to 20 percent more likely to settle than an HC-LV claim, a
finding that is marginally statistically significant, and at odds with the insignificant results of Tables 4 and 5. Of
course, this finding might stem from using all disputed claims (even those that settle) to predict litigation costs.
Because settlement avoids, by design, many of the costs of fully litigated cases, including cost information from
settled claims is likely to generate a spurious correlation between high litigation costs and the decision to
adjudicate a claim. But this difference with Tables 4 and 5 is also entirely consistent with our model, which
includes negotiation and drafting costs for high-low agreements ( and )—i.e., in our model, a case with
higher-than-median volatility can be more likely to settle than cases with lower costs and lower volatility.


                                                         21
darker its shading. The top and middle figures in the first column of Table 6 visually
reproduce the key results of Tables 4 and 5, respectively. The bottom row shows the relative
likelihood of high-low adjudication. The second column confirms the basic picture of the first
column (and our regression work) by cutting the data more finely, taking advantage of the
variation in the independent variables in a natural way.

        Finally, to further evaluate the soundness of our empirical approach, we estimated
three simple, straightforward dichotomous choice logit models (one for each outcome) with
expected litigation costs and outcome variance entering separately as continuous independent
variables.63 This empirical strategy departs significantly from our motivating model’s
structure and underlying assumptions, but it allows us to investigate the consequences of
incorporating continuous measures of expected litigation cost and outcome variance and
relaxing the IIA assumption that accompanies the use of equation (3)’s multinomial logit.64
The results of the exercise are consistent with the preceding analysis.


5.          High-Low Agreements as a Mechanism to Limit Rent-Seeking

        Litigants may also employ a high-low agreement as a commitment device to limit
rent-seeking activities and reduce litigation costs. To illustrate how a high-low agreement can
be mutually beneficial, consider a rent-seeking contest between two risk-neutral parties in
which greater litigation expenditures improve a litigant’s odds of prevailing at trial:65 The
                                                               ⁄      ⁄
court awards high damages        ) with probability                       and low damages     )
                               ⁄        ⁄
with probability 1                         , where is exogenously given, and represent
each side’s litigation expenditures, and captures the trial outcome’s sensitivity to those
expenditures by the parties.

            Absent any agreement, the Nash equilibrium spending levels increase monotonically
in            , the spread of possible trial outcomes.66 Specifically:

       63
           Specifically, we separately regressed (1) whether a claim settled on expected litigation costs and
outcome variance (treating all trial/arbitration outcomes as identical), (2) whether the parties discussed or entered
into a high-low agreement on expected litigation costs and outcome variance (grouping settlement and naked
trials/arbitrations together), and (3) whether the parties discussed or entered into a high-low agreement
conditional on the claim not fully settling (nesting the choices by assuming that the parties first decide whether
to settle and then whether to enter into a high-low agreement).
       64
          Importantly, the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA) assumption appears reasonably likely to
hold in this context. Not one of the relevant outcomes—full settlement, a high-low agreement, or naked
adjudication—is anywhere close to a perfect substitute for one of the others.
       65
            See, for example, Tullock (1980), Dixit (1987), and Siegel (2009), for related work on contest models.
                                                   .       .                          .     .
       66
         The plaintiff’s payoff at trial is                             1                                    .
Differentiating this expression gives the expression for        in the text. Similarly, one can derive   .


                                                           22
                                             .                                                                   (4)
                                   4
By contractually restricting the spread of possible trial outcomes, however, litigants can
commit themselves to invest less in the litigation—indeed, to invest the jointly optimal level.
In particular, when          , the set of Pareto-optimal contracts will satisfy: 67


                                        .                                                                        (5)

        Intuitively, when litigants are mutually optimistic (         ), they jointly benefit from
the speculation value of trial, but they also want to avoid squandering that joint benefit by
making offsetting investments (wasteful rent-seeking) that are nonetheless privately optimal
in a non-cooperative setting. The contract trades off these two objectives. Both parties would
rather maximize their joint benefit by agreeing to reduce their litigation expenditure levels
and, assuming parties cannot verify spending and so cannot contract on that behavior directly,
a high-low agreement can accomplish this same goal indirectly by reducing the sensitivity of
the final outcome to these investments. Note that the high-low spread,            , is smaller
when is larger, meaning that when outcomes are more sensitive to expenditures, litigants
have an even greater incentive to constrain their costs through a tighter high-low spread.

         Some of the predictions of this rent-seeking model are, at a superficial level, similar to
those of our original model: parties will tend to adopt high-low contracts when the spread
          is large (because naked adjudication would lead to excessive spending) and when
litigation costs are not too high (for otherwise they would prefer to settle out of court). The
rent-seeking model has the further empirical prediction, however, that a high-low agreement
will cause the parties to reduce their subsequent litigation expenditures. One possible (and
potentially observable) consequence, therefore, would be a post-high-low decline (or a slower
increase relative to those claims not governed by a high-low agreement) in litigation
expenditures by both parties.

        To evaluate this prediction, we examined whether monthly litigation expenditures for
claims with high-low agreements in place were lower, all else equal, after the parties entered
into the agreements. Specifically, we regressed claim-level monthly total litigation
expenditures (and outside counsel fees) on a post-high-low indicator, claim-specific effects,




        67
             The joint benefit of going to trial is                             ⁄2                   where
  and         are fixed litigation costs. Differentiating this expression with respect to   establishes the result.


                                                             23
claim characteristics that vary over time, and time fixed effects.68 To account for any
remaining unobservables and to test whether post-high-low monthly litigation expenditures
may simply have grown at a slower rate, we also compared the spending patterns in high-low
cases with those in cases in which a high-low agreement was discussed or negotiated, but
never concluded.69 Despite exploring various error structures and alternative specifications,
we found no consistent differences in monthly litigation expenses between claims with a
binding high-low agreement in place and all others.

        Of course, even a precisely estimated zero effect would not repudiate our excessive
rent-seeking theory. Litigants may be able to identify claims that are likely to involve high-
low agreements, and so reduce or delay spending in advance of entering into a high-low
agreement. Litigation costs may also be fixed in the short run, especially for litigants, like our
insurer, that employ legal staffs.70 Still, our findings hint that limiting rent-seeking may only
rarely account for high-low agreements, and there are strong theoretical arguments to support
that interpretation. Most prominently, private parties may have other commitment devices at
their disposal to limit their litigation expenditures. For example, litigants can concede certain
issues and litigate only the remaining ones,71 and litigants can—and do—write contracts that
explicitly constrain the presentation of evidence, including restrictions on the number of
witnesses or the hours or scope of testimony. In short, parties may not need high-low
agreements to limit excessive rent-seeking when they can do so directly through explicit
contractual limitations on spending.


6.         Conclusion

         This paper presents the first systematic study of high-low agreements, an increasingly
popular contractual device in civil litigation in the United States. We show formally that when
at least one party is risk-averse and both litigants are sufficiently optimistic about their
prospects at trial, high-low agreements may arise endogenously because they can eliminate
extreme outcomes while still allowing scope for disagreement. We evaluate this proposition

      68
           We also explore “outside counsel fees” as a dependent variable because they may be more likely than
“total litigation expenditures” (which have fixed components) to reflect immediate changes in spending.
      69
          We assume that claims involving high-low discussions are sufficiently similar to claims with high-lows
in place to serve as an appropriate comparison group. To the extent that discussions do not fail randomly,
however, our estimates represent a combination of the effects of the high-low agreement and the unobserved
differences between these two groups.
      70
         Monthly expenditure totals may also be less reliable than overall spending totals, as expenditures may
be recorded months after commitments to pay for goods or services were made.
      71
          See Noyes (2006) for a discussion of courts’ acceptance of contracts that waive statutory rights and
rules, such as waivers of notice and hearing and contracts that modify discovery requirements and limitations.


                                                       24
empirically using insurance claims data and find that high-low discussions and agreements are
relatively more common when outcomes are more uncertain and litigation costs are low. Our
results are statistically significant and robust to alternative specifications.

         Our work moves beyond the existing literature on settlement in civil litigation, which
primarily focuses on only the extreme ends of the dispute resolution spectrum—cases that are
settled or dropped and cases that proceed to full-blown trial. In reality, dispute resolution
occurs on a continuum: To reduce costs, parties can opt to arbitrate (in essence, agree to
ignore certain procedural requirements and waive judges and juries in favor of third-party
factfinders). Likewise, parties can agree to stipulate to certain facts or points of law while still
allowing a judge or jury to decide many key issues. These practices make plain that settlement
in litigation includes far more than simply out-of court settlement.72

        High-low agreements (and incomplete settlement arrangements generally) also raise a
host of public policy issues that deserve attention, but that are beyond the scope of this paper.
For instance, because these private agreements mitigate the risk of trial for litigants, they
decrease the attractiveness of full settlement, and therefore they should increase the demand
for (high-low constrained) trials that require courts and other resources that are publicly
provided. Furthermore, because litigants are not required to disclose the existence of a high-
low agreement, the availability of these arrangements may lead to a misallocation of scarce
adjudicatory resources if a judge or jury makes scheduling and other decisions on the
assumption that a dispute involves greater stakes than it actually does.73




       72
         Of course, the cost-reducing benefits of arbitration are well-recognized, but arbitration’s relationship to
the broader class of settlement contracts and the “risk-reducing” mechanisms that we highlight here, such as
high-low agreements, remains underdeveloped.
       73
         Additional distortions may arise for jurisdictional reasons. For example, imagine a lawsuit alleging
$100,000 in damages, above the $75,000 federal jurisdiction amount-in-controversy requirement. If a secret
high-low agreement limits possible damages to between $40,000 and $60,000, the effective amount in
controversy is only $20,000. One can even imagine an out-of-court full settlement (e.g., $50,000 payment
regardless) between parties who seek, on the public’s dime, a jury’s determination of “who was right, after all.”


                                                        25
References

Bar-Gill, Oren. 2006. Evolution and Persistence of Optimism in Litigation. Journal of Law,
   Economics, & Organization 22:490–507.
Bebchuk, Lucian A. 1984. Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information. RAND
   Journal of Economics 15:404–415.
Briys, Eric, Michel Crouhy, and Rainer Schobel. 1991. The Pricing of Default Free Interest
   Rate Cap, Floor, and Collar Agreements. Journal of Finance 46:1879–92.
Black, Bernard, David A. Hyman, Charles Silver, and William M. Sage. 2008. Defense Costs
   and Insurer Reserves in Medical Malpractice and Other Personal Injury Cases: Evidence
   from Texas, 1988-2004. American Law and Economics Review 10:185–245.
Clermont, Kevin M., and Schwab, Stewart J. 2008. Employment Discrimination Plaintiffs in
   Federal Court: From Bad to Worse? Harvard Law & Policy Review 3:103–32.
Cooter, Robert D., and Rubinfeld, Daniel L. 1989. Economic Analysis of Legal Disputes and
   their Resolution. Journal of Economic Literature 27:1067–97.
Coulson, Robert. 1968. Negotiating Control Contracts: Trial Counsel Reduce Their Need for
   Appeals. Judicature 52:190–193.
Danzon, Patricia M., and Lillard, Lee A. 1983. Settlement out of Court: The Disposition of
   Medical Malpractice Claims. Journal of Legal Studies 12:345-77.
Daughety, Andrew F. 2000. Settlement. In B. Bouckaert and G. De Geest, eds., Encyclopedia
   of Law and Economics, Volume 5, Edward Elgar Publishing Co.
Dixit, Avinash. 1987. Strategic Behavior in Contests. American Economic Review 77:891–98.
Donohue, John. 1991. Opting for the British Rule, or If Posner and Shavell Can’t Remember
   the Coase Theorem, Who Will? Harvard Law Review 104:1093–119.
Eisenberg, Theodore, and Henry Farber. 1997. The Litigious Plaintiff Hypothesis. RAND
   Journal of Economics 28:S92–S112.
Eisenberg, Theodore, and Charlotte Lanvers. 2008. What is the Settlement Rate and Why
   Should We Care? Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 6:111–46.
Farber, Henry, and White, Michelle. 1991. Medical Malpractice: An Empirical Investigation
   of the Litigation Process. RAND Journal of Economics 22:199–217.
Fenn, Paul, and Niel Rickman. 1999. Delay and Settlement in Litigation. Economic Journal
   109:476–91.
Fournier, Gary M., and Thomas W. Zuehlke. 1996. The Timing of Out of Court Settlement.
   RAND Journal of Economics 27:310–21.
Emerick, Charles. 2007. High-Low Agreement Negates Jackson County Jury Verdict for
  Crash Injuries. Daily Record (Kansas City, MO), August 28.
Faley, Kevin G., and Andrea M. Alonso. 1998. High-Low Agreements: Misunderstood
   Litigation Technique. New York Law Journal, March 27.



                                             26
Farmer, Amy, and Paul Pecorino. 1994. Pretrial Negotiations with Asymmetric Information
   on Risk Preferences. International Review of Law and Economics 14:273–81.
Finz, Leonard. 1976. A Trial Where Both Sides Win. Judicature 59:41–44.
Fuller, Kathleen P. 2003. Why Some Firms Use Collar Offers in Mergers. Financial Review
    38: 127–150.
Galanter, Marc, and Mia Cahill. 1994. Most Cases Settle: Judicial Promotion and Regulation
   of Settlements. Stanford Law Review 46:1339–91.
Gaver, Jennifer J., and Jeffrey S. Paterson. 2007. The Influence of Large Clients on Office-
   Level Auditor Oversight: Evidence from the Property-Casualty Insurance Industry.
   Journal of Accounting and Economics 43:299–320.
Gould, John. 1973. The Economics of Legal Conflicts. Journal of Legal Studies 2:279–300.
Grace, Elizabeth. 1990. Property-Liability Insurer Reserve Errors: A Theoretical and
   Empirical Analysis. Journal of Risk and Insurance 57:28–46.
Gross, Samuel R., and Kent D. Syverud. 1996. Don’t Try: Civil Jury Verdicts in a System
   Geared to Settlement. UCLA Law Review 44:1–64.
Gruber, Jonathan and Aaron Yelowitz. 1999. Public Health Insurance and Private Saving.
   Journal of Political Economy 107:1249–74.
Hadfield, Gillian K. 2004. Where Have All the Trials Gone? Settlements, Nontrial
   Adjudications, and Statistical Artifacts in the Changing Disposition of Federal Civil
   Cases. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 1:705–734.
Hannaford-Agor, Paula L. 2012. Short, Summary & Expedited: The Evolution of Civil Jury
   Trials. National Center for State Courts. Available online at:
   http://www.ncsc.org/~/media/Files/PDF/Information and Resources/Civil cover
   sheets/ShortSummaryExpedited-online rev.ashx.
Hansen, Robert G. 1987. A Theory of the Choice of Exchange Medium in Mergers and
   Acquisitions. Journal of Business 60: 75–95.
Hay, Bruce, and Kathryn E. Spier. 1998. Settlement of Litigation. In Peter Newman, ed.,
   The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law, Macmillan Reference Limited,
   3: 442–451.
Heyes, Anthony, Neil Rickman and Dionisia Tzavara. 2004. Legal Expenses, Risk Aversion,
   and Litigation. International Review of Law and Economics 24:107–19.
Hoenig, Michael. 2006. Secret “High-Low” Agreements. New York Law Journal, October 11.
Hughes, James, and Edward Snyder. 1995. Litigation and Settlement under the English and
   American Rules: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Law and Economics 38:225–50.
Jolly, Julius. 1883. Hindu Law and Custom. Translated by Batakrishma Ghosh, Greater India
    Society Publication No. 2, 1928.
Judicial Business of the United States Courts, Annual Report 2001. Available online at:
   http://www.uscourts.gov/uscourts/FederalCourts/AnnualReport/2001.pdf.



                                              27
Kessler, Daniel, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey Miller. 1996. Explaining Deviations from the
   Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation.
   Journal of Legal Studies 25:233–59.
Kessler, Daniel, and Daniel Rubinfeld. 2004. Empirical Study of the Civil Justice System.
   Handbook of Law and Economics 1:343–402.
King, Gary and Langche Zeng. 2001. Logistic Regression in Rare Events Data. Political
   Analysis 9:137–163.
Klement, Alon and Zvika Neeman. 2005. Against Compromise: A Mechanism Design
   Approach. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 21:285–314.
Landes, William M. 1971. An Economic Analysis of the Courts. Journal of Law and
   Economics 14:61–107.
Landes, William M. 1993. Sequential Versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis. Journal
   of Legal Studies 22:99–134.
Loewenstein, George, Samuel Issacharoff, Colin Camerer, and Linda Babcock. 1993. Self-
   Serving Assessments of Fairness and Pretrial Bargaining. Journal of Legal Studies
   22:135–58.
Mcguire, Charles R. 1996. Should Banks Sell Insurance? The Relationship of Section 92 of
  the Banking Act, the McCarran-Ferguson Act and State Laws Restricting Bank Activity.
  Journal of Legislation 22:19–43.
McDonough, Molly. 2005. High Low’s Ups and Downs. ABA Journal, August.
Miller, Geoffrey P. 1987. Some Agency Problems in Settlement. Journal of Legal Studies
   16:189–215.
Myerson, Roger. 1979. Incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem. Econometrica
  47:61–73.
Myerson, Roger, and Mark Satterthwaite. 1983. Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral Trading.
  Journal of Economic Theory 29:265–81.
Myers, Stewart C, and Nicholas Majluf. 1984. Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions
  when Firms have Information Investors Do Not Have. Journal of Financial Economics
  87: 355-374.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 1985. Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
  Econometric Models. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3:370–79.
Nalebuff, Barry. 1987. Credible Pretrial Negotiation. RAND Journal of Economics
   18:198–210.
Noyes, Henry S. 2006. If you (Re)Build It, They Will Come: Contracts to Remake the Rules
   of Litigation in Arbitration’s Image. Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy 30:579–
   647.
Officer, Micah S. 2004. Collars and Renegotiation in Mergers and Acquisitions. Journal of
   Finance 59: 2719–2743.



                                             28
Ostrom, Brian J., Neal B. Kauder, and Robert C. LaFountain. 2001. Examining the Work of
   the State Courts, 1999-2000. National Center for State Courts, Williamsburg, VA.
P’ng, Ivan P.L. 1983. Strategic Behavior in Suit, Settlement, and Trial. RAND Journal of
   Economics 14:539–50.
Petroni, Kathy R. 1992. Optimally Reporting in the Property-Casualty Insurance Industry.
    Journal of Accounting and Economics 15:485–508.
Petroni, Kathy R., Stephen G. Ryan, and James M. Wahlen. 2000. Discretionary and Non-
    Discretionary Revisions of Loss Reserves by Property-Casualty Insurers: Differential
    Implications for Future Profitability, Risk, and Market Value. Review of Accounting
    Studies 5: 95–125.
Posner, Richard A. 1973. An Economic Approach to Legal Procedure and Judicial
   Administration. Journal of Legal Studies 2:399–458.
Priest, Gearge, and Benjamin Klein. 1984. The Selection of Disputes for Litigation. Journal
    of Legal Studies 13:1–55.
Reinganum, Jennifer, and Louise Wilde. 1986. Settlement, Litigation, and the Allocation of
   Litigation Costs. RAND Journal of Economics 17:557–68.
Riner, Duane. 1989. High-Low Pretrial Pact Praised, Ensures Some Funds for Plaintiffs.
   Atlanta Journal and Constitution, April 9.
Houston, Joel F., and Michael D. Ryngaert. 1997. Equity Issuance and Adverse Selection: A
   Direct Test Using Conditional Stock Offers. Journal of Finance 52: 197–219.
Salzmann, Ruth E. 1984. Estimated Liabilities for Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
   (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall).
Shavell, Steven. 1982. Suit, Settlement and Trial: A Theoretical Analysis under Alternative
   Methods for the Allocation of Legal Costs. Journal of Legal Studies 11:55–82.
Shepherd, George B. 1999. An Empirical Study of the Economics of Pretrial Discovery.
   International Review of Law and Economics 19:245-263.
Sieg, Holger. 2000. Estimating a Bargaining Model with Asymmetric Information: Evidence
   from Medical Malpractice Disputes. Journal of Political Economy 108:1006–21.
Siegel, Ron. 2009. All-Pay Contests. Econometrica 77:71–92.
Siegelman, Peter, and Joel Waldfogel. 1999. Towards a Taxonomy of Disputes: New
   Evidence through the Prism of the Priest-Klein Hypothesis. Journal of Legal Studies
   28:101–29.
Snyder, Edward, and James Hughes. 1990. The English Rule for Allocating Legal Costs:
   Evidence Confronts Theory. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 6:345–80.
Spier, Kathryn E. 1992. The Dynamics of Pretrial Negotiation. Review of Economic Studies
   59:103–08.
Spier, Kathryn E. 1994. Pretrial Bargaining and the Design of Fee-Shifting Rules. RAND
   Journal of Economics 25:197–214.



                                             29
Spier, Kathryn E. 2007. Litigation. In A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, eds., The
   Handbook of Law and Economics, North Holland.
Terza, Joseph V., Anirban Basu, and Paul J. Rathouz. 2008. Two-Stage Residual Inclusion
   Estimation: Addressing Endogeneity in Health Econometric Modeling. Journal of Health
   Economics 27:531–43.
Travelos, Nickolaos G. 1987. Corporate Takeover Bids, Methods of Payment, and Bidding
   Firms’ Stock Returns. Journal of Finance, 42: 943–963.
Tullock, Gordon. 1980. Efficient Rent Seeking. In J.M. Buchanan, R.D. Tollison, and G.
   Tullock, eds., Toward a Theory of the Rent Seeking Society 97–112. College Station:
   Texas A&M University Press.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1988. Product Liability and Risk Aversion. Journal of Legal Studies 17:101–
   21.
Waldfogel, Joel. 1995. The Selection Hypothesis and the Relationship between Trial and
  Plaintiff Victory. Journal of Political Economy, 103:229–260.
Waldfogel, Joel. 1998. Selection of Cases for Trial. In Peter Newman, ed., The New Palgrave
  Dictionary of Economics and the Law, Macmillan Reference Limited 3:419–24.
Watanabe, Yasutora. 2005. Learning and Bargaining in Dispute Resolution: Theory and
  Evidence from Medical Malpractice Litigation. Northwestern University mimeo.
Yildiz, Muhamet. 2003. Bargaining without a Common Prior—An Immediate Agreement
   Theorem. Econometrica 71:793–811.
Yildiz, Muhamet. 2004. Waiting to Persuade. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:223–48.
Yoon, Albert. 2004. Mandatory Arbitration and Civil Litigation: An Empirical Study of
   Medical Malpractice Litigation in the West. American Law and Economics Review 6:95–
   134.




                                             30
                           Table 1(a): All Claims in Dispute -- Resolution and High-Low Activity
                                           All Claims without High-Low Discussions or Agreements
                                                                                                                                All Claims with
                                            Resolved by Settlement                    Resolved by Trial or                   High-Low Discussions
                                                or Mediation                              Arbitration                           and Agreements
                                                      (1)                                     (2)                                     (3)

Total Number of Claims                                42,863                                   2,492                                     935
Claims by Year (when closed)
   2004                                                4,821                                    297                                      138
   2005                                                7,170                                    432                                      150
   2006                                                8,553                                    529                                      180
   2007                                                9,676                                    537                                      206
   2008                                               11,036                                    576                                      230
   2009                                                1,607                                    121                                       31
Type of Claim
   Auto Liability                                     23,435                                    882                                      590
   General Liability                                  19,428                                   1,610                                     345
Accident Characteristic
  Region Where Claim Arose
     Northeast                                        31.95%                                  39.85%                                  68.02%
     South                                            30.28%                                  26.81%                                  13.90%
     Midwest                                          11.93%                                  8.83%                                    6.84%
     West                                             25.50%                                  23.96%                                  10.91%
     Pacific                                           0.27%                                  0.52%                                    0.32%
Claimant Characteristics
   Claimant Type
      Firm/Business                                    6.8%                                    10.7%                                   1.5%
      Individual                                      89.8%                                    86.2%                                   92.1%
      Unknown                                          3.4%                                     3.1%                                   6.4%
   Part of Body
      Fatality                                         2.6%                                     2.2%                                   1.6%
      Head                                             6.8%                                     5.9%                                   8.5%
      Lower Extremeties                               11.4%                                    12.8%                                   14.2%
      Multiple Injuries                                1.9%                                     3.3%                                    1.1%
      Neck                                            14.9%                                    13.2%                                   9.4%
      Spinal                                           6.4%                                     4.0%                                   10.6%
      Trunk                                           29.6%                                    23.5%                                   38.3%
      Upper Extremeties                                9.4%                                     7.9%                                   12.7%
      Personal Injury                                  4.4%                                     5.0%                                   1.1%
      Unreported                                      12.8%                                    22.2%                                   2.6%
Average Claim Characteristic
  Duration of Claim (months)                           26.10                                   27.63                                    37.28
                                                      (15.61)                                  (18.66)                                 (18.49)
   Initial Reserve                                    $7,355                                   $7,043                                  $7,055
                                                     (16,228)                                 (13,603)                                (12,425)
   Loss Paid                                          $41,508                                 $28,153                                 $93,426
                                                     (109,358)                               (117,658)                               (174,682)
   Total Insurer Litigation Costs                     $7,765                                  $13,231                                 $14,215
                                                     (20,578)                                 (32,865)                                (31,792)
   Policy Limit (per person)                         $798,397                               $1,003,179                                $632,594
                                                     (894,999)                               (887,140)                               (740,183)
   Policy Limit (per event)                         $1,059,359                              $1,423,470                                $878,318
                                                    (1,252,906)                             (2,447,770)                              (801,791)
Notes: All figures are computed from machine data or litigation notes provided by the insurer. All financial figures are reported in 2008 dollars. T he first
two columns show summary statistics for claims that did not involve a high-low discussion, broken down by how they resolved. T he final column presents
summary statistics for all claims in which a high-low agreement was discussed (including claims in which an agreement was reached). Standard deviations
are reported in parentheses.




                                                                            31
                                 Table 1(b): Final Resolution of All Claims with High-Low Discussions
                                                Claims with Only High-Low Discussions                                Claims with High-Low Agreements

                                         Resolved by Settlement              Resolved by Trial or             Resolved by Settlement           Resolved by Trial or
                                             or Mediation                       Arbitration                       or Mediation                    Arbitration
                                                   (1)                               (2)                                (3)                            (4)

Total Number of Claims                               639                                45                                147                             99
Claims by Year (when closed)
   2004                                              104                                 4                                 16                             11
   2005                                              111                                11                                 21                              7
   2006                                              115                                12                                 36                             17
   2007                                              133                                 5                                 36                             32
   2008                                              157                                10                                 32                             29
   2009                                              19                                  3                                 6                               3
Type of Claim
   Auto Liability                                    400                                23                                 87                             78
   General Liability                                 239                                22                                 60                             21
Accident Characteristic
  Region Where Claim Arose
     Northeast                                     68.23%                            60.00%                             72.11%                         63.64%
     South                                         12.99%                            15.56%                             14.97%                         17.17%
     Midwest                                        7.20%                             6.67%                             2.72%                          11.11%
     West                                          11.42%                            15.56%                             10.20%                          7.07%
     Pacific                                        0.16%                             2.22%                             0.00%                           1.01%
Claimant Characteristics
   Claimant Type
      Firm/Business                                 1.3%                               0.0%                               3.4%                          1.0%
      Individual                                   93.3%                              84.4%                              91.8%                          89.9%
      Unknown                                      5.5%                               15.6%                               4.8%                          9.1%
   Part of Body
      Fatality                                      1.7%                              6.7%                                0.7%                          0.0%
      Head                                         8.9%                               4.4%                                9.5%                          5.1%
      Lower Extremeties                            13.3%                              20.0%                              17.0%                          13.1%
      Multiple Injuries                             0.9%                               6.7%                               0.7%                           0.0%
      Neck                                         9.7%                               8.9%                                8.8%                          9.1%
      Spinal                                       10.2%                              11.1%                              11.6%                          11.1%
      Trunk                                        39.1%                              31.1%                              36.1%                          41.4%
      Upper Extremeties                            13.2%                              8.9%                               11.6%                          14.1%
      Personal Injury                               0.8%                               0.0%                               2.0%                          1.0%
      Unreported                                    2.2%                              2.2%                                2.0%                          5.1%
Average Claim Characteristic
  Duration of Claim (months)                        35.57                              50.47                             39.60                          39.17
                                                   (18.13)                            (27.42)                           (17.13)                         (13.64)
   Initial Reserve                                 $7,318                            $10,945                             $6,501                         $4,468
                                                  (13,084)                           (18,015)                           (10,805)                        (4,531)
   Loss Paid                                       $92,201                           $150,415                           $89,140                        $85,980
                                                  (170,228)                         (337,284)                          (141,065)                      (139,191)
   Total Insurer Litigation Costs                  $11,943                           $56,349                            $13,846                        $10,904
                                                  (26,340)                           (84,126)                           (25,296)                       (10,792)
   Policy Limit (per person)                      $664,752                           $643,792                          $627,319                       $416,004
                                                  (792,354)                         (545,772)                          (664,195)                      (509,241)
   Policy Limit (per event)                       $889,047                          $1,129,779                         $936,635                       $588,551
                                                  (796,347)                         (879,138)                          (862,668)                      (624,862)
Notes: All figures are computed from machine data or litigation notes provided by the insurer. All financial figures are reported in 2008 dollars. All claims involved a
high-low discussion and are broken down by the claim's final high-low status and how the claim ultimately resolved. Columns (1) and (2) include claims in which only
high-low discussions occurred (i.e., no agreements). Columns (3) and (4) include only those claims in which the parties actually entered into high-low agreements.
Any high-low agreement is, by definition, no longer in force if the parties decide to renegotiate and fully settle. T o be conservative, in column (4), we assume that
dozens of cases that involve high-low agreements settle when the insurer reports only that mediation or negotiation occurred (even though both can lead to some
form of binding adjudication). T here are five fewer claims in this table (versus T able 1(a)) because the final resolution of five claims with high-low discussions is
unknown. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                 32
                      Table 2: Details of High-Low Agreements
                                                                               High-Low Agreement
                                                                                     Reached
Total number High-Low Agreements (complete)                                              246

Average Duration from Report Date
  High-Low Agreement Reached (months)                                                    31.91
                                                                                        (14.8)
   Claim Closed (months)                                                                 39.43
                                                                                        (15.8)

High-Low Agreement Details
   Average High Amount                                                                 $161,111
                                                                                      (223,198)
   Average Low Amount                                                                  $43,912
                                                                                      (107,645)

Resolution of High-Low Claims
  Arbitration                                                                           28.1%
  Litigation                                                                            12.2%
  Settlement                                                                            56.9%
  Mediation                                                                              2.9%

Payout When Claim Adjudicated Under High-Low Agreement
  Final Payout at the Low                                                               15.2%
  Final Payout Between the High and Low                                                 67.7%
  Final Payout at the High                                                              15.2%
  Unknown (High-Low Terms or Payout Information Missing)                                2.0%

Notes: All figures are computed from machine data or litigation notes provided by the insurer. All
financial figures are reported in 2008 dollars. Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                  33
                                   Table 3: Intensity of High-Low Discussion
                                                                    Level of High-Low Discussion
                                          High-Low Raised by             Parties Amenable to             High-Low Agreement
                                              One Party                       High-Low                         Reached

Total Number of Claims                              345                             344                             246
Claims by Year (when closed)
   2004                                             59                              52                              27
   2005                                             66                              56                              28
   2006                                             70                              57                              53
   2007                                             59                              79                              68
   2008                                             82                              87                              61
   2009                                              9                              13                               9
Type of Claim
   Auto Liability                                   224                             201                             165
   General Liability                                121                             143                             81
Accident Characteristic
  Region Where Claim Arose
     Northeast                                   70.43%                          65.12%                          68.70%
     South                                       12.75%                          13.66%                          15.85%
     Midwest                                      5.80%                           8.43%                           6.10%
     West                                        10.72%                          12.50%                           8.94%
     Pacific                                      0.29%                           0.29%                           0.41%
Claimant Characteristics
   Claimant Type
      Firm/Business                               1.5%                            0.9%                            2.4%
      Individual                                  91.0%                           93.9%                           91.1%
      Unknown                                     7.5%                            5.2%                            6.5%
   Part of Body
      Fatality                                    1.7%                            2.3%                            0.4%
      Head                                        8.1%                            9.3%                            7.7%
      Lower Extremeties                           12.8%                           14.8%                           15.5%
      Multiple Injuries                           0.6%                             2.0%                           0.4%
      Neck                                        9.6%                             9.6%                           8.9%
      Spinal                                      8.1%                            12.5%                           11.4%
      Trunk                                       44.6%                           32.0%                           38.2%
      Upper Extremeties                           12.8%                           12.8%                           12.6%
      Personal Injury                             0.3%                            1.5%                            1.6%
      Unreported                                  1.5%                            3.2%                            3.3%
Average Claim Characteristic
  Duration of Claim (months)                       35.36                           37.68                           39.43
                                                  (20.77)                         (17.69)                         (15.79)
   Initial Reserve                                $7,307                          $7,785                          $5,683
                                                 (14,351)                        (12,475)                         (8,876)
   Loss Paid                                     $78,472                         $112,377                        $87,876
                                                (147,138)                       (216,173)                        (140,041)
   Total Insurer Litigation Costs                $13,420                         $16,123                         $12,662
                                                 (37,407)                        (32,183)                        (20,736)
   Policy Limit (per person)                     $606,609                        $723,243                        $542,277
                                                (618,820)                       (907,452)                        (614,334)
   Policy Limit (per event)                      $860,351                        $951,524                        $795,281
                                                (788,358)                       (816,792)                        (791,954)
Notes: All figures are computed from machine data or litigation notes provided by the insurer. All financial figures are reported in
2008 dollars. "High-Low Raised by One Party" indicates that either the insurer or the other party raised the possibility of a high-
low agreement in a settlement discussion, but the other side was uninterested, at least according to the litigation notes. "Parties
Amenable to High-Low" indicates that the parties attempted to negotiate a high-low agreement at some point in the litigation.
Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.




                                                               34
               Table 4: Likelihood of High-Low Discussion or Agreement and
                       Full Settlement Relative to Trial or Arbitration
                     (Litigation Costs Predicted Using Litigated Cases)
                                                     (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)

High-Low Discussion
HC-HV                                               4.255                 4.140                 4.657                 5.293
                                                   (0.736)               (0.725)               (0.964)               (1.112)
                                                    [0.00]                [0.00]                [0.00]                [0.00]

LC-HV                                               5.198                 5.712                 7.097                 8.486
                                                   (1.180)               (1.228)               (1.689)               (2.215)
                                                    [0.01]                [0.00]                [0.00]                [0.01]

LC-LV                                               1.281                 1.375                 1.684                 1.551
                                                   (0.315)               (0.338)               (0.438)               (0.431)
                                                    [0.39]                [0.29]                [0.15]                [0.23]
Settlement

HC-HV                                               1.103                 1.131                 1.045                 1.062
                                                   (0.074)               (0.076)               (0.080)               (0.101)
                                                    [0.19]                [0.11]                [0.59]                [0.55]

LC-HV                                               1.012                 1.178                 1.182                 1.205
                                                   (0.103)               (0.121)               (0.151)               (0.151)
                                                    [0.91]                [0.17]                [0.26]                [0.20]

LC-LV                                               0.757                 0.862                 0.818                 0.804
                                                   (0.070)               (0.081)               (0.094)               (0.096)
                                                    [0.01]                [0.12]                [0.08]                [0.07]
Calculating Expected
Litigation Costs
Set #1 (see notes)                                                                                                   
Set #2 (see notes)                                                                                                    
Set #3 (see notes)                                                                                                     
Set #4 (see notes)                                                                                                      

Num of Obs.                                        45,379                44,000                36,113                32,317
Notes: Estimates are reported as relative risk ratios. The outcome variable captures whether a claim ever involved a high-low
discussion or agreement and, if not, whether it settled out-of-court or was resolved through trial or arbitration (excluded
category). The independent variables are indicators for the interaction between an indicator for whether the claim had above-
or below-median expected variance and an indicator for whether the claim had above- or below-median expected litigation
costs. Therefore, HC-HV is one for claims with above-median (H) expected litigation costs (C) and above-median (H) expected
variance (V) and zero otherwise, etc. Bootstrapped standard errors are listed below estimates in parentheses. P-values are
listed in brackets. We explain the method for calculating expected litigation expenditures in Section 4. Here, we show estimates
using four different expected litigation cost calculations. Set #1 includes state of litigation fixed effects, accident region fixed
effects, fixed effects for the insurance company's estimate of percentage of liability, year effects for when the accident was
reported, fixed effects for the number of persons injured in the event, fixed effects for type of injury or damage, a fatality
indicator, and an indicator for whether the line of business was automobile liability or general liability. Set #2 adds state of
accident fixed effects, the insurance policy claim limit, the population density of the insured's geographic area, and the
insurance company's estimates of "incurred loss" in months 3, 4, and 5 after the filing of a claim. Set #3 adds demographic
variables about the area where the insured lives, the type of plaintiff (corporate or individual), and the population density of
the plaintiff's geographic area. Set #4 adds an indicator for the year in which the suit was filed.




                                                               35
             Table 5: Likelihood of High-Low Agreement and Full-Settlement
                              Relative to Trial or Arbitration
                    (Litigation Costs Predicted Using Litigated Cases)
                                                     (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)

High-Low Agreement
HC-HV                                               4.167                 4.152                 5.053                 3.679
                                                   (1.404)               (1.383)               (1.592)               (1.188)
                                                    [0.05]                [0.05]                [0.03]                [0.05]

LC-HV                                               6.977                 8.179                10.191                 8.759
                                                   (2.505)               (2.707)               (3.414)               (3.048)
                                                    [0.04]                [0.02]                [0.02]                [0.03]

LC-LV                                               1.483                 1.629                 1.902                 1.341
                                                   (0.612)               (0.603)               (0.708)               (0.536)
                                                    [0.45]                [0.32]                [0.23]                [0.54]
Settlement

HC-HV                                               1.082                 1.113                 1.030                 1.043
                                                   (0.071)               (0.073)               (0.077)               (0.098)
                                                    [0.28]                [0.15]                [0.71]                [0.67]

LC-HV                                               1.000                 1.156                 1.166                 1.196
                                                   (0.100)               (0.117)               (0.149)               (0.150)
                                                    [1.00]                [0.21]                [0.29]                [0.22]

LC-LV                                               0.761                 0.866                 0.820                 0.804
                                                   (0.071)               (0.082)               (0.094)               (0.096)
                                                    [0.01]                [0.13]                [0.09]                [0.07]
Calculating Expected
Litigation Costs
Set #1 (see notes)                                                                                                   
Set #2 (see notes)                                                                                                    
Set #3 (see notes)                                                                                                     
Set #4 (see notes)                                                                                                      

Num of Obs.                                        45,375                43,996                36,112                32,317
Notes: Estimates are reported as relative risk ratios. The outcome variable captures whether a claim ever involved a high-low
agreement and, if not, whether it settled out-of-court or was resolved through trial or arbitration (excluded category). The
independent variables are indicators for the interaction between an indicator for whether the claim had above- or below-
median expected variance and an indicator for whether the claim had above- or below-median expected litigation costs.
Therefore, HC-HV is one for claims with above-median (H) expected litigation costs (C) and above-median (H) expected
variance (V) and zero otherwise, etc. Bootstrapped standard errors are listed below estimates in parentheses. P-values are
listed in brackets. We explain the method for calculating expected litigation expenditures in Section 4. Here, we show estimates
using four different expected litigation cost calculations. Set #1 includes state of litigation fixed effects, accident region fixed
effects, fixed effects for the insurance company's estimate of percentage of liability, year effects for when the accident was
reported, fixed effects for the number of persons injured in the event, fixed effects for type of injury or damage, a fatality
indicator, and an indicator for whether the line of business was automobile liability or general liability. Set #2 adds state of
accident fixed effects, the insurance policy claim limit, the population density of the insured's geographic area, and the
insurance company's estimates of "incurred loss" in months 3, 4, and 5 after the filing of a claim. Set #3 adds demographic
variables about the area where the insured lives, the type of plaintiff (corporate or individual), and the population density of
the plaintiff's geographic area. Set #4 adds an indicator for the year in which the suit was filed.




                                                               36
37
Appendix A: Proof of Lemma 1 and Proposition 1

Proof of Lemma 1: Using equation (1), the award modification contract would satisfy:


                                                                                   .
        1                                1

The litigation and negotiation costs drop out, giving:

                                                 .
        1                     1

Rearranging this expression,

         1⁄        1
                                             .
         1⁄        1

Taking the natural logarithm of both sides, and rearranging terms gives the result. ■


Proof of Proposition 1: We will first characterize the situations where the parties would
jointly prefer settlement to a naked trial. Suppose there is an ordinary settlement contract, ,
that is better for both litigants. For the plaintiff, it must be the case that

         exp                  exp                                  1         exp                    .

Rearranging terms, this establishes a lower bound, , for the settlement amount:

                         1⁄        ln                          1

                                        1⁄           ln                            1        .

Similarly for the defendant, settling must be better than going to trial, so

         exp                exp                                1       exp                      .

Rearranging terms, we establish an upper bound, , for the settlement amount:

                       1⁄         ln                  1

                                        1⁄           ln                       1         .

So a mutually acceptable settlement amount exists if and only if                       , or when:



                                                          38
                    1⁄   ln 1                                   1⁄     ln 1                       .

We will rename the right-hand side                     ; , , ,         , and we suppress notation and
rewrite it as             . Note that       0       0. Differentiating            tells us that it is
increasing if and only if:


                                                                       0,
        1                               1

which is true if and only if

         1          ⁄
                                                ,
         1

or, equivalently,               Δ∗ where Δ∗ is defined in the text.

        When            , then Δ∗ 0. Since                 is a decreasing function for all
             ∗
           Δ and 0           0, we conclude that                  0 for all           0. So the
parties would prefer settlement to a naked trial. If contracts were unrestricted, they might
want to sign a contract with          . Under Assumption 1, the constraint that             is
binding so the parties can do no better than settle out of court.

        When            , then Δ∗ 0. When                ∈ 0, ∆∗ then                   0. The
                                                     ∗
Pareto optimal contract modification                ∆              would amplify the risk at trial,
                                                  ∗
violating Assumption 1. So for            ∈ 0, ∆ the parties would never opt for a high-low
agreement. In this region, the parties will either settle out of court or pursue a naked trial.
When               ∆∗ then the contract              ∆∗             does not violate Assumption 1.
                                                                 ∗
The parties will prefer a high-low contract with               ∆ to a naked trial when the joint
net value of the high-low contract is larger than the joint value of a naked trial, or:

             ∆∗                                                               ,

or, equivalently:

                           ∆          ∆∗                   .

The value ∆ ∆∗ exists because               decreases without bound when           goes to
                                                ∗
infinity. Finally, ∆       0 when             ∆ . When              ∆ the parties will
pursue trial with a high-low agreement when              ∆∗               and will settle
                                  ∗
out of court when               ∆              .■




                                                     39
Appendix B: Additional Data Description

       The insurer, which insisted upon anonymity as a condition of allowing us to use its
data, provided us with detailed data for all claims that were either closed or open at any point
between January 1, 2004, and March 31, 2009. The raw claim data included approximately
570,000 total claims. Because we do not know how open claims eventually resolve, we do not
use them in our analysis. By also removing claims that were missing extensive information or
were outliers in subject matter, geography, or timing, we constructed a “clean” data set of
approximately 385,000 claims.
      The clean data set consists of two types of claims: claims resolved administratively
through a claim handler and “disputed” claims. For our purposes, we define a claim as being
“in dispute” if either (1) positive litigation costs are recorded by the insurer’s in-house legal
counsel or an outside firm, or (2) a suit date is recorded (which occurs when the insurer
receives notice that the plaintiff has filed a complaint, at which point the insurer refers to the
claim as being “in suit”). A little more than 12 percent or about 48,350 of the claims were “in
dispute” using our definition. Approximately 5 percent of the disputed claims, or about 2,600
claims, were “litigated” (resolved by trial or arbitration). Most non-administrative claims
involve both a suit date and positive litigation costs, but a small fraction involves only one or
the other. In Table A3, we provide summary statistics for the data, and we include alternative
“broad” and “narrow” measures of the “disputed” claims category by using the union and
intersection of conditions (1) and (2), respectively.
       When a claimant notifies the insurer of a claim against one of its policies, the insurer
first internally assesses the claim to determine to what extent, if any, the policyholder is
responsible for the alleged harm. Based on this determination, the insurer attempts to resolve
the claim through one of its claims agents. Most claims are resolved in this way, essentially
administratively. If the claims agent is unable to resolve the claim through negotiation, and
the claimant subsequently files suit, the insurer continues in its efforts to settle the claim but
either assigns its own in-house legal staff or outside legal counsel to manage the claim.
Consistent with most litigation, suits against the insurer typically end in settlement, with a
small percentage proceeding to trial or arbitration.
       For each claim, the insurer records the date of the alleged harm, the date the insurer
received notice of the claim, and the close date (i.e., when the claim is resolved, regardless of
its disposition). With these dates, it is possible to calculate the duration of each claim. In
addition, the insurer gathers detailed information about the alleged harm and its likely
“litigation” value. Of particular interest, the insurance company makes an initial assessment
of the harm and the extent of its perceived liability, but also subsequently records a second
post-evaluation, pre-litigation evaluation of the likely value of the claim. It also records the
state (and sometimes city) in which the accident or harm occurred and maintains demographic
information about the area in which the insured and claimant (plaintiff) lives or lived. For all
claims, the insurer also collects the amount ultimately paid out, if anything, to the claimant, as
well as any legal fees or other legal expenses incurred. Each record also contains the policy



                                                40
limit for the policyholder (which affects how the insurer handles the claim), information about
how long the insured had the policy, and when it became effective.
       For approximately 80 percent of the claims, the insurer recorded whether the plaintiff
was an individual or a business. The company also records extremely detailed information
about the type of harm allegedly suffered by the plaintiff. Possible harms include
property/economic damage, personal injury or death, or, in many instances, both.
Property/economic damage and personal injury raise different concerns for the insurer. With
property/economic damage, the magnitude of harm is typically quantifiable using market
measures, leaving liability as the central issue. By contrast, claims involving personal injury
require the insurer to determine both the magnitude of the harm as well as the extent of
liability, so the insurer catalogs the part of the body allegedly harmed (e.g., head, neck, spine)
as well as the nature of the injury (e.g., contusion, sprain, fracture). If there are multiple
injuries, the insurer records them, as well as whether other people were injured during the
“loss event” and other indicators of injury (the use of an ambulance, for example).
        As the summary statistics in Table A3 suggest, “in dispute” claims are different from
administratively handled claims. The fatality rate is more than four times higher in disputed
claims than in administrative claims. In addition, a disputed claim takes on average four times
longer to resolve and involves payouts eight times greater than an administrative claim. The
insurer tracks how the claim resolved, whether by settlement, arbitration, or trial. Table 1(a)
reports the same summary statistics as Table A2, broken down by whether the claim involved
a high-low discussion (irrespective of whether the parties reached a high-low agreement or
how the claim ultimately resolved), resolved through settlement without a high-low
discussion, or resolved by trial or arbitration without a high-low discussion. Consistent with
existing literature on settlement rates (Galanter, 1994), the vast majority of claims (95
percent) resolve without formal adjudication.
        The insurer does not store any of its settlement agreements (including even whether
there was a written or oral high-low agreement in place) in its standard, uniformly coded and
collected electronic records. However, the insurer does keep extensive electronic narrative
records on how the claim is handled while it is in dispute. Claim handlers, lawyers, and
anyone else involved with a claim enter their notes as claims evolve, although the notes are
not entirely complete and can be difficult to decipher.
       To extract information about high-low agreements from these notes (which run at least
many dozens of pages per “in dispute” claim when aggregated), we worked with the insurer to
design an algorithm that extracted chunks of text surrounding references to a “high-low”
agreement. The algorithm was designed to identify the many ways different people might
have referred to high-low agreements in the notes: e.g., “hi-lo,” “high/low,” and “hi/low.”
       A single claim often gave rise to several notes, depending on the frequency of high-
low references. All notes included the following:
          Event ID: the underlying event giving rise to one or more claims;
          Claim ID: the specific claim corresponding to a given event;


                                                41
          Note ID: individual identifier for the specific note;
          Note Type: the category of note, e.g., negotiation, legal, medical, etc.;
          Note Date: the date corresponding to the note;
          Note Count: the total number of notes attached to the claim.
The algorithm also recorded how many times the variation of the term appeared in the claim
notes. For privacy reasons, notes were redacted to exclude names, addresses, social security
numbers, and other sensitive information.
      We read through a large sample of complete case notes and algorithm-extracted chunks
of text to better understand the scope of the notes and to design a coding regimen. Research
assistants completed the coding and double-checking of the data. For each of these “high-
low” relevant claims, we read the available narrative information, and recorded the context in
which the high-low agreement arose, whether the parties reached an actual agreement, as well
as other potentially useful information, such as the number of back and forth proposals,
relevant dates, and the proximity of the discussion to trial or arbitration, if apparent.
      When the redactions inhibited our ability to understand the notes, we requested
additional information from the insurer. Officials at the insurer either helped us to determine
the substance of the notes or forwarded hand-redacted notes. These notes were then
recombined with the existing notes for those claims. The same procedure was used for both
auto (AL) and general liability (GL) claims. The high-low data was structured such that each
row in a spreadsheet contained a new note and all of the information we had about that note.
The data were sorted by Event ID to determine whether there were multiple claims for an
event, then sorted by claim ID to group each claim together, then sorted by date so that the
notes were in chronological order within each claim. We ultimately coded a total of almost
300,000 text entries (many for each claim).
      From the claim notes identified and redacted by the text-mining algorithm, we collected
the following information on high-low discussions and agreements.
      H/L Discussion Level (measures the extent of high-low discussion). A “0” indicates
       that a high-low was mentioned by the insurer but there was no discussion between the
       parties. A “1” indicates that it was mentioned by one party but the other party was not
       interested. A “2” indicates that a high-low was discussed and seriously considered by
       both sides, but that no high-low was ever reached. Any type of interest on the other
       party’s part (such as “let me check with my client”) received a “2” coding. A “3”
       indicates that a high-low agreement was made. “4” records unknown/unclear.
      Party Name (identifies the party initiating the high-low discussion). A “1” indicates
       that the insurer raised the possibility of a high-low, a “2” means the plaintiff raised it,
       a “3” indicates a co-defendant (such as another insurance company also involved in
       the litigation) raised it, and a “4” means that it was unclear from the notes which party
       raised the possibility. A “5” indicates that a judge raised the idea.
      Date H/L Raised (the date of the first recorded mention of a high-low).


                                               42
      H/L Context (the stage of the claim at which the discussion of the high-low occurred).
       A “0” represents a very early planning/negotiation stage, “1” is for arbitration, “2” is
       for mediation, and “3” is for trial.
      Date H/L Reached (if applicable, the date when the parties agreed to a high-low).
      High (if applicable, the high of the agreement).
      Low (if applicable, the low of the agreement).
      Claim Resolution (how the claim was eventually resolved). A “1” is for arbitration, a
       “2” is for mediation, a “3” is for trial, a “4” is for settlement, a “5” is for a dismissal or
       dropped case, and a “6” is recorded when the notes did not provide sufficient
       information to determine the resolution.
   In the rare event that claims involved multiple parties and multiple distinct high-low
agreements, we recorded the information in multiple separate rows as if there were separate
agreements. We then later determined the appropriate treatment based on the facts and
procedural posture of the case.
    We also collected whether a claim involved multiple high-low proposals and, if so, we
recorded the terms of each offer or demand, up to three proposals. (In a few instances, the
notes did not report the actual terms of the high-low proposal.) These proposals usually, but
not necessarily, resulted in the parties reaching a high-low agreement. Finally, we kept track
of any information indicating the motivation or thinking of the lawyers or other insurer
personnel in engaging in a high-low negotiation or agreement, and also recorded any other
information possibly relevant to analyzing the case.
      As an internal check, many claims (several hundred) were coded redundantly to ensure
accuracy. Subsequent spot-checking also revealed that coding was highly consistent. Research
assistants also recorded the certainty of their coding. A claim coded as a “1” was evaluated by
another research assistant or by one of us, a “2” indicated that the claim required additional
attention, and a “3” meant the RA had high confidence in the coding.




                                                43
                     Table A1: Litigated and High-Low Related Claims
                                       Claims Resolved by
                                                                   Claims with High-          Claims with High-
                                            Trial or
                                                                   Low Discussions            Low Agreements
                                           Arbitration
Total Number of Claims                         2,636                        935                        246
Claims by Year (when closed)
   2004                                          312                        138                        27
   2005                                          450                        150                        28
   2006                                          558                        180                        53
   2007                                          574                        206                        68
   2008                                          615                        230                        61
   2009                                          127                        31                         9
Type of Claim
   Auto Liability                               983                         590                        165
   General Liability                           1,653                        345                         81
Accident Characteristic
  Region Where Claim Arose
     Northeast                                41.08%                     68.02%                     68.70%
     South                                    26.25%                     13.90%                     15.85%
     Midwest                                   8.88%                      6.84%                     6.10%
     West                                     23.18%                     10.91%                     8.94%
     Pacific                                   0.57%                      0.32%                     0.41%
Claimant Characteristics
   Claimant Type
      Firm/Business                            10.1%                      1.5%                        2.4%
      Individual                               86.3%                      92.1%                      91.1%
      Unknown                                  3.6%                       6.4%                        6.5%
   Part of Body
      Fatality                                  2.2%                       1.6%                       0.4%
      Head                                     5.8%                       8.5%                        7.7%
      Lower Extremeties                        13.0%                      14.2%                      15.5%
      Multiple Injuries                         3.2%                       1.1%                       0.4%
      Neck                                     13.0%                       9.4%                       8.9%
      Spinal                                    4.4%                      10.6%                      11.4%
      Trunk                                    24.3%                      38.3%                      38.2%
      Upper Extremeties                         8.2%                      12.7%                      12.6%
      Personal Injury                           4.8%                       1.1%                       1.6%
      Unreported                               21.2%                       2.6%                       3.3%
Average Claim Characteristic
  Duration of Claim (months)                   28.45                      37.28                      39.43
                                               (19.02)                    (18.49)                    (15.79)
   Initial Reserve                             $7,012                     $7,055                     $5,683
                                              (13,474)                   (12,425)                    (8,876)
   Loss Paid                                  $32,392                    $93,426                    $87,876
                                             (126,757)                  (174,682)                  (140,041)
   Total Insurer Litigation Costs             $13,880                    $14,215                    $12,662
                                              (34,280)                   (31,792)                   (20,736)
   Policy Limit (per person)                 $974,916                    $632,594                   $542,277
                                             (879,177)                  (740,183)                  (614,334)
   Policy Limit (per event)                  $1,389,592                  $878,318                   $795,281
                                            (2,394,692)                 (801,791)                  (791,954)
Notes: All figures are computed from machine data or litigation notes provided by the insurer. All financial figures
are reported in 2008 dollars. T he category "Claims with High-Low Discussions" includes claims in which the parties
at least raised in settlement negotiations the possibility of a high-low agreement. "Claims with High-Low
Agreements" consists of the subset of "Claims with High-Low Discussions" in which the parties reached an actual
agreement. Because some high-low agreements subsequently resolved through settlement, "Claims Resolved through
T rial or Arbitration" includes some but not all of the high-low discussions and agreements. Standard deviations are
reported in parentheses.




                                                         44
        Table A2: Likelihood of High-Low Discussions and Agreements, High-Low
             Agreements, and Full-Settlement Relative to Trial or Arbitration
                 (Litigation Costs Predicted Using All Disputed Claims)
                                      Discussions and Agreements                                        Agreements
                                   (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
High-Low Activity
HC-HV                             4.545        4.499        4.481         5.558          3.097        2.606        3.934        2.960
                                 (0.786)      (0.787)      (0.928)       (1.167)        (1.044)      (0.868)      (1.239)      (0.956)
                                  [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]        [0.00]         [0.07]       [0.09]       [0.04]       [0.07]

LC-HV                             8.800       10.087        9.957        10.484          9.691        9.308       11.010        9.106
                                 (1.998)      (2.169)      (2.370)       (2.736)        (3.479)      (3.081)      (3.688)      (3.169)
                                  [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.00]        [0.01]         [0.03]       [0.02]       [0.02]       [0.03]

LC-LV                             2.053        2.291        2.133         1.902          1.647        1.342        1.695        1.138
                                 (0.505)      (0.564)      (0.555)       (0.529)        (0.680)      (0.497)      (0.631)      (0.455)
                                  [0.06]       [0.04]       [0.07]        [0.12]         [0.36]       [0.51]       [0.30]       [0.77]
Settlement

HC-HV                             1.158        1.191        1.178         1.223          1.137        1.175        1.167        1.214
                                 (0.078)      (0.080)      (0.091)       (0.116)        (0.075)      (0.078)      (0.088)      (0.114)
                                  [0.07]       [0.04]       [0.08]        [0.08]         [0.10]       [0.05]       [0.09]       [0.09]

LC-HV                             1.606        1.786        1.835         1.745          1.578        1.739        1.788        1.701
                                 (0.164)      (0.184)      (0.235)       (0.218)        (0.158)      (0.176)      (0.229)      (0.213)
                                  [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.01]        [0.01]         [0.00]       [0.00]       [0.01]       [0.01]

LC-LV                             1.142        1.246        1.283         1.223          1.145        1.250        1.283        1.222
                                 (0.106)      (0.117)      (0.148)       (0.147)        (0.106)      (0.119)      (0.148)      (0.147)
                                  [0.21]       [0.06]       [0.08]        [0.16]         [0.20]       [0.06]       [0.08]       [0.16]
Calculating Expected
Litigation Costs
Set #1 (see notes)                                                                                                         
Set #2 (see notes)                                                                                                           
Set #3 (see notes)                                                                                                             
Set #4 (see notes)                                                                                                               

Num of Obs.                      45,375       43,996       36,112        32,317         45,375       43,996       36,112       32,317
Notes: Estimates are reported as relative risk ratios. The outcome variable captures whether a claim ever involved a high-low
discussion or agreement and, if not, whether it settled out-of-court or was resolved through trial or arbitration (excluded category).
The independent variables are indicators for the interaction between an indicator for whether the claim had above- or below-median
expected variance and an indicator for whether the claim had above- or below-median expected litigation costs. Therefore, HC-HV is
one for claims with above-median (H) expected litigation costs (C) and above-median (H) expected variance (V) and zero otherwise,
etc. Bootstrapped standard errors are listed below estimates in parentheses. P-values are listed in brackets. We explain the method for
calculating expected litigation expenditures in Section 4. Here, we show estimates using four different expected litigation cost
calculations. Set #1 includes state of litigation fixed effects, accident region fixed effects, fixed effects for the insurance company's
estimate of percentage of liability, year effects for when the accident was reported, fixed effects for the number of persons injured in
the event, fixed effects for type of injury or damage, a fatality indicator, and an indicator for whether the line of business was
automobile liability or general liability. Set #2 adds state of accident fixed effects, the insurance policy claim limit, the population
density of the insured's geographic area, and the insurance company's estimates of "incurred loss" in months 3, 4, and 5 after the filing
of a claim. Set #3 adds demographic variables about the area where the insured lives, the type of plaintiff (corporate or individual), and
the population density of the plaintiff's geographic area. Set #4 adds an indicator for the year in which the suit was filed.




                                                                    45
                                    Table A3: Full Universe of Insurance Claims
                                                           Admin.             Claims in Dispute             Litigated       High-Low
                                         All Claims
                                                           Claims            Broad           Narrow          Claims        Discussions

Total Number of Claims                     385,067         336,720           48,347           34,280           2,636             935
Claims by Year (when closed)
   2004                                    68,445           62,527           5,918            3,699             312              138
   2005                                    79,698           71,481            8,217           5,729             450              150
   2006                                    83,804           74,227           9,577            6,726             558              180
   2007                                    87,446           76,742           10,704           7,684             574              206
   2008                                    62,670           50,545           12,125           8,959             615              230
   2009                                     3,004            1,198            1,806           1,483             127              31
Type of Claim
   Auto Liability                          224,883         199,724           25,159           18,386            983              590
   General Liability                       160,184         136,996           23,188           15,894           1,653             345
Accident Characteristic
  Region Where Claim Arose
     Northeast                             22.58%           21.13%           32.69%          35.82%           41.08%          68.02%
     South                                 39.14%           40.49%           29.73%          27.56%           26.25%          13.90%
     Midwest                               12.62%           12.77%           11.59%          11.37%           8.88%           6.84%
     West                                  25.43%           25.40%           25.64%          24.98%           23.18%          10.91%
     Pacific                               0.20%             0.18%            0.29%           0.22%            0.57%           0.32%
Claimant Characteristics
   Claimant Type
      Firm/Business                          2.2%            1.5%            6.8%             6.1%            10.1%            1.5%
      Individual                            76.6%           75.1%            87.0%            89.1%           86.3%            92.1%
      Unknown                               21.2%           23.4%             6.2%             4.8%            3.6%             6.4%
   Part of Body
      Fatality                               0.7%            0.5%             2.5%             2.0%            2.2%             1.6%
      Head                                   8.2%            8.4%             6.8%             6.4%            5.8%             8.5%
      Lower Extremeties                      9.5%            9.2%            11.4%            12.5%           13.0%            14.2%
      Multiple Injuries                      2.5%            2.6%             2.0%             1.5%            3.2%             1.1%
      Neck                                  22.9%           24.1%            14.3%            13.8%           13.0%             9.4%
      Spinal                                 2.1%            1.6%             6.2%             7.2%            4.4%            10.6%
      Trunk                                 27.4%           27.2%            28.7%            30.5%           24.3%            38.3%
      Upper Extremeties                      8.1%            8.0%             9.3%            10.1%            8.2%            12.7%
      Personal Injury                        0.9%            0.4%             4.4%             3.5%            4.8%             1.1%
      Unreported                            17.6%           18.0%            14.5%            12.4%           21.2%             2.6%
Average Claim Characteristic
  Duration of Claim (months)                 9.20            6.76             26.19           28.98            28.45            37.28
                                           (11.28)           (7.84)          (15.99)         (15.71)          (19.02)          (18.49)
   Initial Reserve                         $7,346             --             $7,346           $7,163          $7,012           $7,055
                                           (17,805)           --             (17,805)        (13,934)        (13,474)         (12,425)
   Loss Paid                               $9,950           $5,442           $41,347         $47,058          $32,392         $93,426
                                           (46,820)        (23,366)        (111,938)        (114,579)        (126,757)       (174,682)
   Total Insurer Litigation Costs          $1,039             --             $8,277          $10,675          $13,880         $14,215
                                           (8,414)            --             (22,449)        (24,928)        (34,280)         (31,792)
   Policy Limit (per person)              $737,431         $726,009         $817,015        $786,181         $974,916         $632,594
                                         (2,101,475)      (2,210,010)     (1,071,745)       (848,220)        (879,177)       (740,183)
   Policy Limit (per event)               $886,054         $855,077        $1,097,049      $1,078,358       $1,389,592        $878,318
                                         (1,170,253)      (1,138,832)     (1,346,353)      (1,067,624)      (2,394,692)      (801,791)
Notes: All figures are computed from machine data or litigation notes provided by the insurer. All financial figures are reported in 2008
dollars. "Administrative Claims" are claims that involve no legal expenses and in which no complaint was filed. "Claims in Dispute"
involve some minimal legal expenses and/or (narrow/broad) the filing of a legal complaint. Litigated claims are those claims that are
eventually adjudicated either in trial or by arbitration. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.




                                                                        46
