                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  PRESENT-BIAS, PROCRASTINATION AND DEADLINES IN A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                        Alberto Bisin
                                        Kyle Hyndman

                                      Working Paper 19874
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19874


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2014, Revised April 2018




We thank the Editor and two anonymous referees for exceptionally useful comments which lead
us to a complete revision. We thank Anne Stubing, Aditya Bhandari, Margaret Ford, Taylor
McBride, and Daniel Vaughan for their excellent help with the experiments; Nicholas DePinto,
Chardonnay Phelan, and Severine Toussaert for their research assistance; and Anwar Ruff for his
programming expertise. We thank the Center for Experimental Social Science for their generous
use of their lab. We have received very helpful comments from Gary Charness, Chetan Dave,
John Duffy, Guillaume Frechette, Anett John, David Laibson, David Levine, Johanna
Mollerstrom, Andy Schotter, and many seminar participants. Thanks also to Dan Ariely for
kindly providing us with the data regarding his seminal experiment on procrastination with Klaus
Wertenbroch. Financial support from Southern Methodist University (Hyndman) and from the
Center for Experimental Social Science (Bisin & Hyndman) and the C.V. Starr Center for
Applied Economics (Bisin) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Alberto Bisin and Kyle Hyndman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Present-Bias, Procrastination and Deadlines in a Field Experiment
Alberto Bisin and Kyle Hyndman
NBER Working Paper No. 19874
January 2014, Revised April 2018
JEL No. D03

                                          ABSTRACT

We study procrastination in the context of a field experiment involving students who must exert
costly effort to complete certain tasks by a fixed deadline. Descriptively, we document a strong
demand for commitment, in the form of self-imposed deadlines, which appear to be associated
with students' self-reported psychological characteristics and cost of time. We structurally
estimate students' present-bias and cost of time by fitting the experimental data to a stylized
stopping time choice model. We find that present-bias is relatively widespread but that having
multiple repeated tasks appears to activate effective internal self-control mechanisms. Finally, we
also document an important form of partial naïveté on the part of students in anticipating their
ability to self-control when setting deadlines.


Alberto Bisin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Kyle Hyndman
Jindal School of Management
University of Texas at Dallas
800 W. Campbell Rd. (SM31)
Richardson, TX 75080
KyleB.Hyndman@utdallas.edu
1       Introduction
Procrastination is generally defined in the psychological literature as the the practice of
putting off impending tasks to a later time even when such practice results in “counterpro-
ductive and needless delay” (see e.g., Schraw, Wadkins, and Olafson, 2007). The qualification
that delay be counterproductive and needless is important. Delay may represent an optimal
strategy in an environment in which the cost of effort evolves over time, when waiting for the
best moment to complete a task. Procrastination is then typically construed in psychology
and economics as the result of a present-bias in preferences, on account of which agents delay
doing unpleasant tasks that they themselves wish they would do sooner (O’Donoghue and
Rabin, 1999a).
    In this paper we experimentally study procrastination in students’ academic work – a
context procrastination appears widespread in. Solomon and Rothblum (1984) find that
at least 46% of college students consider themselves serious procrastinators; Steel (2007)
finds that between 80% and 95% of college students regularly procrastinate when performing
academic tasks.1 Indeed several recent field experiments on procrastination have focused on
students’ homework activity (e.g., Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002), Burger, Charness, and
Lynham (2011)). We design and conduct a framed field experiment in which students must
exert costly effort to perform a certain number of tasks by a fixed deadline for a monetary
payment after completion of each task. Each student in the experiment chooses when to
complete the task, if ever, in his/her own private residence over the course of his/her normal
daily activities. Each student trades off the requirement of the experimental tasks with
the various demands on his/her time, in terms of academic work, leisure, and employment
activities, which we conceptualize as an effort cost associated to each task.
    In a dynamic choice context like the one we study, students with a present-bias might
adopt various internal (psychological) and/or external self-control mechanisms to avoid pro-
crastinating on the task(s). Internal mechanisms include mental deadlines, cues, and antici-
patory planning. External mechanisms include binding self-imposed deadlines and voluntary
exposure to social pressure. We shall study explicitly the role of binding deadlines in af-
fecting procrastination. Furthermore, by comparing students’ behavior when faced with a
single task versus multiple repeated tasks, we are able to indirectly observe the operation
of internal self-control mechanisms. Multiple repeated tasks have, in fact, been shown to
induce self-regulatory behavior; see e.g., Baumeister, Heatherton, and Tice (1994), Kuhl and
Beckmann (1985) and Gollwitzer and Bargh (1996) for extensive surveys. On the other hand
students might be partially naı̈ve with respect to their ability to exert internal self-control —
perhaps over-estimating or under-estimating their ability to do so. By allowing students to
self-impose possibly restrictive deadlines before undertaking the dynamic choice experiment,
we are able to gauge their naı̈veté in this respect.
    Our experiment provides us with several interesting findings. First, we document a robust
demand for commitment. When given the opportunity, a substantial fraction of students
self-impose binding deadlines. However, descriptively, the presence of deadlines does not
appear to increase task completion rates. This is in contrast with the findings of Ariely
and Wertenbroch (2002), but is consistent with those of Burger, Charness, and Lynham
    1
    Novarese and Giovinazzo (2013) also studies university administration data concluding that lack of stu-
dent promptness in enrollment is negatively correlated with academic achievement, a finding which could be
interpreted as due to procrastination.


                                                    2
(2011). In our Endogenous deadlines treatments, in which subjects are given the opportunity
to self-impose binding deadlines, we do not see any significant differences in the number of
tasks completed between those who do and those who do not. Amongst those students who
successfully complete a task, the average time (from the final deadline) is never significantly
different between those students who do and do not self-impose a deadline.
    To better understand this and other aspects of students’ behavior in our experiment, we
identify and estimate their deep preference parameters, notably, their present-bias and other
possible behavioral aspects of their decision making. Each student’s behavior will, in general,
depend on his/her discounting preferences, e.g., how patient he/she is and whether he/she
is subject to a present-bias. Since delay might be an optimal response to the evolution of
effort costs, we shall have to separately identify students’ preference parameters from the
properties of the costs they face. To this end we fit a stylized model of a decision maker’s
choice regarding when to complete a task in an environment in which effort is costly and
evolves according to a finite state Markov process; that is, an optimal stopping time problem.
We analyze and characterize the solution to this problem depending on whether the agent’s
preferences are either exponential or quasi-hyperbolic (β −δ, as first studied by Laibson (1994,
1997); O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999a,b) and by Phelps and Pollak (1968) with regards to
inter-generational altruism), which display present-bias and time-inconsistency.
    Our empirical strategy allows for (i) a reliable identification and an explicit quantitative
measure for present-bias, which depends on the subjects’ decision to self-impose deadlines as
well as their behavioral choice regarding when to complete the task; (ii) a flexible approach
to account for the differential operation of internal self-control mechanisms, by allowing for
our estimates of present-bias to be different in single task versus multiple repeated tasks
treatments; (iii) a quantitative measure of the relative roles of costs and present-bias in
explaining delay in task completion. Finally, our empirical strategy also allows us to test
whether (iv) students display partial naı̈veté in anticipating their ability to exercise self-
control.
    We find strong evidence for widespread present-bias: the posterior probability distribution
over present-bias identifies about 30% of likely quasi-hyperbolic subjects (with a posterior
probability > 60%). In the single task treatments quasi-hyperbolic students display a high
present bias, as measured by 1−β: 77%; furthermore they perceive a higher and more volatile
cost of time, possibly indicating a correlation between present-bias and a distorted perception
of such cost.
    Contrary to what we observe in the single task treatments, in the multiple-task treat-
ments present-bias is estimated equal to 0. Indeed, in the multiple-task treatments there
is virtually no difference in the distribution for completion times between exponential and
quasi-hyperbolic students. This implies that repeated similar tasks activate internal self-
control through various framing effects. This is consistent with independent evidence on
the determinants of self-regulation mechanisms. Possible mechanisms include inducing the
“budgeting” of these tasks into more prominent “mental accounts” for time (Thaler, 1980,
1990), and/or the formulation of more explicit and precise simple plans and implementation
intentions (Gollwitzer, 1999). We interpret this result as suggesting that present-bias, while
present and large, appears not to significantly affect behavior in the context of repeated
similar tasks.
    Finally, we find that, in the multiple tasks treatment, subjects are partially naı̈ve in the


                                               3
sense that they underestimate their ability to self control. Indeed, they display a robust
demand for commitment by setting binding deadlines for themselves, even though they are
able to fully exercise self-control (Present bias, 1 − β, is estimated to be 0 for all students
in these treatments). While we cannot empirically assess whether students overestimate or
underestimate their ability to self-control in single task treatment, we find evidence that the
ability to set deadlines ends up reducing, on average, the completion rates of partially naı̈ve
students, which would not happen for sophisticated students who set deadlines optimally.2
    The data we obtain from our experiment are actually substantially richer than just the
timing of completions. Specifically, we also observe the timing of attempts to complete the
task by students and whether the attempt is ultimately successful. This is important in our
understanding of the students’ behavior in the experiment. In principle, several interesting
characteristics of the behavior of subjects such as forecast inaccuracy and over-confidence
might induce them to disregard the possibility of not completing the task after having at-
tempted it. In this case, present-bias might interact with these characteristics in explaining
task completion in our experiment and our estimates for present-bias would account for other
behavioral components. To gain more insight regarding the interaction between, for exam-
ple, forecast inaccuracy, over-confidence, and present-bias, we re-estimate the model with at-
tempts data in place of completion data. We find that focusing on completions over-estimates
the extent of present-bias. By accounting for attempts data and hence, indirectly, for other
behavioral components like forecast inaccuracy and over-confidence, estimated present-biased
is greatly reduced, from 77% to 38%. This result is consistent, in the context of our experi-
ment, with self-reported beliefs about how likely subjects were to complete the task(s), which
we collect prior to the beginning of the experiment. These beliefs clearly show that subjects
do not accurately forecast their future behavior in terms of task completion — specifically,
they are over-confident.3


2     Related Literature
The theoretical literature on present-bias and time-inconsistency dates back at least to Strotz
(1956), while Phelps and Pollak (1968), Laibson (1994, 1997) and O’Donoghue and Rabin
(1999a) formalized the model of β − δ quasi-hyperbolic discounting, which forms the basis
for our theoretical and empirical framework. A rich experimental literature in psychology
and economics has first motivated and then supported this theoretical framework, providing
evidence for present-bias.4 Similar behavioral regularities have been documented as well in
    2
      In Section 5.2 we discuss further evidence which we interpret as indication of the fact that partially naı̈ve
subjects do not set deadlines optimally, potentially inducing negative welfare effects.
    3
      More generally, the interaction between imperfect foresight and present-bias in time preferences is formally
studied by Gabaix and Laibson (2017).
    4
      First, by eliciting students’ intertemporal preferences, many of the early papers find evidence of declining
discount rates; see e.g., (Thaler (1991), Loewenstein and Thaler (1989), Loewenstein and Prelec (1992), Kirby
and Herrnstein (1995) and Benzion, Rapoport, and Yagil (1989)); and Herrnstein (1961); de Villiers and
Herrnstein (1976); Ainslie and Herrnstein (1981) for early evidence in the experimental psychology. Also,
many studies document preference reversals which are inconsistent with exponential discounting; see Ainslie
(1992, 2001), Loewenstein and Prelec (1992) and Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue (2002) for surveys
of this literature and Rachlin and Laibson (1997) for a collection of early essays on the topic. More recently,
in a lab experiment conducted in class, Halevy (2012) is able to identify separately time-consistency and time-
invariance, finding 52% of time-inconsistent agents, more then half of which also displaying time-invariance.


                                                        4
field experiments with monetary payments,5 though the evidence is more mixed.6 However,
eliciting preferences over non-monetary choices eliminates some relevant confounding factors
and strong evidence for present-bias is typically reinstated.7
    However, the evidence for present-bias in laboratory and field experiments eliciting dis-
count rates cannot directly be interpreted as evidence for procrastination, which is rather
a property of behavior in dynamic choice environments than of preferences.8 On the other
hand, observing agents who, when given the option, adopt external commitment devices such
as binding self-imposed deadlines, can be interpreted as evidence that the agents themselves
perceive procrastination as a obstacle to the implementation of their preferred dynamic choice
plan.9 Ample evidence in this respect is obtained both in the lab and in the field. With re-
gards to lab experiments, Trope and Fishbach (2000) experimentally study two commitment
mechanisms: the ability to make a fixed payment conditional on task completion and the
ability to impose a penalty for failing to complete a task. In both cases, they find that many
students willingly choose such commitments. Casari (2009) finds that among the students
who exhibit reversals in monetary choices, 60% prefer to commit to a lower amount today
rather than making a choice at a later period. In an experiment about effort choice alloca-
tions, Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015) find that present-biased students are more
likely to demand commitment than others. Houser, Schunk, Winter, and Xiao (2010) study
commitment behavior under repeated temptations to surf the Internet and find that more
than 20% of students are willing to remove their Internet access at the first opportunity they
get. As for field evidence, most of it regards voluntary exposure to social pressure. Exam-
ples include regular attendance to meeting groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous or Weight
Watchers and commitment markets whereby agents enter into a contract with a disinterested
third party, specifying the goal to be achieved, the time in which it is to be achieved and the
financial penalties for failure.10
In lab studies using monetary payments, Casari (2009) finds that about 65% of students exhibit some form
of choice reversal while Benhabib, Bisin, and Schotter (2010) find strong evidence of present-bias in the form
of a fixed cost. Finally, a recent series of studies strengthen these results by complementing the choice data
with data regarding the neurological processes underlying intertemporal choices in lab experiments; see e.g.,
McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein, and Cohen (2004); Kable and Glimcher (2007).
    5
      See Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006), Bauer, Chytilová, and Morduch (2012), Meier and Sprenger (2010)
and Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen (2010); and by Dean and Sautmann (2013) with consumption and savings
data.
    6
      Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a,b); Giné, Goldberg, Silverman, and Yang (2013); Harrison and Lau (2005);
Harrison, Lau, and Williams (2002); Andersen, Harrison, Lau, and Rutström (2011, 2008); Dohmen, Falk,
and Sunde (2012) can be interpreted to show that, when carefully controlling for risk, transaction costs and
payment reliability, present-bias in monetary choices tends to disappear in the aggregate.
    7
      See Casari and Dragone (2012) or Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015) in the context of effort
choice, or Brown, Chua, and Camerer (2009) for brief intertemporal choices of juices or soda. See DellaVigna
(2009) for a survey.
    8
      A large theoretical literature in psychology and economics studies the form and the effectiveness of self-
control mechanisms. For a theoretical point of view, see e.g., Ainslie (1992, 2001); Laibson (1994). More
recent work includes Benabou and Tirole (2004); Benhabib and Bisin (2005) and Hsiaw (2013).
    9
      Theoretical studies of the effects of external commitment devices in dynamic choice environments include
O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999b), who characterize general external mechanisms to induce second-best optimal
behavior in agents who procrastinate due to present-bias preferences, Sáez-Martı́ and Sjögren (2008), who
study how binding deadlines affect the timing of effort when agents get distracted, and Battaglini, Benabou,
and Tirole (2005) for a theoretical analysis of commitment through peer groups.
  10
      See e.g., http://www.stickk.com and Bryan, Karlan, and Nelson (2010) for more examples and discussion.
Mahajan and Tarozzi (2011) conduct a field study exploiting investment choices in bednets providing protection


                                                       5
    Direct evidence of procrastination is typically obtained in the literature by comparing
the behavior of agents in the same dynamic choice environment with or without the option
of external commitment devices. For example, Giné, Karlan, and Zinman (2010) study a
voluntary commitment product designed to help smokers to quit. Smokers are given the
opportunity to deposit money in a bank account. After 6 months they are given a test
for nicotine. Those who pass the test receive their money back, while those who fail see
their money donated to charity. Giné, Karlan, and Zinman (2010) find that smokers in the
commitment group are more likely to pass the test for nicotine after 12 months than those
who are not given the chance to commit. A few studies have also shown (c.f., Thaler and
Benartzi (2004); Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006) and Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson (2011))
that products with certain commitment features lead to higher savings. For example, Thaler
and Benartzi (2004) propose a mechanism whereby employees commit to allocating some
percentage of future salary increases to their retirement savings. They show both that a
large number of people join the program and that savings increase by a considerable amount
after 40 months of participation. In the context of self-control at work, Kaur, Kremer,
and Mullainathan (2010) find that workers are willing to choose dominated contracts as a
commitment device to increase their productivity.11
    Evidence for partial naı̈veté in dynamic choice contexts has been suggested by DellaVigna
and Malmendier (2006) in their study of gym memberships and attendance. More recently
Augenblick and Rabin (Forthcoming), studying subjects who choose how much of an un-
pleasant task to complete immediately for various payment schemes, find strong evidence for
present bias, but also that subjects only anticipate 10-24% of their present bias. Fang and
Wang (2015) provide a method for estimating dynamic discrete choice models and also find
evidence for partial naı̈veté in women’s decisions to undergo mammograms. More closely
related to us is the field study by John (2017) who provides evidence that partially naı̈ve
subjects are more likely to choose weak commitment devices which lead to eventual default.
In our case, subjects are partially naı̈ve about their ability to internally self-control, which
leads them to self-impose binding deadlines in the multiple task treatment, to their detriment.
    Like us, a few recent papers study procrastination in the context of students’ academic
work. Results are somewhat mixed. In the experiments conducted by Ariely and Wertenbroch
(2002) students have to complete a series of tasks before a final deadline. Students are
either given exogenous and evenly spaced intermediate deadlines, are free to choose their
own intermediate deadlines or, in one study, no intermediate deadlines. Their main results
are that many students self-impose binding deadlines and that their performance increases
under evenly spaced deadlines (whether self-imposed or exogenously set) compared to the
case of no deadlines. However, it is interesting to note that in Ariely and Wertenbroch’s
against malaria, Schwartz, Mochon, Wyper, Maroba, Patel, and Ariely (2014); Schwartz, Riis, Elbel, and
Ariely (2012) study commitment on health food consumption and calories intake .
   11
      See Bryan, Karlan, and Nelson (2010) for a comprehensive survey of both the theoretical and experimental
literature on commitment and self-control. While in this paper we focus on present-bias and quasi-hyperbolic
discounting as a possible cause for procrastination, it is the case that other types of preferences may lead to
procrastination and demand for commitment. Examples include the models of temptation and self-control by
Gul and Pesendorfer (2001, 2004), dual-self models such as Benhabib and Bisin (2005) and Fudenberg and
Levine (2006), optimal expectations and over-confidence models such as Brunnermeier, Papakonstantinou,
and Parker (2008). In the concluding section we discuss how our results can be interpreted as suggestive
evidence in favor of models of optimal expectations and over-confidence along the lines of Brunnermeier,
Papakonstantinou, and Parker (2008).


                                                      6
(2002) Study 1, the gains in performance are not significant when restricted to the treatment
tasks. Instead, it is the final grades (which includes the treatment tasks, a final paper, and
other components) where we see performance being significantly higher in the Endogenous
deadlines treatment. In their Study 2, the effects are more clearcut in terms of performance,
but students end-up disliking the task more when they are subject to deadlines, leaving some
doubts about whether the effect of deadlines is effectively on procrastination. In a recent
paper, Burger, Charness, and Lynham (2011) conduct an experiment in which students are
faced with a time allocation problem over a task of significant duration (studying 75 hours
over a 5-week period) under different constraints in the form of binding sub-deadlines (e.g.,
15 hours in the first week). The main result of the paper is that deadlines do not lead to
more students successfully completing the task.
    While we follow Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002), Burger, Charness, and Lynham (2011)
and the previous literature on procrastination cited above in many respects, notably in the
general approach of exploiting the demand for commitment to identify present-bias and possi-
bly procrastination, we diverge from them in several important elements of the experimental
design, as well as in the methodology we adopt to analyze the data.
    First of all, because students in our experiment are rewarded through a fixed, known,
homogeneous monetary payment at a pre-specified delay from completion, our experiment
controls for student motivation in performing tasks. This is in contrast e.g., to Ariely and
Wertenbroch’s Study 1 in which students are rewarded for (less measurable) academic per-
formance. Secondly, the tasks in our experiment are the same for all students (alphabetize
either one or up to three lists of “words”) and do not require any special skill which could
be heterogenously distributed across the student pool; this is in contrast to the writing task
of Ariely and Wertenbroch’s Study 1 as well as to the proof-reading task of their Study 2, in
which heterogeneous ability could arguably affect the results.12 Most importantly, we impose
an upper bound on the time to complete the task after initiating it, so that students are
essentially required to complete each task in one sitting. Without such a restriction, as in
Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002), there is no clear link between the time effort is exerted and
the time the reward is obtained: students could smooth effort over time and could even trade
off effort and time, all of which makes it difficult to interpret the results of the experiments as
evidence for/against procrastination due to present-bias. Furthermore, the time restriction
to complete the task we impose allows us to collect data on failed attempts, which can be
exploited to better understand the determinants of students’ behavior. Another distinctive
feature of our design is that self-imposed deadlines are necessarily hard deadlines, while the
deadlines in the Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002) experiments are “soft” in the sense that only
a per period penalty is imposed for completion after the deadline. While soft deadlines occur
perhaps more naturally outside of the realm of these experiments, their theoretical implica-
tions are harder to obtain and hence it is harder to interpret any effects of such deadlines in
terms of the underlying characteristics of the preferences of students which might motivate
their demand for commitment and their behavior.
    Most importantly, our formulation of what constitutes a task and of the dynamic choice
  12
    In fact, in our experiment, the “words” to be alphabetized were not meaningful words, but rather (partially
random) character strings which are less likely to provide an advantage to native English speakers. An initial
pilot study suggested great variation in students’ approaches (and consequently required time) to completing
the task. Therefore, to further level the playing field, in the instructions we suggested a particular method for
completing the tasks. According to a post-experiment survey, most students followed the suggested method.


                                                       7
problem faced by the experimental students allows us to map directly the experimental data
to the underlying theoretical structure, where the dynamic choice problem the agents solve
is an optimal stopping time problem. Therefore, our analysis is not limited to a descriptive
study of procrastination and of the mostly qualitative effects of deadlines on such behavior,
but rather it allows us to estimate deep preference parameter from students’ behavior as
well as some contextual parameters (e.g., effort costs). The experimental design adopted
by Burger, Charness, and Lynham (2011) is more similar to ours in the sense that student
behavior, time spent in the study room, is also unaffected by possibly heterogenous skills
and is clearly measurable; also, the monetary reward mechanism is clearly specified and so is
the delay with respect to completion at which it is obtained. However, the dynamic choice
problem students are faced with in Burger, Charness, and Lynham (2011) is quite complex as
a student’s choice at any time optimally depends on the time he/she has previously spent in
the study room in the course of the experiment, effectively a state variable. As a consequence,
a structural analysis of the experimental data, to be able to estimate preference and other
contextual parameters, is not viable with their experimental design.


3     Experimental Design
We conduct two distinct sets of experiments. In the first students have one week to complete
a single task. We distinguish two treatments corresponding to two different intermediate (be-
fore the natural end-of-experiment) deadline scenarios: No deadline and Endogenous (i.e.,
self-imposed) deadlines. We call these the 1T(ask) treatments. In the second set of exper-
iments, students have two weeks to complete three tasks, with three different treatments
corresponding to different intermediate deadline scenarios: No deadlines, Exogenous dead-
lines and Endogenous deadlines. We call these the 3T(ask) treatments.
    In the 1T treatments, subjects are paid $20 if they successfully complete the task, while
in the 3T treatments, subjects are paid $15 for each task successfully completed by the
relevant deadline. In what follows we describe the experimental procedures we use for the
3T treatments. Identical procedures are used for the 1T treatments.

3.1   Phase 1: The Lab-based Component
Each session begins with a lab-based component in which students read the instructions for
their treatment and are given a user name and password in order to gain access to the web-
based experimental software. The instructions outline the nature of the tasks, explain the
software and also tell students the nature of any deadlines that they face.
    After reading the instructions, students log on to the experimental software and are
reminded of their deadlines for each task. For students in the No deadlines treatment, all
tasks have a deadline set at the end of the experiment; i.e., two weeks after coming into
the lab. For students in the Exogenous deadlines treatment, each of the three tasks has a
different deadline; deadlines are evenly spaced, with the deadline for task 3 being at the end
of the experiment. Students in the Endogenous deadlines treatment are able to choose an
intermediate deadline for each of the three tasks. The latest deadline that students could set
is the end of the experiment.
    After observing or choosing their deadlines, in the lab, students answer a series of survey
questions. The survey asks about their (work, academic and social) schedules for the two-

                                              8
                                  Figure 1: A Sample Task




week duration of the experiment. It also asks students to report their subjective expectation
(in probability form) of completing 0, 1, 2 or all 3 tasks. Finally, the survey asks a number
of questions designed to gauge students’ perceptions about several of their own psychological
characteristics, like reliability, punctuality, organization, etc. Appendix B contains a sample
of the experimental instructions and the survey questions used.
    This component of the experiment is conducted at the Center for Experimental Social
Science (C.E.S.S.) at New York University and lasted between 30 and 45 minutes. At the
end of this phase, students are given a $10 participation fee.

3.2   Phase 2: The Experiment
Upon completing the first component of the experiment, students leave the C.E.S.S. lab and
are free to work on the tasks at any time they wish. To do so, students log on to a website
using their user name and password. Upon logging in, they are issued a list of words for the
current task and are asked to list them in alphabetical order. In order to simulate as best as
possible a stopping time problem, once a list of words is given, students have to alphabetize
the list within the lesser of 2 hours and the time until the task deadline. Failing to do so
implies that a new list of words is issued if time remains; if no time remains before that task’s
deadline, students are automatically taken to the next task. Additionally, each time students
refresh the browser or log into the software, a new list of words is issued.

                                               9
    If a student submits an incorrectly alphabetized list, the software sends a message alerting
her of the existence of at least one mistake in the submitted list, without any indication
about the position of the mistake(s). If a student submits a correctly alphabetized list, she
is immediately taken to the next task, which she can work on if she so chooses.
    Each task that is successfully completed by the relevant deadline generates a payment of
$15, via petty cash vouchers mailed to students.13 In particular, all tasks that are completed
by 1:00PM on a given day are processed for payment that same day. Tasks completed after
1:00PM or on weekends are processed the next weekday.

3.3    Phase 3: Post-experiment Survey
Upon completion of the third task, or after the end of the experiment, students are asked
to complete a post-experiment survey. The purpose of this is to gain information on any
unanticipated shocks that they may have faced during the field component of the experiment.

3.4    Different Sessions
In Table 1 we summarize the details of our experimental sessions. In the 3T treatments,
Sessions 1 and 2 were conducted during the Spring semester of 2010, while Session 3 took
place during the Spring semester of 2011. Sessions 2 and 3 were aimed at adding variation in
the data. In particular, Session 2 was scheduled so that it ended on the final day of classes
for the semester. We conjectured that students would be busier or under greater pressure at
the end of the semester where they also had final exams and projects to complete. Session 3
made the task more difficult to complete by increasing the number of words to alphabetize
from 150 to 200. The 1T treatments were conducted during the Spring semester of 2011 and
involved 150 words.
                  Table 1: Summary of the Various Treatments and Sessions

         Treatment      Session     Intermediate           Timing         Words     Tasks     N
                                      deadlines
          1T-None          1            None            Mid-semester       150        1      46
         1T-Endog          1        Endogenous          Mid-semester       150        1      35
          3T-None          1            None            Mid-semester       150        3      23
          3T-None          2            None            End-semester       150        3      24
          3T-None          3            None            Mid-semester       200        3      14
          3T-Exog          1         Exogenous          Mid-semester       150        3      21
          3T-Exog          2         Exogenous          End-semester       150        3      24
          3T-Exog          3         Exogenous          Mid-semester       200        3      24
         3T-Endog          1        Endogenous          Mid-semester       150        3      21
         3T-Endog          2        Endogenous          End-semester       150        3      24
         3T-Endog          3        Endogenous          Mid-semester       200        3      22

  13
    In Phase 1, students pre-address envelopes and fill in their petty-cash vouchers. This is done to both
increase the credibility and saliency of payments, and to make the processing of payments easier for us.




                                                   10
4    Model
We now introduce the basic model we adopt to represent the decision problems students face
in our experiment.

Sequence of Events. We can divide the decision problem into two distinct stages. First,
there is an ex-ante stage, denoted by t = −1, and an active decision stage which consists
of an ordered set of discrete time periods, t = 0, ..., T , during which subjects may choose
to complete the task(s) assigned. The active decision stage is, formally, a stopping time
problem, in which each student must exert costly effort to perform a certain number of tasks
by the fixed deadline for a monetary payment after completion of each task. The ex-ante
stage is when agents choose (possibly intermediate binding) deadlines for each of the tasks
they have the option to complete starting at t = 0.

Present Bias. We consider two types of agents: (i) those with exponential time preferences
and (ii) those who are present-biased. For the present-biased agents, we posit that they may
possess some internal psychological mechanism that allows them to exert self-control, but
we also allow that they may be partially naı̈ve about their ability to internally self-control.
That is, agents might misperceive how effective their self-control mechanism will be in the
stopping-time problem. Consistent with the psychology literature (Baumeister, Heatherton,
and Tice, 1994; Kuhl and Beckmann, 1985; Gollwitzer and Bargh, 1996), this mechanism
may depend on the frame of the decision problem, specifically, 1T v. 3T.
    We adopt the β − δ quasi-hyperbolic framework to model present-biased time preferences.
Specifically, let time preference be denoted by 0 < δ < 1 and present bias by 0 < β0 ≤ 1.
We consider β0 < 1 to be an underlying parameter that distinguishes between exponential
(β0 = 1) and present-biased agents (β0 < 1). However, behavior in the active decision stage
for present-biased agents is governed by βτ ∈ [β0 , 1], τ ∈ {1T, 3T } which incorporates the
agents internal self-control mechanism when she faces a single task (1T) or multiple repeated
tasks (3T).
    When solving the stopping time problem, we assume quasi-hyperbolic agents are sophisti-
cated in that they are aware of their future incentive to procrastinate; that is, they know βτ .
On the other hand, at the ex-ante stage, quasi-hyperbolic agents do not necessarily correctly
anticipate their ability to exert internal self-control; that is, they may misperceive βτ . Let
β̂τ denote a present-biased agent’s perception about their own present-bias in the ex ante
stage. We say that present-biased agents are partially naı̈ve if β̂τ 6= βτ . On the other hand,
exponential agents do not misperceive their time preferences. That is, for an exponential
agent, β̂τ = βτ = 1.

Effort Cost. We conceptualize each agent’s trade-off between the requirements of the ex-
perimental tasks and the various alternative demands to his/her time with a stochastic effort
costs associated to each task.
    Formally, each student faces a cost c(t) of completing the task at time t. We assume that
costs evolve according to a Markov process. In particular, let C = {c1 , c2 , . . . cN } denote the
set of possible costs (with 0 = c1 < c2 < . . . < cN ). Let P (c0 | c) denote a Markov transition
matrix so that if the cost in time t is c ∈ C, then with probability P (c0 | c) the cost will be


                                                11
c0 ∈ C at time t+1. We assume that for all ci , i = 1, ..., n−1, P (· | ci+1 ), seen as a probability
distribution over C, first-order stochastically dominates P (· | ci ). In our empirical analysis,
we will impose more structure on this process.
    Proceeding backwards, we first consider the stopping time problem and then the optimal
deadline problem. For ease of exposition, we relegate most details and proofs are relegated
to Appendix A.

4.1     Optimal Stopping Time Problem
We first consider the model in which a single task must be completed and then extend it to
the multiple tasks case.

4.1.1    Single Task
Consider an agent with a given deadline 1 ≤ D ≤ T ; that is, he/she has a task to complete
before D. The agent must exert a single unit of effort to complete the task. If he/she
completes the task at any time t ≤ D, then in period t + 1, he/she will receive a payment of
V > 0.
    As of time 0, the payoff of a decision maker completing the task at time t at cost c is
β1T δ t (δV − c). However, at time t the payoff is β1T δV − c. The agent’s choice problem is
therefore time-consistent if and only if he/she is exponential, with β1T = 1.
    We can construct the agent’s value function proceeding backwards. At time D he/she
will complete the task if and only if β1T δV ≥ c. His/her value function will therefore be:

                             W (c, D; D, β1T ) = max{β1T δV − c, 0}.

We assume that the agent is sophisticated in that she is aware that her future incentive to
procrastinate. As a consequence, at time D − 1, the undiscounted value that he/she perceives
she will obtain in time D if she delays completing the task is
                                             
                                               δV − c, if c ≤ β1T δV
                          w(c, D; D, β1T ) =                            .
                                               0,        otherwise

The agent will then complete the task at time T −1 if and only if β1T δV −c ≥ β1T δ c0 ∈C P (c0 |
                                                                                      P
c)w(c, T ; D, β1T ); and the value function at T − 1 is
                                                         X
           W (c, D − 1; D, β1T ) = max{β1T δV − c, β1T δ     P (c0 | c)w(c, D; D, β1T )}.
                                                              c0 ∈C

Proceeding iteratively (see Appendix A for details) we obtain:

                                              X
W (c, t; D, β1T ) = max{β1T δV − c, β1T δ             P (c0 | c)w(c, t + 1; D, β1T )},
                                              c0 ∈C
                      
                                                                β δV − c ≥
                       δV − c,                               if 1T P
                      
w(c, t; D, β1T ) =                                              β1T δ c0 ∈C P (c0 | c)w(c, t + 1; D, β1T )   .
                       P          0
                       δ c0 ∈C P (c | c)w(c, t + 1; D, β1T ) otherwise

In the exponential case, with β1T = 1, the value function simplifies to:

                                                 12
                                                       X
                   W (c, t; D, 1) = max{δV − c, δ              P (c0 | c)W (c, t + 1; D, 1)}.
                                                       c0 ∈C

    Each agent’s optimal behavior can then be characterized in the following proposition:

Proposition 1 Assume ck > δV , for some k ≤ N . Then

  (i) The value function, W (c, t; D, β1T ), is decreasing in c and t, and is increasing in D;

 (ii) for all time periods t, there exist a threshold c̄(t; D, β1T ) such that the decision maker’s
      optimal decision rule is to complete the task if and only if c(t) ≤ c̄(t; D, β1T ), where
      c(t) denotes the realization of the cost at t;

(iii) the threshold c̄(t; D, β1T ) is decreasing in β1T ≤ 1; also, if β1T = 1, it is increasing in
      t and decreasing in D.

    The optimal behavior of students in the stopping time problem is to employ a threshold
rule. This is the case for both exponential and quasi-hyperbolic students. However, the
threshold for quasi-hyperbolic agents will generally be lower. Indeed, time-inconsistency of
preferences introduces an incentive to procrastinate since, from the t = 0 perspective, the
benefit/cost ratio of completing the task at time t0 > 0 is δVc , while at time t0 > 0, when the
decision is actually taken, the benefit/cost ratio of completing the task is β1TcδV < δVc . Note
also that while a quasi-hyperbolic decision maker will employ a threshold rule, there is no
guarantee that the threshold will be monotone in either t or D.14

4.1.2    Multiple Tasks
We now turn to the case in which the decision maker must complete multiple tasks. In
accordance with the experiment, we present the model for the case of three tasks. Assume
that the deadline for task i is Di , with D1 ≤ D2 ≤ D3 ≤ T . Each task completed by the
appropriate deadline pays V with one period of delay. As in the experiment, we assume that
the tasks must be done sequentially. Therefore, the decision maker cannot start task i + 1
until either task i has been completed or the deadline, Di , to complete task i has passed.
    In order to allow for the possibility that it may get easier to complete an additional task
immediately after completing one task (learning by doing) or more difficult (fatigue), we will
assume that the cost of task completion jumps by J index values upon completing a task.
Let c00 (c) denote the new cost that the decision maker faces after having completed a task
at cost c. We assume that for all i ∈ {1, . . . , N }, c00 (ci ) = cmax{1,min{i+J,N }} . Observe that if
J < 0, then there is learning by doing, while if J > 0, fatigue sets in.
    The problem of solving for the optimal decision rule with three tasks is now substantially
more difficult. By completing task 1 at time t, the decision maker not only receives the
   14
      We have omitted any discussion of naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic discounters. These are decision makers who
have a present-bias, but are unaware of it. Such decision makers will also employ a threshold rule, and that
the threshold will be lower than for sophisticated quasi-hyperbolic discounters. It turns out, however, that
the thresholds for sophisticated and naı̈ve are generally very close in the relevant range of parameters making
it difficult to separately identify these students based on the distribution of task completions. For this and
other reasons discussed in detail in Section 5.3, our empirical analysis, below, will focus only on exponential
and sophisticated quasi-hyperbolic discounters.


                                                      13
direct payment of V but also receives an option to complete task 2 (starting from time t).
Moreover, the tasks are linked more explicitly by the possibility for fatigue or learning by
doing. All of this will affect behavior. Indeed, notice that we cannot immediately conclude
that an exponential decision maker will complete task i ∈ {1, 2} at deadline Di if and only
if β3T δV − c ≥ 0. If a decision maker gets fatigued, then costs will increase, which could
substantially reduce the probability of completing task i+1. Therefore, even if β3T δV −c > 0,
a decision maker may prefer not to complete task i. Similarly, if there is strong learning by
doing, the decision maker may actually prefer to complete task i even if β3T δV − c < 0. More
details can be found in Appendix A.

4.2      Optimal Deadlines.
Consider now the optimal choice of deadlines at the ex-ante stage. As we noted, we assume
that exponential agents rationally anticipate that they do not display any present-bias:

                                if β0 = 1, then βˆτ = βτ = 1, τ = 1T, 3T.                  (Exp)

However, present-biased agents may misperceive their present bias at the ex-ante stage:

                                   if β0 < 1, then βˆτ =
                                                       6 βτ , τ = 1T, 3T.           (Quasi-Hyp)

We do not postulate ex-ante whether the mis-perception bias is positive or negative.
   For simplicity, consider the single task case.15 Let E(·) denote the unconditional (from
the ex-ante stage, t = −1) expectation operator with respect to the cost process c. The
optimal deadline choice problem of the agent is:
                                                       
                                  max E W (c, 0; D, β̂1T .
                                         D≤T

   A decision maker with exponential discounting always prefers not to self-impose any
deadline since doing so only destroys the option value of waiting for a lower cost, while
providing no commitment benefit.
Proposition 2 An exponential agent, with β0 = β̂1T = β1T = 1, optimally chooses D = T .
    However, the same cannot be said for a present-biased decision maker. Because she
knows that she may be tempted to delay in the future, she may prefer to commit to an
earlier deadline. We are not able to solve in closed form for the conditions on the parameters
under which an quasi-hyperbolic discounter would self-impose a deadline. We can however
show the following.

Proposition 3 A quasi-hyperbolic agent, with βτ ≤ 1, τ = 1T, 3T optimally chooses D = T
if he/she perceives no present-bias, β̂τ = 1. He/she possibly chooses D < T only when
perceiving some present-bias, β̂τ < 1.
    If the agent is sophisticated at the ex-ante stage (i.e., β̂τ = βτ < 1), then any deadline
D < T induces the decision maker to complete the task on average earlier than without the
deadline. On the other hand, if the agent is partially naı̈ve (i.e., β̂τ < 1 and β̂τ 6= βτ ), then
a deadline D < T can induce him/her to complete the task either earlier or later on average
than it would be optimal for βτ .
 15
      Results extend straightforwardly to the multiple tasks case.


                                                       14
    Relying on numerical results, in Appendix A, we document that a lower present bias (a
higher β̂1T ), a higher discount rate δ, a lower volatility of the cost process (which we param-
eterize by σ), a lower upper bound on costs CN , all make self-imposed deadlines relatively
less-desirable for a quasi-hyperbolic discounter; see Figure A.1.


5     Empirical Analysis
In this section we analyze our experimental data structurally; that is, we estimate the model
of subject behavior that we introduced in the previous section. The ex-ante stage in the model
corresponds to Phase 1 of the experiment in which subjects came to the lab to be introduced
to the task(s) and, possibly, to choose their own deadlines or have them exogenously imposed
by the experimenter. The active decision stage corresponds instead to the experimental task
students complete on their own time outside of the experimental lab.. Different treatments
in the lab correspond to restricted versions of the model; e.g., the No deadlines/Exogenous
deadlines treatments have a moot ex-ante stage, and the 1T treatments have just a single
task.
    Proceeding backward, we first study the stopping time problem, given deadlines, if any.
We then study the optimal deadline problem.

5.1   Present-Bias and Costs in the Stopping-Time Problem
The theoretical analysis of the previous sections shows that, independently of their discount-
ing preferences, agents should adopt a threshold rule whereby they complete the task at any
given moment if their cost is below a threshold. We also have shown that, other things equal,
present-biased agents have a threshold which is strictly below that of exponential agents.
Therefore, other things equal, present-biased students should complete the task stochasti-
cally later than exponential subjects. Combined with a classification procedure of subjects
as either exponential or quasi-hyperbolic, we use these insights to identify the possible behav-
ioral aspects of their decision making and the effort costs associated to the completion of the
tasks. Our empirical strategy allows for (i) a reliable identification strategy for present-bias,
which depends on the subjects’ decision to self-impose deadlines as well as their behavioral
choice regarding when to complete the task; (ii) a quantitative measure of the relative roles
of costs and present-bias in explaining delay in task completion; and (iii) an explicit quanti-
tative measure of present-bias. Finally, our empirical strategy also allows us to test whether
(iv) differential treatments such as single versus repeated tasks impact students’ ability to
exercise some form of self-control, as well as (v) whether students display partial naı̈veté in
anticipating their ability to exercise self-control.
    More in detail, the parameters of the stopping time model include the preference param-
eters and the cost parameters. Identification requires appropriate restrictions regarding how
heterogeneous across subjects the parameters are allowed to be. We exploit a parsimonious
specification which allows for both present-biased and exponential subjects and for some
heterogeneity in terms of the cost of time subjects face.
    We allow subjects to differ in whether they display present-bias or not, but we restrict all
present-biased agents to be identical. To capture different psychological self-control mecha-
nisms, present-bias is allowed to depend on whether subjects face a single task or multiple


                                               15
tasks. More specifically, we restrict δ and the vector β = (β1T , β3T ) to be the same across
subjects.
    We interpret the cost process in our environment as determined by both factual (e.g., how
busy the subject is) as well as psychological (e.g., how she values and experiences available
time) characteristics, the latter of which might be correlated with time preferences. More
specifically, when estimating the single task model we allow for the cost process to depend
on whether the subject is present-biased or not and estimate (ckN , σ k )k∈{e,h} , where e, h index
respectively, exponential and quasi-hyperbolic subjects. When we estimate the multiple task
model, however, the computational burden is too severe and we restrict the parameters of
the cost process, cN , σ, J to be the same across subjects.16
    The general approach we take is maximum simulated likelihood. Given the underlying
structural model and for each parameter value, (i) we simulate behavior for a large number
of hypothetical subjects and (ii) we then compute the probability distribution of completion
times. From this, we calculate the likelihood function of the parameters given the experi-
mental data on the actual completion times by our subjects, which we finally maximize to
produce our parameter estimates. In what follows we provide more specific details.

5.1.1    Identification of Exponential and Present-Biased Subjects
Since we allow a subset of the parameters to be indexed by subject type, k ∈ {e, h}, esti-
mating our structural model requires identifying each subject as either exponential or quasi-
hyperbolic. As we already noted, according to theory, only present-biased subjects would
self-impose a deadline. Our identification strategy seeks to exploit this.17 We pursue a gen-
eral and flexible approach to identification and seek to estimate the probability that a subject
is present-biased. Consider the single task model. We estimate two logit models – one for
each of the 1T and 3T Endogenous deadlines treatments – on the decision to self-impose a
deadline, where the Phase 1 survey responses are the explanatory variables. Using the param-
eter estimates from each model, we can compute, for a subject in any treatment, the predicted
probability that the subject would self-impose a deadline (and hence be present-biased).18
Let p3T
      j denote the predicted probability that subject j would set a deadline according to the
logit model based on survey responses from the 3T treatment. Let p1T    j denote the predicted
probability that subject j would set a deadline according to a similar logit model based on
survey responses for the 1T treatment. Let µj = νp3T                 1T
                                                       j + (1 − ν)pj denote the prior proba-
bility that subject j is present-biased; where ν ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter to be estimated, which
measures how much the identification based on 3T is also valid for the 1T treatment.
    Since setting a deadline should also be indicative of present-bias, for subjects in the 1T
Endogenous deadlines treatment, we update this prior depending on whether or not they set
  16
     Note we avoid the index indicating treatment (1T v. 3T) in the cost parameters, as they are distinguished
by the index k which only appears in 1T.
  17
     To be sure it is possible that subjects’ deadline choices are driven by considerations other than demand
for commitment and, hence, outside the model.
  18
     We estimate these logit models both using all survey questions and, more parsimoniously, by only including
the most relevant variables for the decision to self-impose a deadline. This should guard against the possibility
of over-fitting the model and making for worse out of sample predictions, which is our primary interest.
Qualitatively, the results are not sensitive to whether the full or parsimonious model is used.




                                                       16
a deadline. Specifically, the posterior probability of being present-biased is:
             
              αµj/(αµj +(1−α)(1−µj )),      if set deadline
         0      (1−α)µj/((1−α)µj +α(1−µj )), if did not set deadline but had option to
        µj =
                µj ,                         if no option to set deadline
             

where α ∈ [0.5, 1] measures the strength of the signal that setting a deadline implies the
subject is present-biased. 
    In conclusion, let θ1T = β1T , δ, (ckN , σ k )k∈{e,h} be the fundamental set of model param-
eters to be estimated from the data in the 1T treatment. The likelihood of a subject j who
completes the task at time tj ∈ {1, . . . , T } ∪ {∞}, where {∞} denotes that the task was not
finished, is given by:

                       Lj (tj ; θ1T , ν, α) = µ0j Lhj (tj ; θ1T ) + (1 − µ0j )Le (tj ; θ1T ),

where Lkj (tj ; θ1T ) is the simulated probability that a type k ∈ {e, h} completes the task at
time tj . Notice that the fundamental model parameters are augmented by ν and α, the pa-
rameters which link the probability of present-bias to each subject’s individual psychological
characteristics from the survey questions.
   The overall likelihood is then
                                                          N
                                                          Y
                                L(θ1T , ν, α|data) =            Li (ti ; θ1T , ν, α);
                                                          i=1

and the parameter estimates (θ1T  ˆ , ν̂, α̂) minimize − log(L(θ1T , ν, α|data)).
    Turn now to the 3T treatment. Estimating the structural model in this case – where
subjects face different deadlines – is computationally demanding. Therefore, we must neces-
sarily simplify our approach. First, we estimate the structural model using only completions
data from the No deadlines and the Exogenous deadlines treatments (though we continue to
rely on data from the Endogenous deadlines treatment to identify which subjects are present-
biased). As a consequence, for any subject j, µ0j = µj and the parameter α does not appear
in the estimation. Second, we fix ν = 1; that is, we assume that only the determinants of
the decision to self-impose deadlines in 3T are exploited in identifying subjects with present
bias. While the assumption is restrictive, it is motivated by the fact the observation – see
Table 3 – that deadlines appear to be more strict and more in line with a demand for com-
mitment in 3T than in 1T.19 Lastly, with regard to present-bias, we will consider a subject
to be present-biased if µj > 1/2. Our final simplification is that assume that exponential and
present-biased subjects have the same cost process; that is, (ckN , σ k ) = (cN , σ), for k ∈ {e, h}.
    In conclusion, given the parameters θ3T = (β3T , δ, cN , σ, J) we can numerically calculate
the threshold c̄kl (t) such that a subject of type k ∈ {e, h} will complete task l at time t if
and only if c(t) ≤ c̄kl (t). We then simulate the stopping time problem for a large number
of simulated decision makers for each pair in {Exogenous, No Deadlines} × {e, h} and find
the time at which they complete the task.20 This gives us 12 distributions of completion
  19
     The assumption is ex-post validated by the fact that parameter ν is estimated to be 1 in 1T, as we will
document in the next section.
  20
     Specifically, in the 3T treatment, we simulated 40,000 hypothetical students – 10,000 for each of the pairs
in {Exogenous, No Deadlines} × {e, h}.


                                                        17
times - one for each triple {Exogenous, No Deadlines} × {e, h} × {Task 1, Task 2, Task 3} -
each of which has support {1, 2, . . . , T } ∪ {∞}. Denote these distributions by Ldkl (t; θ3T ) =
Ldeadline, type, task (t; θ3T ). Given these distributions, as well as the completion times of sub-
jects and their classification as quasi-hyperbolic or exponential, we can then construct the
likelihood function. Let tjdkl denote subject j’s completion time of task l when he/she is in
deadline treatment d and classified as type k. The likelihood function for treatment is then:
                                                 N Y
                                                   3
                                                           Ldj kj l (tjdj kj l ; θ3T ),
                                                 Y
                               L(θ3T |data) =
                                                 j=1 l=1

where dj ∈ {No Deadlines, Exogneous} is the deadline treatment of subject j and kj ∈
{Exponential, Quasi-Hyperbolic} is the classified type of subject j. We then search for the
parameter vector, θ3T = (β3T , δ, cN , σ, J) which minimizes − log(L(θ3T |data)).21

5.1.2    Main Results
The estimation results are provided in Table 2, where panel (a) contains the results for 1T
and panel (b) contains the results for 3T. Except for the α and ν parameters in panel (a), the

                                      Table 2: Estimation Results
                                           (a) One Task Treatment
                       Present-Bias - β1T                                   0.23 (0.018)
                       Upper Bound on Cost (Exp) - ceN                      42.1 (0.088)
                       Cost Volatility (Exp) - σ e                          1.549 (0.118)
                       Upper Bound on Cost (Hyp) - chN                      64.1 (0.499)
                       Cost Volatility (Hyp) - σ h                          60.0 (0.768)
                       Updating Parameter - α                               0.50 (0.327)
                       Weight on 3T Logit Identification - ν                1.00 (0.347)
                       LL                                                       -140.7

                                          (b) Three Task Treatment
                           Parameter                                     Estimate
                           Present-Bias - β3T                          1.00 (0.009)
                           Upper Bound on Cost - CN                    40.8 (0.108)
                           Cost Volatility - σ                        5.595 (0.078)
                           Cost Jump on Completion - J                0.682 (0.111)
                           LL                                             -722.69

   21
      As a practical matter, we divide each day into 2 time periods of 12 hours each. All tasks that were com-
pleted in that window are counted as being completed in that period. This greatly reduces the computational
complexity of the problem by reducing the number of possible completion times. We assume that P (c0 | c)
is uniform on [max{0, c − σ}, min{cN , c + σ}] and we break up the interval of possible costs [0, cN ] into 300
evenly spaced values, giving us a 300 × 300 Markov transition matrix. Finally, we fix δ at a given value, since
initial trials suggested this parameter had a negligible effect on behavior.




                                                      18
                Figure 2: Posterior Probability of Being Quasi-Hyperbolic in 1T




estimates seem to be fairly precisely estimated.22 The posterior probability distribution over
present-bias that we estimate for subjects in the single task treatment is shown in Figure 2.
    We discuss the main results of our empirical analysis in the following.

Present Bias. First, our analysis documents a strong evidence for present-bias in the single
task treatment: we estimate β1T = 0.23. Present-bias is also relatively widespread in our
sample: the posterior probability distribution over present-bias identifies about 30% of likely
quasi-hyperbolic subjects (posterior probability > 60%). Nonetheless, 45% of subjects are
likely exponential (posterior probability of present-bias < 20%).
    We also find that the cost of time process differs for exponential and quasi-hyperbolic
subjects. In particular, subjects with present-bias perceive a higher and much more volatile
costs of time in the single task treatment. The maximal dollar value of the time to perform the
task, cN , is $64.1 for quasi-hyperbolic and $42.1 for exponential subjects; while the volatility
of costs is $60 as opposed to $1.5. One interpretation for this is that there is a large and
important psychological component of costs and that there may be a correlation between
present-bias and a possibly distorted perception of the cost of time.23
    Most importantly our analysis documents an important fundamental difference between
the single task and multiple tasks treatments in our subjects’ ability to exercise internal self-
  22
     However, it is interesting to note that, given the estimates α = 0.5 and ν = 1, the identification of
present-bias relies entirely on the determinants of deadline choice in the 3T treatment (ν = 1) and that
setting a deadline does not increase the prior probability of present bias (α = 1). This implies that it is mostly
in 3T that deadlines represent demand for commitment.
  23
     This interpretation is consistent with Gabaix and Laibson (2017), who argue that present-bias may actually
be confused with forecasting errors of future events, as long as forecasting errors are plausibly connected to a
distorted perception of the cost of time; see also Retz Lucci (2013) for a discussion of the possible relationship
between time preference and time perception.


                                                       19
Figure 3: Simulated Task Completions
        (a) One Task Treatment




        (b) Three Task Treatment




                  20
control. Specifically, while we estimate a strong present-bias in 1T with β1T = .23, we find no
evidence of present-bias in multiple tasks: β3T = 1. These estimates are consistent with the
interpretation that present-bias essentially disappears in the multiple task case; that is, when
faced with multiple tasks subjects are successful at exercising various forms of psychological
self-control, perhaps because the repetition of the tasks induces them to formulate a plan
regarding when to complete them (see Gollwitzer and Bargh, 1996; Gollwitzer, 1999). Inter-
estingly, present-biased subjects in the multiple tasks treatment also appear to control any
mis-perception they might have regarding their cost of time: the estimated upper bound of
the cost of time in 3T is $40.80, comparable to that found in the 1T treatment for exponential
subjects; and the volatility ($5.6) is also relatively close to the one estimated for exponential
subjects in the single task case.
    Finally, our estimate of the cost of time process in the multiple tasks treatment imply
fatigue in completing tasks; that is, the cost of completing the next task immediately after the
current task increases. Indeed, we consistently observe that some students appear to spread
them out over the course of the experiment.24

5.1.3    Model Fit
Figure 3 gives a visual sense of the model fit comparing the actual distributions of task
completions with the predicted distributions given our parameter estimates. Figure 3(a),
which is for the 1T treatment, shows that our model is almost perfect at matching completions
up to day 5, after which the model under-estimates the observed completion rate. After that,
our model predicts a slower rate of completions and a modest deadline effect for days 6 and
7. In contrast, the data show a somewhat faster rate of completion over the final 3 days and
no deadline effect to speak of.
    In the 3T treatments, which is depicted in Figure 3(b), our empirical model generally
predicts the correct shape, but it underestimates task 1 completions and overestimates task
3. The model predicts a smoother completion rate for task 3 and a modest deadline effect,
while the subjects show a flattening completion rate after day 5 and a strong final deadline
effect. Still, with effectively only three parameters (given β = 1), it is remarkable that the
model captures the qualitative features of the data so well. Indeed, for Task 2, the fit is
nearly perfect.

5.2     Optimal Deadline Choice
Our empirical model identifies present-biased subjects’ β in the active decision stage. Ide-
ally, we would like to also estimate their perceived present-bias parameter, β̂, which would
allow us to quantify their misperceptions about present-bias and their ability to self-control.
Unfortunately, the deadline data are too noisy to accomplish this goal with great confidence.
The observed heterogeneity across deadlines, even after conditioning on the choice of bind-
ing deadlines, suggests a prominent role of unobserved characteristics in the explanation of
optimal deadline choice.25
  24
     However, other students bunch their task completions, but this is also consistent with fatigue provided
that the initial cost is low enough.
  25
     For example, one natural modeling choice would be to posit a positing stochastic perceived present-bias
parameter, β̂τ , τ = 1T, 3T , with each subject’s parameter being drawn from some distribution.



                                                    21
    As a consequence, rather than attempting to provide point estimates of β̂τ , τ = 1T, 3T ,
our analysis of the deadline data from the experiment aims to test whether (i) students
we identify as present-biased expect to be able to fully exercise self-control or not; that is,
whether β̂τ = 1; and whether (ii) these students are partially naı̈ve at the ex-ante state;
that is, whether their expectations regarding their ability to self-control are indeed correct:
β̂τ = βτ .
    The theoretical analysis, in Proposition 2 and 3 implies that only subjects with β̂τ < 1
would self-impose deadlines in treatment τ = 1T, 3T . Therefore, evidence that subjects
perceive themselves to be present-biased would manifest as a significant fraction of subjects
choosing to self-impose a strictly more binding deadline than we, the experimenters, imposed.
Table 3 shows that the fraction of students who choose to self-impose deadlines is generally
30% or higher across all the experimental treatments we run. Indeed, proportions tests of the
frequency of self-imposing a deadline against a null hypothesis that the true proportion is 0.01
are easily rejected for both the 1T and 3T treatments, and indeed, for each individual task
in 3T (p  0.01).26 Table 3 also shows stark differences between the 1T and 3T treatments.
In particular, in the 1T treatment with Endogenous deadlines 31.4% of students self-impose
a binding deadline, while in the equivalent (i.e., mid-semester, 150 words) 3T treatment we
observe a more robust demand for commitment, with over 60% of students self-imposing a
binding deadline on task 1. We conclude that

                                   βˆτ < 1,   for both τ = 1T, 3T ;

that is, present-biased students expect not to be able to fully self-control in both single and
multiple tasks treatments.
    This result, that subjects perceive themselves to lack self-control (β̂τ < 1), is especially
striking for the 3T treatment. Recall that our structural model estimated β3T = 1, suggest-
ing that in the active decision stage, present-biased subjects are able to fully self-control.
Therefore, we obtain::
                                        β̂3T < β3T = 1.
Interpreting the subjects’ choice to self-impose deadlines as a demand for commitment, this
result indicates that, when facing multiple tasks, subjects display a robust demand for com-
mitment, even though they are able to fully exercise self-control. In other words, subjects are
partially naı̈ve in the sense that they underestimate their ability to self control in the multiple
task treatment.
    Proposition 3, in turn, implies that partially naı̈ve agents might self-impose deadlines
which negatively affect their completion rates. This is consistent with our experimental data
as documented in Table 4. Indeed, students in the Endogenous deadlines treatment have the
lowest task completion rate, significantly lower than the completion rate in the No deadlines
treatment (p = 0.043). Also, in 3T, the task completion rate is highest in the No Deadlines
treatment.
    We also see that subjects’ behavior displays a strong deadline effect in 3T, as apparent
in Figure 4(b): large spikes in task completions in the time immediately before the deadline.
The deadline effect is particularly clear in the Exogenous deadlines treatment, but can also
  26
    The proportions test cannot test against a zero null hypothesis. Therefore, we tested against a “true”
proportion of 0.01.



                                                   22
                               Table 3: Self-Imposed deadlines
                                       (a) 1T Treatments
                                 Mid-semester, 150 Words
                                               Task 1 Task 2         Task 3
                    Days Before (Conditional)    1.6     —             —
                      % Setting deadlines       31.4     —             —

                                       (b) 3T Treatments
                                 Mid-semester, 150 Words
                                               Task 1 Task 2         Task 3
                    Days Before (Conditional)    7.7     5.6          5.1
                      % Setting deadlines       61.9    57.1          42.9
                                 End-semester, 150 Words
                                               Task 1 Task 2         Task 3
                    Days Before (Conditional)    4.5     2.5          2.3
                      % Setting deadlines       33.3    33.3          20.8
                                 Mid-semester, 200 Words
                                               Task 1 Task 2         Task 3
                    Days Before (Conditional)    5.4     4.2          3.8
                      % Setting deadlines       50.0    50.0          40.9



be seen in Task 3 of the Endogenous deadlines treatment. In contrast, in the No deadlines
treatment, any deadline effects are muted, if present at all. We interpret this as an indication
of the fact that partially naı̈ve subjects do not set deadlines optimally, potentially inducing
negative welfare effects.
    On the other hand, in the 1T treatment, combining the optimal deadline and the struc-
tural estimates of our model of behavior in the active decision stage, we conclude that:

                                         β̂1T , β1T < 1.
Therefore, we cannot directly identify whether β̂1T is greater, equal, or smaller than β1T < 1;
that is, while we document partial naı̈veté in the 1T treatment, we cannot empirically assess
whether students overestimate or underestimate their ability to self-control. However, by
exploiting the implications of Proposition 3, we can test whether deadlines are effective in
inducing completion in 1T. If they are, it is an indication that β̂1T = β1T .
    Although Table 4 shows that subjects in the 1T Endogenous deadlines treatment have
a higher completion rate than subjects in the 1T No deadlines treatment, the difference is
not statistically significant (p = 0.306). Moreover, focusing on the Endogenous deadlines
treatment and comparing those who did and did not self-impose a deadline, we also find that
there is no significant difference in behavior (p = 0.834). Therefore, it would seem that due to
random factors, unrelated to whether a subject self-imposed a deadline or not, the completion
rate is slightly higher (but not significantly so) in the Endogenous deadlines treatment.




                                               23
                                Table 4: Descriptive Summary of the Completion Statistics

                                                                                  Fraction of Tasks Completed
                                                                             Endogenous Exogenous No deadlines
                                      1T Treatments                            57.1%           —          45.6%
                                      3T Treatments                            36.8%         40.6%        47.0%
Highlighted cells indicate a statistically significant difference at the 5% level or better
between the two treatments (two-sided test).

                                          Figure 4: Cumulative Distribution of Task Completions
                                                                                                   (a) 1T Treatments


                                                          Endogenous

                                                          No Deadlines
                                      0.5




                                      0.4
                 Fraction Completed




                                      0.3




                                      0.2




                                      0.1




                                          0
                                              0              1               2                                    3             4                                 5                    6                 7
                                                                                                            Time (0 = Beginning of Exp.)



                                                                                                   (b) 3T Treatments
                                                        Task 1                                                        Task 2                                                        Task 3
                               0.6                                                                0.6                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                     Exogenous
                                                                                                                                                                                     Endogenous
                               0.5                                                                0.5                                                           0.5                  No Deadlines



                               0.4                                                                0.4                                                           0.4
      Fraction Completed




                                                                             Fraction Completed




                                                                                                                                           Fraction Completed




                               0.3                                                                0.3                                                           0.3



                               0.2                                                                0.2                                                           0.2



                               0.1                                                                0.1                                                           0.1



                                      0                                                            0                                                             0
                                          0            5         10                                     0            5         10                                     0            5         10
                                              Time (0 = Beginning of Exp.)                                  Time (0 = Beginning of Exp.)                                  Time (0 = Beginning of Exp.)




                                                                                                                     24
5.3    Other Behavioral Phenomena
Our structural model is driven by a single behavioral component, present bias. In this section
we try to uncover additional patterns in the data that may speak about these aspects.

Over-Confidence, Forecast Errors, and Perseverance. As we mentioned in Section 3.2,
if a student submits an incorrectly alphabetized list, the software sends a message alerting
him/her of the existence of at least one mistake in the submitted list. He/she can then submit
successive new lists until the task is correctly completed, or give up. Our data contains
therefore evidence of any attempts to complete the task, even if unsuccessful. Indeed, in 1T
treatments we have 104 attempts made by 67 of the 81 subjects; of these attempts only 41
are successful. Therefore, some subjects have one or more attempts before either successfully
completing the task or giving up in failure. A similar pattern holds in our 3T treatments.
    In our pre-experiment survey, in addition to the cost and psychological factors that we
elicited, we also asked subjects to report their beliefs about how likely they were to complete
the task(s). Comparing stated beliefs with actual completion rates, as we do in Table 5,
provides an interesting contrast and suggests that subjects are over-confident about their
likelihood of completing the tasks. While beliefs about completing all tasks range from 83%
to almost 91%, actual completion rates are never higher than 57%. However, stated beliefs
are much more closely aligned with the fraction of tasks attempted.

         Table 5: Self-Reported Beliefs of Completing Tasks (Pooling Over Sessions)
                                              (a) 1T Treatments
                                                Endogenous         Exogenous       No deadlines
                 Beliefs: Finish Task             85.97%              —              90.70%
              Frac. of Tasks Attempted            77.1%               —               87.0%
              Frac. of Tasks Completed             57.1%              —               45.6%

                                              (b) 3T Treatments
                                                Endogenous         Exogenous       No deadlines
               Beliefs: Finish 3 Tasks            86.52%            83.25%           90.48%
              Frac. of Tasks Attempted             53.2%             57.5%            61.2%
              Frac. of Tasks Completed             36.8%             40.6%            47.0%

          Highlighted cells indicate a statistically significant difference at the 10% level or better
          between the two treatments (two-sided test).

    Moreover, if we look at the 95 students who complete zero tasks in the 3T treatments
(which could be suggestive of procrastination), we see that 72 (75.8%) log into the exper-
imental software at least once and 67 (69.8%) have at least one submission failure. Thus,
although their lack of success at completing a task suggests procrastination, a look at their
attempts suggests a partially alternative explanation: at least some subjects find the task
more difficult than they initially expected and simply give up.27 Thus the dynamics of failed
  27
    As can be seen in the instructions, we tried to give subjects “reasonable” expectations of task difficulty
by suggesting a particular method for completing the task. We also provided a time estimate, stating “If you
are careful with this method, then it should be possible to complete each task in 1 hour or less.” In fact, most


                                                       25
  Figure 5: The Cumulative Fraction of Tasks Completed & Attempted (1T Treatments)




attempts can be important in our understanding of students’ behavior in the experiment. At
a minimum, it suggests that procrastination is not the only factor that explains our com-
pletion data; instead, over-confidence (or forecast inaccuracy) is an important part of the
story.
    In principal, over-confidence and present-bias might interact in some way. In fact, our
results suggest that they may instead be relatively distinct phenomena, in the sense that over-
confidence affects both exponential and quasi-hyperbolic subjects. For the 1T treatments,
Figure 5 plots the observed distributions of task completions, first attempts as well as second
and higher attempts for both quasi-hyperbolic and exponential discounters according to our
logit classification of subject types. Just as was the case for completions (the first panel),
quasi-hyperbolic discounters delay their attempts relative to exponential discounters, though
for completions and first attempts these differences disappear by the final deadline. Only for
second and higher attempts do quasi-hyperbolic subjects have a modestly lower rate by the
end of the experiment.
    For the 3T treatments, Figure 6 plots, for each of the three tasks, the observed distri-
butions of task completions, first attempts as well as second and higher attempts for both
quasi-hyperbolic and exponential discounters. Just as with completions, the differences be-
tween exponential and quasi-hyperbolic discounters for attempts are very small, with quasi-
hyperbolic discounters delaying somewhat less. Thus for both the 1T and 3T treatments,
the distributions of attempts for quasi-hyperbolic and exponential subjects have the same
qualitative features as the distributions of completions.
    To see more evidence that failed attempts are at least partially distinct from present-bias,
note that both exponential and quasi-hyperbolic subjects have approximately equal success
rates: Of those subjects who have at least one attempt, 36.96% of exponential and 38.1%
of quasi-hyperbolic discounters succeed on first attempt. Of those who are unsuccessful on
their first attempt, 62.1% of exponential and 61.5% of quasi-hyperbolic discounters do not
make any further attempts. Finally, conditional on at least one failed attempt, exponential
discounters have an average of 1.93 attempts and quasi-hyperbolic discounters an average of
1.77 attempts. None of these differences are statistically significant.
tasks were completed in substantially less time. However, by attempting to complete the task too quickly, the
chance of making a mistake, which was difficult to subsequently find, was increased.


                                                     26
  Figure 6: The Cumulative Fraction of Tasks Completed & Attempted (3T Treatments)




    To gauge more precisely at the interaction between over-confidence and present-bias, we
re-estimated the single task model with attempts data in place of completion data.28,29 This
allows us to obtain an accurate picture of the subjects’ cost process and present-bias under the
assumption that over-confidence induces them to disregard the possibility of not completing
the task after having attempted it. Indeed, for an over-confident subject, an attempt to
complete the task at time t (even if not ultimately successful), reveals that the cost crossed
his/her stopping time threshold.30 The results for this exercise are reported in Table 6, while
Figure 7 shows compares the actual and estimated distributions of attempts.
    The most important result is that present-bias is now substantially smaller: our estimate
of β1T goes from 0.23 for completions data to 0.68. for attempts data. We also see that
  28
     Since we do not observe present-bias in the 3T treatment, and since Figure 6 suggests that attempts follow
a similar pattern as completions for exponential and quasi-hyperbolic agents, we do not expect any interesting
interactions between over-confidence and present-bias in the 3T treatments.
  29
     In order to capture the empirical observation that roughly 30% of subjects made a nearly immediate
attempt to complete the task, we allowed for initial costs to be scaled downward by a factor. To avoid confusion
and facilitate comparison with the estimates using completions data, the scaling parameter is omitted from
Table 6.
  30
     In a previous draft we extend the model to allow subjects to update their perception of the cost of time
after an unsuccessful attempt at the task and even to quit. Results are not qualitatively different.



                                                      27
                Table 6: Structural Model of First Attempt (1T Treatment)

                     Present-Bias - β1T                   0.62 (0.017)
                     Upper Bound on Cost (Exp) - ceN      31.7 (0.125)
                     Cost Volatility (Exp) - σ e          2.226 (0.154)
                     Upper Bound on Cost (Hyp) - chN      47.1 (0.578)
                     Cost Volatility (Hyp) - σ h          38.6 (0.625)
                     Updating Parameter (α)                0.59 (0.269)
                     Weight on 3T Logit Identification    0.97 (0.314)
                     LL                                       -187.37

            Figure 7: Model Fit for One Task Treatment Using Attempts Data




costs have a lower, more reasonable, upper bound and are relatively less volatile for quasi-
hyperbolic subjects. Thus we conclude that focusing on completions over-estimates the extent
of present-bias; by accounting for over-confidence, through the use of attempts data, estimated
present-biased is greatly reduced.
    We note here that the potential negative welfare effects of deadlines for partially naı̈ve
agents we uncover in our empirical analysis are in our experimental data amplified by the
fact that not all attempted task completions are eventually successful. The likelihood of
ultimately completing a task is increasing the further from the deadline the task is attempted.
Thus, binding intermediate deadlines impede task completion. Consider Figure 8. Panel (a)
shows that subjects who face a deadline start working on the task – in absolute terms –
earlier than subjects who do not face a deadline (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, p = 0.069).
However, as panel (b) clearly shows, these subjects begin working on tasks much closer to
their deadline than subjects who do not face binding intermediate deadlines. Finally, Figure
8(c) shows that subjects who begin working on a task closer to the deadline are much less


                                              28
likely to ultimately complete the task. Specifically, subjects who begin a few hours before
the deadline have a less-than 50% chance of completing the task, while subjects who begin
a week or or more before the deadline have a 70% chance or higher of completing the task.
We draw the same conclusion as in Figure 8(c) with a random effects logit regression. The
estimated coefficient on time remaining is positive and significant (p = 0.002). For every
additional day before the deadline that one starts a task, the probability of completing the
task increases by approximately 2.6%.

                                                     Figure 8: The Time of Task Issuance (3T Treatments)
                                       (a) Time At Which Task Was Issued                                                                             (b) Time From deadline At Which Task Was Issued




                                                                                                                                                                      1
                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                  .8
                              .8




                                                                                                                                                         Fraction of Tasks Issued
     Fraction of Tasks Issued




                                                                                                                                                                         .6
                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                .4
            .4




                                                                                                                                                                      .2
                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                   0




                                   0       2         4        6          8         10        12                                                14                                      0          2          4        6         8        10         12   14
                                            Time Task Was Issued (0 = Beginning of Experiment)                                                                                                    Difference Between Task Issuance and Deadline (Days)

                                                     Face a Deadline                                                       No Deadline                                                                       Face a Deadline            No Deadline




                                                                 (c) Likelihood of Completing Task Given Time Is-
                                                                 sued From Deadline
                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                       Likelihood of Successfully Completing Task
                                                                           .1   .2    .3   .40    .5  .6    .7




                                                                                                                       0       2          4        6         8        10         12                                 14
                                                                                                                               Difference Between Task Issuance and Deadline (Days)

                                                                                                                                  Latest Task Issuance                                     Earliest Task Issuance




Naı̈veté in the stopping-time problem. The behavioral literature on present-bias distin-
guishes between two classes of quasi-hyperbolic discounters: sophisticated and naı̈ve, depend-
ing on whether or not they are aware of their present-bias. In our theoretical and empirical
analysis we allow for partial naı̈veté at the ex-ante stage, but do not in the stopping-time
problem, effectively classifying all quasi-hyperbolic discounters as sophisticated. We now
provide a discussion of this issue.
    First, our procedure to identify quasi-hyperbolic discounters is really designed to identify
sophisticated quasi-hyperbolic discounters. This is because it is based on the self-reported
characteristics of those who self-impose binding deadlines. A naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic dis-

                                                                                                                                                    29
counter – who is unaware of her present-bias – would never self-impose binding deadlines.
In Table C.1 we provide summary statistics on our survey questions, differentiating between
those who did and did not self-impose deadlines in the 3T Endogenous deadlines treatment.
As can be seen, the most significant difference between students who do and do not self-
impose deadlines is how they answer the conscientiousness question. Specifically, those who
do self-impose deadlines report themselves to be less conscientious. This is supportive of the
notion that it is the sophisticated students who are willing to impose a deadline on them-
selves. Thus we feel that the group we label as quasi-hyperbolic can confidently be assumed
to be composed of sophisticated quasi-hyperbolic students.
    It is possible that some naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic discounters remain hidden in the group of
students we classify as exponential discounters. It might be argued that this explains why
we find no difference between exponential and quasi-hyperbolic subjects in the 3T treatment.
The combination of naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic and exponential subjects might lead to behavior
which is indistinguishable from sophisticated quasi-hyperbolic subjects. However, if this were
the case, we would expect the same to happen in 1T as well. Yet, as we have shown, quasi-
hyperbolic subjects delay more than exponential subjects in the one task treatments. Thus,
our results are in partial accordance with Mahajan and Tarozzi (2011) who shows that even
if naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic subjects make up a substantial portion of the total population of
quasi-hyperbolic subjects, they display a much smaller present bias.
    In an attempt to dig more deeply regarding the identification of naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic
discounters, we can exploit a series of questions we asked in the pre-experimental survey.
These questions were previously used by Americks, Caplin, Leahy, and Tyler (2007) to gauge
this same issue. Specifically, students are asked to consider being given 10 restaurant vouchers
that were valid for two years at any restaurant and are then asked the following hypotheticals:

q14 From your current perspective how many vouchers would you like to use in year 1?

q16 If you were to give in to your temptation, how many vouchers do you think you would
     use in year 1?

q17 Based on your most accurate forecast of how you think you would actually behave, how
    many vouchers would you use in year 1?

Following Americks, Caplin, Leahy, and Tyler (2007), SCP = q17 − q14 can be adopted
as a measure of self-control problems, and in particular SCP > 0 can be interpreted as
evidence of present-bias. However, since these questions refer to a specific context of self-
control (spending on restaurants), a subject could be unaware of their general self-control
problems/present-bias (i.e., they could be naı̈ve) while still eliciting SCP > 0. We can then
identify naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic students as those who, according to our logit analysis are not
sophisticated (i.e., we say SOP H = 0) but have SCP > 0.31 This is the case for about
20.8% of students in the 3T treatments. On average, these students finish 1.195 tasks, while
the non-naı̈ve finish 1.25 tasks. The difference is not significant. Once more this analysis
is consistent with the interpretation that, even if naives are present, they display a small
  31
     In support of this analysis, it turns out that there is a significantly negative relationship between the
predicted probability of setting a deadline and SCP. That is, as SCP increases, we are less likely to label that
subject as sophisticated. Moreover, we cannot reject that the correlation between SCP and one’s self-reported
level of conscientiousness (which was a key factor in the decision to self-impose a deadline) is 0 (p = 0.45).


                                                      30
present-bias as in Mahajan and Tarozzi (2011).

Lack of Attention. Given that the 3T treatments take place over a two-week period, it is
possible that students who fail to complete some tasks simply forget about the experiment.
To test this, at the end of Spring 2011, we ran a fourth session with three treatments. In
all three treatments, students are able to set their own deadlines and each task consists of
200 words. The first treatment is a baseline where no reminders are possible. In the second
treatment, students can request, at no cost, to receive a reminder. In the third treatment,
students can request to receive a reminder at a cost of $3 (deducted from the participation
fee). Reminders are sent via email daily at approximately 9:00AM and they inform the
student of his/her deadlines and also provide the URL to the experimental software. We
draw two conclusions from the data we obtain in these sessions.32 First, no student is willing
to pay $3 out of his/her participation fee in order to receive a daily reminder. Moreover,
even when reminders are free, 25% of the students choose to not receive them. Second, the
presence of reminders makes people more likely to self-impose a deadline. Specifically, in
the absence of reminders, 6 out of 16 subjects self-imposed a deadline on at least one task,
which is comparable to the 9 out of 24 who did the same in the previously reported end of
semester session. In contrast, when subjects had the option to receive reminders 31 out of 39
subjects chose to self-impose a deadline on at least one task. A proportions test easily rejects
equality of proportions (p < 0.01).33 If subjects used deadlines as de facto reminders, then
giving subjects to ability to receive reminders should lead to fewer self-imposed deadlines.
Instead, we saw the opposite. This confirms our prior interpretation that binding self-imposed
deadlines are a manifestation of students’ demand for commitment.


6     Conclusions
In this paper we study procrastination in the context of a field experiment. We find that
students display a substantial demand for commitment in the form of self-imposed deadlines.
Deadlines however do not appear to increase task completion rates. Present-bias, and hence
procrastination, appear to constitute an important determinant of students’ behavior in the
experiment. Importantly, however, the effects of present-bias appear to be completely un-
done by internal self-control when subjects engage in repeated similar tasks. Furthermore, we
document that the behavior of students when setting deadlines reveals that, while they tend
to be sophisticated in that they generally anticipate being present-biased, they are partially
naı̈ve in that they do not correctly anticipate their ability to internally self-control. More
specifically, in the multiple repeated tasks treatment students under-estimate their ability to
self-control. Finally, our data suggests that present-bias and other behavioral characteristics,
like e.g., forecast inaccuracy and over-confidence might significantly interact in inducing delay
and lowering completion rates. This interaction generates behavior which may look like
procrastination, consistently with recent theoretical work by Gabaix and Laibson (2017).


   32
      We only discuss the lab data, the set-up of reminders and deadlines, not the behavioral data because a
glitch in the software corrupted the the latter.
   33
      See Cadena, Schoar, Cristea, and Delgado-Medrano (2011) for somewhat different results on the relation-
ship between reminders and procrastination.


                                                     31
References
Ainslie, G. (1992): Picoeconomics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

        (2001): Breakdown of Will. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Ainslie, G., and R. Herrnstein (1981): “Preference reversal and delayed reinforcement,”
  Animal Learning Behavior, 9, 476–482.

Americks, J., A. Caplin, J. Leahy, and T. Tyler (2007): “Measuring Self-Control
 Problems,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 966–972.

Andersen, S., G. W. Harrison, M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutström (2008): “Eliciting
 Risk and Time Preferences,” Econometrica, 76(3), 583–618.

        (2011): “Discounting Behavior: A Reconsideration,” mimeo, Duke University.

Andreoni, J., and C. Sprenger (2012a): “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
 Budgets,” The American Economic Review, 102(7), 3333–3356.

        (2012b): “Risk Preferences Are Not Time Preferences,” The American Economic
  Review, 102(7), 3357–3376.

Ariely, D., and K. Wertenbroch (2002): “Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance:
 Self-Control by Precommitment,” Psychological Science, 13(3), 219–224.

Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin (2006): “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence
 from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 121(2), 635–672.

Augenblick, N., M. Niederle, and C. Sprenger (2015): “Working Over Time: Dynamic
 Inconsistency in Real Effort Tasks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1067–1115.

Augenblick, N., and M. Rabin (Forthcoming): “An Experiment on Time Preference and
 Misprediction in Unpleasant Tasks,” Review of Economic Studies.

Battaglini, M., R. Benabou, and J. Tirole (2005): “Self-Control in Peer Groups,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 112, 848–887.

Bauer, M., J. Chytilová, and J. Morduch (2012): “Behavioral Foundations of Micro-
 credit: Experimental and Survey Evidence from Rural India,” The American Economic
 Review, 102(2), 1118–1139.

Baumeister, R. F., T. F. Heatherton, and D. M. Tice (1994): Losing Control: How
 and Why People Fail at Self Regulation. Academic Press, San Diego.

Benabou, R., and J. Tirole (2004): “Willpower and Personal Rules,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 112(4), 848–886.

Benhabib, J., and A. Bisin (2005): “Modeling internal commitment mechanisms and
 self-control: A neuroeconomics approach to consumption–saving decisions,” Games and
 Economic Behavior, 52, 460–92.

                                          32
Benhabib, J., A. Bisin, and A. Schotter (2010): “Present-Bias, Quasi-Hyperbolic Dis-
 counting, and Fixed Costs,” Games and Economic Behavior, 69, 205–23.

Benzion, U., A. Rapoport, and J. Yagil (1989): “Discount rates inferred from decisions:
 an experimental study.,” Management Science, 35, 270–284.

Brown, A. L., Z. E. Chua, and C. F. Camerer (2009): “Learning and Visceral Tempta-
 tion in Dynamic Saving Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 197–231.

Brunnermeier, M., F. Papakonstantinou, and J. Parker (2008): “An Economic
 Model of the Planning Fallacy,” Working Paper.

Bryan, G., D. Karlan, and S. Nelson (2010): “Commitment Devices,” Annual Review
 of Economics, 2, 671–698.

Burger, N., G. Charness, and J. Lynham (2011): “Field and Online Experiments on
 Self-Control,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 77, 393–404.

Cadena, X., A. Schoar, A. Cristea, and H. M. Delgado-Medrano (2011): “Fighting
 Procrastination in the Workplace: An Experiment,” NBER Working Paper No. 16944.

Casari, M. (2009): “Pre-commitment and flexibility in a time decision experiment,” Journal
 of Risk and Uncertainty, 38(2), 117–41.

Casari, M., and D. Dragone (2012): “Choice Reversal without Temptation: A Dynamic
 Experiment on Time Preferences,” working paper.

de Villiers, P., and R. Herrnstein (1976): “Towards a law of response strength,” Psy-
  chological Bulletin, 83, 1131–1153.

Dean, M., and A. Sautmann (2013): “Credit Constraints and the Measurement of Time
 Preferences,” mimeo, Brown University.

DellaVigna, S. (2009): “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of
 Economic Literature, 47(2), 315–372.

DellaVigna, S., and U. Malmendier (2006): “Paying Not To Go To The Gym,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 96, 694–719.

Dohmen, T. J., A. Falk, and D. H. U. Sunde (2012): “Interpreting Time Horizon Effects
 in Inter-Temporal Choice,” IZA DP No. 6385.

Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson (2011): “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer:
 Evidence From Kenya,” American Economic Review, 101(6), 2350–2390.

Fang, H., and Y. Wang (2015): “Estimating Dynamic Discrete Choice Models With Hy-
  perbolic Discounting, With an Application to Mammography Decisions,” International
  Economic Review, 56(2), 565–596.

Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein, and T. O’Donoghue (2002): “Time discounting and
 time preference: A critical review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 351–401.


                                           33
Fudenberg, D., and D. K. Levine (2006): “A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control,”
 American Economic Review, 96(5), 1449–1476.

Gabaix, X., and D. Laibson (2017): “Myopia and Discounting,” NBER Working Paper
 #23254.

Giné, X., J. Goldberg, D. Silverman, and D. Yang (2013): “Revising Commitments:
 Time Preference and Time-Inconsistency in the Field.,” working paper.

Giné, X., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2010): “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is:
 A Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation,” American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 2(4), 213–235.

Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999): “Implementation intentions: Strong effects of simple plans,”
 American Psychology, 54, 493–503.

Gollwitzer, P. M., and J. A. Bargh (1996): The Psychology of Action. Guilford, New
 York.

Gul, F., and W. Pesendorfer (2001): “Temptation and Self-Control,” Econometrica, 69,
 1403–1436.

        (2004): “Self-Control and the Theory of Consumption,” Econometrica, 72, 119–158.

Halevy, Y. (2012): “Time Consistency: Stationarity and Time Invariance,” Working Paper.

Harrison, G., and M. Lau (2005): “Is the evidence for hyperbolic discounting in humans
 an experimental artefact?,” Behavioral Brain Sciences, 28(5), 657.

Harrison, G., M. Lau, and M. Williams (2002): “Estimating individual discount rates
 for Denmark: A field experiment,” American Economic Review, 92(5), 1606–17.

Herrnstein, R. (1961): “Relative and absolute strengths of response as a function of fre-
 quency of reinforcement,” Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 4, 267–72.

Houser, D., D. Schunk, J. Winter, and E. Xiao (2010): “Temptation and Commitment
 in the Laboratory,” working paper.

Hsiaw, A. (2013): “Goal-Setting and Self-Control,” Journal of Economic Theory, 148(2),
 601–626.

John, A. (2017): “When Commitment Fails – Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Working
  Paper.

Kable, J., and P. Glimcher (2007): “The neural correlates of subjective value during
 intertemporal choice,” Nature neuroscience, 10, 1625 – 1633.

Kaur, S., M. Kremer, and S. Mullainathan (2010): “Self-Control and the Development
 of Work Arrangements,” The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100,
 624–628.



                                           34
Kirby, K. N., and R. J. Herrnstein (1995): “Preference reversals due to myopic dis-
  counting of delayed reward.,” Psychological Science, 6(2), 83–89.

Kuhl, J., and J. Beckmann (eds.) (1985): Action Control: From Cognition to Behavior.
 Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Laibson, D. (1994): “Essays in Hyperbolic Discounting,” Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts In-
  stitute of Technology.

         (1997): “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 113, 443–477.

Loewenstein, G., and D. Prelec (1992): “Anomalies in intertemporal choice: Evidence
 and interpretation.,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), 573–97.

Loewenstein, G., and R. Thaler (1989): “Anomalies: intertemporal choice.,” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 3(4), 181–193.

Mahajan, A., and A. Tarozzi (2011): “Time Inconsistency, Expectations and Technology
 Adoption: The Case of Insecticite Treated Nets,” Stanford University, mimeographed.

McClure, S. M., D. I. Laibson, G. Loewenstein, and J. D. Cohen (2004): “Separate
 Neural Systems Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary Rewards,” Science, 306(5695),
 503–07.

Meier, S., and C. Sprenger (2010): “Present-biased preferences and credit card borrow-
 ing.,” The American Economic Journal, 2(1), 193–210.

Novarese, M., and V. D. Giovinazzo (2013): “Promptness and Academic Performance,”
 mimeo, Università di Milano Bicocca.

O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (1999a): “Doing It Now or Later,” American Economic
 Review, 89(1), 103–124.

        (1999b): “Incentives for Procrastinators,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114,
  769–816.

Phelps, E. S., and R. Pollak (1968): “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
 Equilibrium Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 35, 185–199.

Rachlin, H., and D. Laibson (eds.) (1997): The Matching Law: Papers on Psychology
 and Economics by Richard Herrnstein. Harvard University Press, Cambdridge, Ma.

Retz Lucci, C. (2013): “Time, Self, and Intertemporal Choice,” Frontiers in Neuroscience,
 7, 40.

Sáez-Martı́, M., and A. Sjögren (2008): “Deadlines and Distractions,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 143, 153–176.

Schraw, G., T. Wadkins, and L. Olafson (2007): “Doing the things we do: A grounded
  theory of academic procrastination,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(1), 12–25.


                                           35
Schwartz, J., D. Mochon, L. Wyper, J. Maroba, D. Patel, and D. Ariely (2014):
  “Healthier by Precommitment,” Psychological Science, 25(2), 538–546.

Schwartz, J., J. Riis, B. Elbel, and D. Ariely (2012): “Inviting Consumers To Down-
  size Fast-Food Portions Significantly Reduces Calorie Consumption,” Health Affairs, 31(2),
  399–407.

Solomon, L., and E. Rothblum (1984): “Academic procrastination: Frequency and
  cognitive-behavioral correlates,” Journal of Counseling Psychology, 31(4), 503–509.

Steel, P. (2007): “The Nature of Procrastination: A Meta-Analytic and Theoretical Review
  of Quintessential Self-Regulatory Failure,” Psychological Bulletin, 133(1), 65–94.

Strotz, R. (1956): “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 23(3), 165–180.

Tanaka, T., C. Camerer, and Q. Nguyen (2010): “Poverty, Politics, and Preferences:
 Data from Field Experiments in Vietnam,” American Economic Review, 100(1), 557–571.

Thaler, R. H. (1980): “Toward a positive theory of consumer choice,” Journal of Economic
 Behavior and Organization, 1, 39–60.

          (1990): “Saving, fungibility and mental accounts,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 4, 193–205.

          (1991): Quasi Rational Economics. Russell Sage Foundation Publications, New
  York.

Thaler, R. H., and S. Benartzi (2004): “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Eco-
 nomics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), S164–187.

Trope, Y., and A. Fishbach (2000): “Counteractive Self-Control in Overcoming Tempta-
 tion,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(4), 493–506.




                                            36
Appendix A              The Model
Assume34 that students face a cost c(t) of completing the task at time t. Costs evolve
according to a Markov process. In particular, let C = {c1 , c2 , . . . cN } denote the set of possible
costs (with 0 = c1 < c2 < . . . < cN ). Let P (c0 | c) denote a Markov transition matrix so
that if the cost in time t is c, then with probability P (c0 | c) the cost will be c0 in time t + 1,
c, c0 ∈ C. Let σ denote some measure of variance for costs. We maintain the assumption that
for all ci , i = 1, ..., n − 1, P (. | ci+1 ), seen as a probability distribution over C, first order
stochastically dominates P (. | ci ).

A.1     Single Task
A decision maker has a task to complete before some ultimate deadline, D. Time is discrete
and the decision maker must exert a single unit of effort to complete the task. Formally, the
decision maker is solving a stopping time problem. If she completes that task at any time
t ≤ D, then in period t + 1, she will receive a payment of V > 0.
    It is convenient to distinguish the case in which the decision maker displays exponential
discounting, β1T = 1, from the case in which she displays quasi-hyperbolic discounting,
β1T < 1. In this Appendix we consider the two cases in turn. Proposition 1 in the text is
then presented and proved in its two components, Propostion A.1 and A.2, in this appendix.

A.1.1     Exponential Discounting
Let δ < 1 denote the (exponential) discount rate. Consider first the case in which the decision
maker is exponential, that is, she displays no present-bias: β1T = 1. Then, as of time 0, the
payoff of a decision maker completing the task in time t at cost c is δ t (δV − c). We will
assume that there is some index k, such that ck > δV .
   We can solve for the optimal policy via backward induction. At the time of the deadline
D, we know that the decision maker will complete the task if and only if δV ≥ c. The value
function W (c, t; D, β1T ), evaluated at t = D, given an arbitrary cost c ∈ C, and with β1T = 1,
can we written as:
                                 W (c, D; D, 1) = max{δV − c, 0}.
   At time D − 1, given again an arbitrary cost c ∈ C the decision maker’s rule is to complete
the task if and only if              X
                           δV − c ≥      δP (c0 | c)W (c0 , D; D, 1),
                                           c0 ∈C

Hence, the value function is given by:
                                                           X
                 W (c, D − 1; D, 1) = max{δV − c,                  δP (c0 | c)W (c0 , D; D, 1)}.
                                                           c0 ∈C

This process can be continued for any arbitrary time period, t < D, so that:
                                             X
                W (c, t; D, 1) = max{δV − c,    δP (c0 | c)W (c0 , t + 1; D, 1)}.
                                                   c0 ∈C
  34
    At the cost of some overlap with the text, we keep this appendix self-contained to make it easier for a
reader interested in more than a superficial account of the model.


                                                    37
Proposition A. 1 Assume ck > δV , for some k ≤ N . Then,
  (i) W (c, t; D, 1) is decreasing in c and t, and is increasing in D;

 (ii) for all time periods t, there exist a threshold c̄(t; D, 1) such that the decision maker’s
      optimal decision rule is to complete the task if and only if c(t) ≤ c̄(t; D, 1), where c(t)
      denotes the realization of the cost at t; and

(iii) the threshold c̄(t; D, 1) is increasing in t and decreasing in D.

Proof of Proposition A.1. We begin by proving that the value function is decreasing in
t. The proof is by induction. First, note that
                                 X
W (c, D−1; D, 1) = max{δV −c, δ       P (c0 | c)W (c0 , D; D, 1)} ≥ max{δV −c, 0} = W (c, D; D, 1).
                                          c0 ∈C

Next, suppose that for all t ∈ {t̄, . . . , T − 1}, W (c, t; D, 1) ≥ W (c, t + 1; D, 1). It is then easy
to see that:
             W (c, t̄ − 1; D, 1) = max{δV − c, δ c0 ∈C P (c0 | c)W (c0 , t̄; D, 1)} ≥
                                                     P


                                                  P (c0 | c)W (c0 , t̄ + 1; D, 1)} = W (c, t̄; D, 1).
                                      P
               ≥ max{δV − c, δ           c0 ∈C

This follows by the induction hypothesis and because the max operator preserves the inequal-
ity. This completes the proof. The proof that W (c, t; D, 1) is decreasing in c and increasing
in D is similar and, therefore, omitted.
    To prove part (ii), observe that by the definition of first-order stochastic dominance, we
know that for any increasing function, u(c),
                               n
                               X                                n
                                                                X
                                     P (cj | ci+1 )u(cj ) ≥           P (cj | ci )u(cj )
                               j=1                              j=1

  We begin at time T − 1 and proceed backwards. Since W (c, D; D, 1) is decreasing in c,
−W (c, D; D, 1) is increasing. Therefore, we can conclude that:
                   n
                   X                                              n
                                                                  X
               −         P (cj | ci+1 )W (cj , D; D, 1) ≥ −             P (cj | ci )W (cj , D; D, 1),
                   j=1                                            j=1

or
                   n
                   X                                            n
                                                                X
                         P (cj | ci+1 )W (cj , D; D, 1) ≤             P (cj | ci )W (cj , D; D, 1).
                   j=1                                          j=1

     We must now show that there exists a cost, c̄T −1 such that
                                   X
                        δV − c − δ      P (c0 | c)W (c0 , D; D, 1) ≥ 0
                                                  c0 ∈C

is satisfied if and only if c < c̄T −1 .
    Note that the inequality is strictly positive at c = c1 = 0 and the inequality is strictly nega-
tive for c = cN > δV . Therefore, to show that there is a unique threshold, it is enough to show

                                                           38
that the left-hand side is decreasing in c. This follows because δ c0 ∈C P (c0 | c)W (c0 , D; D, 1)
                                                                       P
is decreasing in c with slope bounded below by −δ > −1. Thus, the decision maker employs
a threshold rule at time D − 1.
     The exact same arguments can be used to show that the decision maker will employ a
threshold rule at any time t. This completes the proof of part (ii).
     Finally, to prove part (iii), we show that c̄(t; D, 1) is increasing in t. The argument
is adapted straighforwardly to show that c̄(t; D, 1) is also decreasing in D. Suppose that
there exists t1 < t2 such that the thresholds are: c̄(t1 ; D, 1) > c̄(t2 ; D, 1). Choose c ∈
(c̄(t2 ; D, 1), c̄(t1 ; D, 1)]. Then, we know that W (c, t1 ; D, 1) = V̄ − c. Moreover, since c >
c̄(t2 ; D, 1), we also know that W (c, t2 ; D, 1) > δV − c. Putting this together, it implies that
W (c, t1 ; D, 1) = δV − c < W (c, t2 ; D, 1), a contradiction to the fact (proven in part (i)) that
the value function is decreasing in t. 

A.1.2       Quasi-Hyperbolic Discounting
Let β1T = β < 1 denote present-bias, while δ < 1 still denote the (exponential) discount rate.
Then, as of time 0, the payoff of a decision maker completing the task in time t at cost c
is βδ t (δV − c); as of time t, however, the payoff is βδV − c. We assume that the decision
maker is sophisticated in that she is aware that her future incentive to procrastinate. As in
the case of an exponential decision maker, a sophisticated quasi-hyperbolic decision maker
will employ a threshold rule.
    At the time of the deadline D the decision maker will complete the task if and only if
βδV ≥ c, making her value function:
                                    W (c, D; D, β) = max{βδV − c, 0}.
      Next move to time D − 1. Define
                                                   
                                                         δV − c, if c ≤ βδV
                                w(c, D; D, β) =
                                                         0,      otherwise
to be the undiscounted value that she perceives she will obtain in time D if she delays
completing the task.35 She will complete the task at time D − 1 if and only if:
                                       X
                         βδV − c ≥ βδ      P (c0 | c)w(c0 , D; D, β).
                                                 c0 ∈C

Note that since c1 = 0 is a possible cost realization, there are always costs such that the
decision maker would find it optimal to complete the task. This, combined with similar
arguments as above allow us to conclude that the sophisticated decision maker will also
employ a threshold rule. Therefore, the value function of the decision maker is:
                                                   X
              W (c, D − 1; D, β) = max{βV − c, βδ      P (c0 | c)w(c0 , D; D, β)}
                                                               c0 ∈C

and the perceived value is:
                                                        if βδV − c ≥ βδ c0 ∈C P (c0 | c)w(c0 , D; D, β)
                                                                      P
                     δVP− c,
w(c, D−1; D, β) =                                                                                       .
                     δ c0 ∈C P (c0 | c)w(c0 , D; D, β), otherwise
 35
      Observe that she applies the correct policy function, but the β term disappears.


                                                         39
       We can apply the same iterative logic to conclude that:
                                                   X
                W (c, t; D, β) = max{βδV − c, βδ      P (c0 | c)w(c0 , t + 1; D, β)}.
                                                           c0 ∈C

Proposition A. 2 Then,

  (i) W (c, t; D, β) is decreasing in c and t; and increasing in D.

 (ii) for all time periods t, there exist a threshold c̄(t; D, β) such that the decision maker’s
      optimal decision rule is to complete the task if and only if c(t) ≤ c̄(t; D, β), where c(t)
      denotes the realization of the cost at t.

(iii) the threshold c̄(t; D, β) is decreasing in β.

The proof of the proposition follows the lines of the preceding one, Proposition A.1, regarding
exponential discounters, and is therefore omitted. Note that while a quasi-hyperbolic decision
maker will employ a threshold rule, there is no guarantee that it will be monotone in t and
D.36

A.1.3       The Optimality of Deadlines
The optimal deadline choice problem of the agent is:
                                                     
                                max E W (c, 0; D, β̂1T .
                                        D≤T

Proposition 2 and 3 in the text are straighforward implications of Proposition A.1 and A.2.
Since we are not able to solve in closed form for the conditions on the parameters under
which a quasi-hyperbolic discounter would self-impose a deadline, we show some numerical
results.
    In each of the four panels of Figure A.1, we allow one of the model’s parameters to vary
while holding the other parameters constant. In all cases, β < 1. On the horizontal axis is the
time (in days) one has until the deadline, while the vertical axis is the ex ante expected value
of the option to complete the task. This figure captures the two main forces at work. On
the one hand, there is the commitment value of a tight deadline which induces the decision
maker to complete the task immediately. This can be seen by observing that the expected
value is initially decreasing at very short deadlines. While a tight deadline has commitment
value, it comes at the cost of destroying a lot of option value of being able to wait for a lower
  36
    We have omitted any discussion of naı̈ve quasi-hyperbolic discounters. These are decision makers who
have a present bias, but are unaware of it and believe, incorrectly, that they will behave as an exponential
discounter would in the future. Using the same techniques, it is possible to show that the value function of
the naı̈ve decision maker is given by:
                                                        X
                       N (c, t; D, β) = max{βδV − c, βδ    P (c0 | c)W (c, t + 1; D, 1)},
                                                        c0 ∈C

where w(c, t + 1; D, 1) denotes the value function of the exponential decision maker with cost c at time t + 1.
  One can show that such decision makers will also employ a threshold rule, and that the threshold will be
lower than for sophisticated quasi-hyperbolic discounters. That is, naı̈ve decision makers are most prone to
procrastination.


                                                      40
Figure A.1: The Optimality of Deadlines With (Sophisticated) Quasi-Hyperbolic Time Pref-
erences
                                                        (a) Changes in β                                                                                                       (b) Changes in r
                                                 Examining The Optimality of Deadlines (Changes in β)                                                             Examining The Optimality of Deadlines (Changes in Discounting)
                           15                                                                                                                          11.2


                                                                                                                                                       11.1
                           14

                                                                                                                                                        11
                           13

                                                                                                                                                       10.9




                                                                                                                              Ex Ante Expected Value
  Ex Ante Expected Value




                           12
                                                                                                                                                       10.8
                           11
                                                                                                                                                       10.7

                           10
                                                                                                                                                       10.6

                            9
                                                                                                                                                       10.5


                            8                                                                                                                          10.4


                                                                                                           β = 0.5                                     10.3                                                                        r = 0.5
                            7
                                                                                                           β = 0.7                                                                                                                 r = 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r = 2.5
                                                                                                           β = 0.9                                     10.2
                            6                                                                                                                                 0     1          2           3          4           5         6                7
                                0        1             2            3          4           5           6             7
                                                                                                                                                                                   Time To Complete Task (Days)
                                                            Time To Complete Task (Days)



                                                 (c) Changes in Volatility                                                                                                    (d) Changes in cn
                                             Examining The Optimality of Deadlines (Volatility of Costs)                                                                Examining The Optimality of Deadlines (Changes in cn)
                           13.1
                                                                                                                                                       11.2
                                        High
                            13          Medium
                                        Low                                                                                                            11.1

                           12.9
                                                                                                                                                        11

                           12.8
                                                                                                                                                       10.9
  Ex Ante Expected Value




                                                                                                                              Ex Ante Expected Value




                           12.7
                                                                                                                                                       10.8

                           12.6
                                                                                                                                                       10.7

                           12.5
                                                                                                                                                       10.6

                           12.4
                                                                                                                                                       10.5

                           12.3
                                                                                                                                                       10.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   cn = 20
                           12.2
                                                                                                                                                       10.3                                                                        cn = 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   cn = 40
                                    0        1          2           3          4           5           6             7                                 10.2
                                                                                                                                                              0     1          2           3          4           5         6                7
                                                            Time To Complete Task (Days)                                                                                           Time To Complete Task (Days)




cost. Eventually, as the time available to complete the task grows, this option value becomes
more important and the expected value begins to increase.37 The figure shows that a low
present-bias (a higher β), a high patience (a lower interest rate r), a low volatility of the cost
process, a low maximal cost all make self-imposed deadlines relatively less-desirable for an
quasi-hyperbolic discounter.
  37
    Although we do not provide figures, intermediate deadlines may be optimal. This is likely to be the case
when the set of possible initial costs is fairly coarse. In this case, an intermediate deadline may be able to
induce some of the low-cost types to complete the task immediately (which gives the decision maker a discrete
benefit), while also preserving option value for higher cost types who cannot be induced to complete the task
immediately.




                                                                                                                         41
A.2    Multiple Tasks
We now turn to the case in which the decision maker must complete multiple tasks. In
fact, in accordance with the experiment, we present the model for the case of three tasks.
Assume that the deadline for task i is Di , with D1 ≤ D2 ≤ D3 . Each task completed by the
appropriate deadline pays V with one period of delay. As in the experiment, we assume that
the tasks must be done sequentially. Therefore, the decision maker cannot start task 2 until
either task 1 has been completed or the deadline, T1 , to complete task 1 has passed; similarly
for task 3.
    In order to allow for the possibility of either learning by doing or fatigue, we will assume
that the cost of task completion jumps by J index values upon completing a task. Let c00 (c)
denote the new cost that the decision maker faces after having completed a task at cost c.
We assume that for all i ∈ {1, . . . , N }, c00 (ci ) = cmax{1,min{i+J,N }} . Observe that if J < 0,
then there is learning by doing, while if J > 0, fatigue sets in.
    The problem of solving for the optimal decision rule with three tasks is now substantially
more difficult. By completing task 1 at time t, the decision maker not only receives the direct
payment of V but also receives an option to complete task 2 (starting from time t). Moreover,
the tasks are linked more explicitly by the possibility for fatigue or learning by doing. All of
this will affect behavior.
    Consider first the case of agents with exponential discounting. For the final task, task
3, the problem is formally equivalent to the single task model presented in the previous
subsection. Therefore, we may write the value function as W3 (c, t; D3 , 1), where t indexes the
current time period and D3 is the deadline for that task. We will say that W3 (c, t; D3 ), 1 = 0
for all t > D3 . Now consider task 2 and start at the time of the associated deadline D2 . The
decision maker will complete the task if and only if:
                                                      X
              δV − c + W3 (c00 (c), D2 ; D3 , 1) ≥ δ     P (c0 | c)W3 (c0 , D2 + 1; D3 , 1),
                                                       c0 ∈C

That is, she will complete the task if and only if the immediate value of completing task 2
plus the additional value of being able to start task 3 (at cost c0i ) is greater than the value of
not completing task 2 and waiting until next period to consider completing task 3.
    Notice that we cannot immediately conclude that an exponential decision maker will
complete task i ∈ {1, 2} at deadline Di if and only if δV − c ≥ 0. If a decision maker
gets fatigued, then costs will increase, which could substantially reduce the probability of
completing task i + 1. Therefore, even if δV − c > 0, a decision maker may prefer not to
complete task 2. Similarly, if there is strong learning by doing, the decision maker may
actually prefer to complete task 2 even if δV − c < 0. A similar reasoning holds for quasi-
hyperbolic decision makers.
    In general, we can write the value functions as:
                                                     X
                W3 (c, t; D3 , 1) = max{δV − c,              δP (c0 | c)W3 (c0 , t + 1; D3 , 1)}
                                                     c0 ∈C


                                                                 δVP− c + W3 (c00 (c), t; D3 , 1) ≥
                                                                        
                     δV − c + W3    (c00 (c), t; D
                                                 , 1),       if
                  
                                               3
W2 (c, t; D2 , 1) =                                              δ c0 ∈C P (c0 | c)W2 (c0 , t + 1; D2 , 1)
                     P          0         0
                     δ c0 ∈C P (c | c)W2 (c , t + 1; D2 , 1) otherwise

                                                     42
                                                               δVP− c + W2 (c00 (c), t; D2 , 1) ≥
                                                              
                  δV − c + W2    (c00 (c), t; D
                                            2 , 1),        if
                
W1 (c, t; D1 ) =                                               δ c0 ∈C P (c0 | c)W1 (c0 , t + 1; D1 , 1)
                  P          0         0
                  δ c0 ∈C P (c | c)W1 (c , t + 1; D1 , 1), otherwise

Just as was noted above, the threshold for completion of task 1 at time D1 will not necessarily
be c ≤ δV . It may be higher (resp. lower) if there is learning by doing (resp. fatigue).

    As there are no additional insights to be gained, we omit here in the text the details of the
sophisticated decision maker’s problem when faced with three tasks. In order to characterise
the optimal decision rule, we follow the same backward induction procedure, making sure
that the decision maker correctly anticipates the policy rule that her future selves use, but
evaluated with quasi-hyperbolic time preferences.
    Just like in the case of a single task, when there are three tasks, only a quasi-hyperbolic
discounter is willing to self-impose a deadline: self-imposing a deadline may reduce the deci-
sion maker’s tendency to procrastinate, and may even induce him/her to complete (at least)
one task immediately.




                                                  43
Appendix B           Instructions & Pre-Experiment Survey Questions

B.1    Sample Experimental Instructions
This is an experiment in the economics of decision-making. Your earnings will depend on
your decisions. Details of how you will make decisions and earn money will be provided
below.
    This experiment will take place over the course of the next several days and will end no
later than 1:00PM two weeks from today. That it, the experiment ends no later than
1:00PM, 7 April 2010.

The Tasks
You will be given three tasks to be completed over the internet. While the tasks are not
specifically related to each other, they can only be completed sequentially (that is, you may
only work on one task at a time).
    For each task, you will be given a list of 150 words which have been arranged randomly
and you will be asked to enter them on a computer terminal in alphabetical order. An
example is shown in Figure B.1.
    For each task properly completed, by the appropriate time, you will be paid $15. Details
of how you will be paid will be given later.

The Interface
   • This experiment will take place over the internet. Any time that you wish to work on
     a task, simply go to the following website:

          http://www.cess.nyu.edu/web_experiments/ny

   • Upon arriving at the website, you will be prompted for your user ID and password.
     Shortly, you will be provided with a user ID and password. Please keep the sheet of
     paper on which your user ID and password are written as this is your only means of
     gaining access to the experimental software.

   • Once you have logged into the system, you may now work on a task.

   • As can be seen in Figure B.1, the list of words is given in the center of the screen and
     words are entered alphabetically at the left and right. The earliest word alphabetically,
     should be entered in the cell labeled 1.

   • When you have completed a task (i.e., when you have arranged all words in the proper
     order), press the submit button, which is at the bottom of the screen.

   • If you have done it correctly, then you will be taken to a new screen where, if you
     choose, you may work on the next (if any) task.

   • If there are mistakes, you will be told:

          The list you submitted contains one or more errors.

                                                44
                                       Figure B.1: Experimental Interface For Tasks
http://cess.nyu.edu/web_experiments/ny/participant/task.php                                                          18/03/2010 13:38



This is Task 1.
In order to complete this task you must solve the problem given to you by entering the words below in
alphabetical order, with the following restrictions:

     You must complete Task 1 by 10:00 pm on Monday, April 5, 2010.
     You must solve this problem by 04:25 pm, or you will be issued a new one.
     If you refresh your browser, or if you close your browser and log in again at a later time, you will be
     issued a new problem.

Select the Submit button at the bottom of this page to submit the solution to you problem.

       1                                                                                                       76

       2                                                                                                       77

       3                                                                                                       78

       4                                                                                                       79

       5                                                                                                       80

       6                                                                                                       81

       7                                                                                                       82

       8                                                                                                       83

       9                                                                                                       84

       10                                                                                                      85

       11                                                                                                      86

       12                                                                                                      87

       13                                                                                                      88

       14                                                                                                      89

       15                                                                                                      90

       16                                                                                                      91

       17                                                                                                      92

       18                                                                                                      93

       19                                                                                                      94

       20                                                                                                      95

       21                                                                                                      96

       22                                                                                                      97

       23                                                                                                      98

       24                                                                                                      99

       25                                                                                                      100

       26                                                                                                      101

       27                                                                                                      102

       28                                                                                                      103

       29                                                                                                      104

       30                                                                                                      105

       31                                                                                                      106

       32                                                                                                      107

       33                                                                                                      108

       34                                                                                                      109

       35                                                                                                      110

       36                                                                                                      111

       37                                                                                                      112

       38                                                                                                      113

       39                                                                                                      114

       40                                                                                                      115

       41                                                                                                      116

       42                                                            45                                        117

       43                                                                                                      118




                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 2
     and remain on the screen for the current task. Observe that you will not be told the
     nature of the mistakes, simply that the task has not been properly completed.

   • Once you have been issued a list of words to alphabetize for a particular task, then you
     must complete it within 2 hours (or before the deadline for that task, whichever is
     earlier). If you do not complete the task within this time, you will be given a new list
     of words.

   • Note that if you press the refresh button or close the web browser and return later, you
     will be given a new list of words.

Completing the Tasks
Of course, there are many different ways that one might wish to approach this task. One
way that we have found to work reasonably well is to print the screen containing the words,
enter the words into a spreadsheet application such as Excel (Microsoft), Numbers (Apple)
or Calc (Open Office), use the sort command and then enter the words in the appropriate
order through the experimental interface. If you are careful with this method, then it should
be possible to complete each task in 1 hour or less.

Deadlines
As indicated above, the experiment will end no later than 1:00PM, 7 April 2010. That
is, all tasks not correctly completed before this time will be considered incomplete and no
payments will be made incomplete tasks. However, if you wish, you may set a separate
deadline for each of the tasks. If you do so, the deadline must be no earlier than 1:00PM
today and no later than 1:00PM, 7 April 2010. Also, the deadline for Task 2 must be the
same or after the deadline for Task 1, and similarly for Task 3.
    It is important to note that the deadlines will be strictly enforced. For example, if you
impose a deadline of 8:26PM tomorrow for the first task and do not complete it by that time,
you will not receive any payment for this task. However, if you miss a deadline for one task,
you will be permitted to move immediately to the subsequent task. That is, if you miss the
deadline for Task 1, you may proceed immediately to Task 2 provided that there is still time
remaining in the experiment and its deadline has also not passed.
    At the appropriate time, once you have logged in to the experimental software, you will
enter your deadlines for each of the tasks. The interface for this is displayed in Figure B.2.

Payment
For each task that you have properly completed by the appropriate deadline, you will be paid
$15. When you have completed a task, the experimental software will immediately notify
one of the experimenters that a task has been completed. For all tasks which have been
completed by 1:00PM on any given day, the experimenter will write a check and place it in
the mail by the end of the day. Payments for any tasks completed after the 1:00PM cutoff
will be processed and mailed the next day.




                                             46
http://cess.nyu.edu/web_experiments/ny/participant/deadline.php                                                                              18/03/2010 13:34




                                               Deadlines
                             Figure B.2: Experimental Interface For Choosing deadlines

         Please read carefully

         The experiment ends on April 07 (Wed), 2010 at 01:00 pm .However, you may impose an earlier deadline (for each task) if you wish. If so,
         please do so now. Keep in mind that the deadlines will be strictly enforced. For example, if you impose a deadline of Mar 19 (Fri), 2010 at
         02:00 am for the first task and do not complete the task by that time, you will not receive any payment for its completion.




          Set Deadlines For Task 1

                   Enter Date:                                                       (MM/DD/YYYY)

                   Enter Time:                                             PM        (HH:MM (AM/PM))



          Set Deadlines For Task 2

                   Enter Date:                                                       (MM/DD/YYYY)

                   Enter Time:                                             PM        (HH:MM (AM/PM))



          Set Deadlines For Task 3

                   Enter Date:                                                       (MM/DD/YYYY)

                   Enter Time:                                             PM        (HH:MM (AM/PM))



          Submit




 Questions
 If there are any questions, please ask them now. If not, we will now provide a demonstration
 of the experimental software and also provide you with your user ID and password.

 B.2         Survey Questions
     1. How many courses are you taking?

     2. What is your major?

     3. What is your GPA?

     4. Over the course of the next two weeks, how many of each of the following to you have:

            (a) minor assignments?
            (b) major assignments or term papers?
            (c) exams?

     5. In response to the question above, please list the due dates for each assignment and the
        date of any exams you have in the next two weeks.                                 Page 1 of 1



     6. Are you presently employed?

     7. How many social, academic or sports clubs do you belong to?

     8. Over the course of the next two weeks, how much time (in hours) do you expect to
        allocate to:

                                                                                47
     (a) your course work?
    (b) your job?
     (c) social obligations or recreational activities?
    (d) family obligations?

 9. In response to Question 8(a), please provide details of your work schedule over the next
    two weeks.

10. In response to Question 8(b), please provide the dates for which you plan to participate
    in social or recreational activities.

11. In response to Question 8(c), please provide the dates for which you have planned family
    obligations.

12. On a scale from 1 to 5 with 1 being “hardly at all” and 5 being “very much so”, please
    answer the following questions:

     (a) How conscientious are you?
    (b) How often are you late turning in assignments?
     (c) How often are you on time for appointments?

13. On a scale from 1 to 5 with 1 being “strongly disagree” and 5 being “strongly agree”,
    rate how closely you identify with the following statements:

     (a) Unexpected things which require my time and attention always seem to occur.
    (b) Sometimes I am not as dependable or reliable as I should be.
     (c) I follow a schedule.
    (d) I never seem to be able to get organised.
     (e) I always pay attention to details.

    Suppose that you win 10 certificates, each of which can be used (once) to receive a
    dream restaurant night. On each such night, you and a companion will get the best
    table and an unlimited budget for food and drink at a restaurant of your choosing.
    There will be no cost to you: all payments including gratuities come as part of the
    prize. The certificates are available for immediate use, starting tonight, and there is an
    absolute guarantee that they will be honored by any restaurant you select if they are
    used within a two year window. However if they are not used up within this two year
    period, any that remain are valueless.
    The questions below concern how many of the certificates you would ideally like to use
    in each year, how tempted you would be to depart from this ideal, and what you expect
    you would do in practice:

14. From your current perspective, how many of the ten certificates would you ideally like
    to use in year 1?

15. Continue with the scenario of Question 14. Some people might be tempted to depart
    from their ideal allocation in Question 14. Which of the following best describes you:

                                              48
     (a) I would have no temptation in either direction.
    (b) I would be somewhat/strongly tempted to use more certificates in the first year
        than would be ideal.
     (c) I would be strongly/somewhat tempted to keep more certificates for use in the
         second year than would be ideal.

16. Continue with the scenario of Question 14. If you were to give in to your temptation,
    how many certificates do you think you would use in year 1 as opposed to year 2?

17. Continue with the scenario of Question 14. Based on your most accurate forecast of
    how you think you would actually behave, how many of the nights would you end up
    using in year 1?

18. On a scale from 0 to 100, how likely do you think each of the following events are?

     (a) I will complete no tasks.
    (b) I will complete at least one task.
     (c) I will complete at least two tasks.
    (d) I will complete all three tasks.




                                               49
Appendix C                Supplemental Analysis
While in the main body, we mainly focused on a structural analysis of behavior, in this
appendix, we provide a brief discussion of some additional descriptive results.

Demand For Commitment
We first discuss in more detail the demand for commitment. As can be seen from Table 3 in
the main text, the fraction of students who choose to self-impose deadlines is generally 30% or
higher across all the experimental treatments we run, though there are interesting differences
across treatments. First, in the 1T treatment with Endogenous deadlines 31.4% of students
(11 in total) self-impose a binding deadline, while in the equivalent (i.e., mid-semester, 150
words) 3T treatment we observe a more robust demand for commitment, with over 60% of
students self-imposing a binding deadline on task 1.38 Second, in the 3T treatment, variation
in the frequency of setting a deadline appears related to the implicit cost in terms of missed
options to complete the task. Postulating that deadlines are less costly the easier the task
(150 vs 200 words) and in the mid-semester setting (as opposed to the end), Table 3 shows
that subjects’ demand for commitment declines in its implicit cost.39 Third, deadlines become
less strict as their implicit cost increases: increasing the number of words from 150 to 200
or shifting the timing of the experiment from mid-semester to end-semester. In fact, we can
say that deadlines are significantly less strict in the end of semester implementation than
in the mid-semester, 150 words implementation (conditional on setting a binding deadline:
p = 0.075; unconditional on setting a binding deadline: p = 0.015).
    Having looked at the incidence and strictness of self-imposed deadlines, we are now in-
terested in the factors that influence the decision to self-impose a deadline. Table C.1, which
compares subjects’ responses to the various cost of time and psychological characteristics
depending on whether or not they self-imposed a deadline (for the 3T Endogenous deadlines
treatment), shows that both psychological and cost factors influence the decision to self-
impose a deadline. In particular, subjects who self-impose deadlines tend to face a higher
cost of their time at the margin, as indicated by having more minor and major assignments,
being in more clubs and spending more time socializing (though they are in significantly fewer
courses). With regards to psychological factors, subjects who self-impose a deadline also self-
report to be less conscientious and more impatient.40 We interpret lack of conscientiousness
as a proxy for present-bias.41
  38
     A two-sided proportions test comparing the 1T treatment with the equivalent 3T treatment, rejects the
hypothesis that the proportion of subjects setting deadlines is the same (p = 0.026).
  39
     However, a two-sided proportions test just misses marginal significance for this result (p = 0.102).
  40
     We take as our measure of impatience subjects’ response to Question 14 from the survey. This question
was taken from Americks, Caplin, Leahy, and Tyler (2007) and was used along with other questions to get an
indication of impatience and self-control problems.
  41
     In testing for differences between those subjects who do and do not self-impose deadlines for each of our
survey questions, it is possible that some variables will be significant purely by chance. To guard against this,
we conducted a Monte Carlo exercise. Specifically, for each question and for each of 100,000 trials, we drew
random sample of subjects of the same size as our Endogenous Deadlines treatment with the same mean and
standard deviation as in our sample. We then tested - both with a t−test and a Mann-Whitney rank sum
test - for differences between the two simulated populations; results are reported in the last two columns of
Table C.1. From this exercise, we can compute the probability of observing six (as we have) or more questions
where we reject equality of means at the 10% level or better. For the t−test and Mann-Whitney tests, these



                                                       50
Table C.1: Self-Reported Characteristics and Self-Imposed deadlines (3T Treatment, All
Survey Questions)

                                                                                                   p−value   p−value
                                                              No Deadline Set       Deadline Set
                                                                                                    t−test   MW test
                         # of courses                                4.06                  3.59      0.121    0.197
                         GPA                                         3.42                  3.45      0.721    0.509
                         # of exams                                  0.94                  0.94      0.994    0.526
 Cost Factors




                         # of major assignments                      1.27                  1.82      0.079    0.074
                         # of minor assignments                      2.70                  4.24      0.063    0.045
                         Have job?                                   0.55                  0.47      0.547    0.543
                         # of clubs                                  1.09                  1.68      0.078    0.077
                         Time studying                               29.65                 30.56     0.893    0.816
                         Time family                                  3.55                 3.53      0.989    0.641
                         Time job                                    13.80                 16.34     0.591    0.990
                         Time socializing                            12.55                 17.55     0.137    0.038
                         Conscientious                               4.21                  3.76      0.009    0.010
 Psychological Factors




                         Often late (assignments)                    1.52                  1.44      0.688    0.589
                         Often on time (appointments)                 4.03                 4.26      0.312    0.265
                         Not dependable                              2.55                  2.32      0.437    0.406
                         Detail oriented                              4.03                  3.85     0.398    0.355
                         Not organized                               2.30                  2.35      0.860    0.758
                         Follow schedule                             3.79                  3.50      0.247    0.152
                         Unexpected events                           3.39                  3.06      0.129    0.149
                         Impatience (Ideal allocation)               5.79                   6.85     0.066    0.067
                         Temptation allocation                        6.06                  6.71     0.319    0.422
                         Perceived actual allocation                  5.82                  6.88     0.074    0.110
                          Higher numbers indicate more of the particular characteristic.


Task Completion
In Tables C.2 and C.3, we look at factors, from the survey subjects completed in Phase 1,
which affect task completion. These tables show that both psychological and cost factors
affect task completion; however, there is an interesting dichotomy between the 3T and 1T
treatments. In 3T psychological factors play a dominant role, while in 1T, cost factors are
decisive.
    In the 3T treatments (Table C.2), we see that 7 out of 11 psychological characteristics are
significantly different at the 10% level and the differences between the groups are all intuitive.
In contrast, only one cost factor (number of exams) is significantly different between those
subjects who complete zero tasks and those who complete all three tasks. The punchline is
that subjects completing three tasks are significantly less disorganized, more punctual, more
dependable, more detail oriented, more likely to follow a schedule and have fewer unexpected
events than subjects who complete zero tasks.42 While subjects who fail to complete any

probabilities are 0.029 and 0.027, respectively, supporting our claim that the observed significant differences
are not due to chance.
  42
     A similar Monte Carlo exercise as the one described in footnote 41 suggests that the number of significant


                                                                      51
tasks may be suggestive of procrastination, as noted above and elaborated on in Section 5.3,
there may be other behavioral factors at play. It is also interesting to note that none of the
factors – psychological or cost – which significantly differentiate between subjects completing
0 or 3 tasks are also significantly different between those who did and did not self-impose a
deadline (recall Table C.1) and vice versa. This suggests that there may be factors beyond
simply a desire to commit underlying the decision to self-impose a deadline. In contrast, for
the 1T treatment (Table C.3), none of the psychological factors differ based on whether not
the subject completed the task, while some cost factors do play a role (number of courses
and number of minor assignments).

                         Table C.2: Self-Reported Characteristics and Task Completion (3T Treatment)

                                                             0 Tasks       3 Tasks   p−val. (t−test)   p−val. (MW test)
                         # of courses                          4.15          4.05        0.724              0.931
                         GPA                                   3.41          3.49        0.176              0.100
                         # of exams                            1.31          1.00        0.079              0.070
 Cost Factors




                         # of major assignments                1.58          1.45        0.532              0.591
                         # of minor assignments                3.27          3.30        0.959              0.953
                         Have job?                             0.50          0.55        0.506              0.504
                         # of clubs                            1.56          1.23        0.149              0.291
                         Time studying                        34.88         31.53        0.536              0.238
                         Time family                           2.86          4.30        0.097              0.283
                         Time job                             12.33         12.53        0.937              0.852
                         Time socializing                     15.87         16.51        0.794              0.794
                         Conscientious                         3.99          4.03        0.715              0.648
 Psychological Factors




                         Often late (assignments)              1.51          1.33        0.202              0.055
                         Often on time (appointments)          4.09          4.50        0.007              0.006
                         Not dependable                        2.64          2.20        0.032              0.016
                         Detail oriented                       3.92          4.17        0.090              0.061
                         Not organized                         2.46          1.90        0.001              0.001
                         Follow schedule                       3.58          3.95        0.027              0.039
                         Unexpected events                     3.31          3.03        0.076              0.048
                         Impatience (Ideal allocation)         6.20          5.92        0.446              0.801
                         Temptation allocation                 6.47          6.25        0.593              0.567
                         Perceived actual allocation           6.43          6.12        0.425              0.519
                            Higher numbers indicate more of the particular characteristic.

    Finally, we are also interested in the factors which affect, conditional on completing a
task, when the task gets done. Table C.4 reports regressions (random effects in the case of
3T) where the dependent variable is the time remaining before the end of the experiment
that the task is completed and the explanatory variables come from the pre-experiment
survey. Negative coefficients imply that higher values of the variable lead to earlier task
completion. Similar to the results on completions, in the 1T treatments, only cost factors
have explanatory power, while in the 3T treatments, it is primarily psychological factors
that influence when the task gets completed. In all cases, the signs of the coefficients are
differences found is highly unlikely to be due to chance (p < 0.0001).


                                                                      52
                         Table C.3: Self-Reported Characteristics and Task Completion (1T Treatment)

                                                             0 Tasks       1 Task   p−val. (t−test)   p−val. (MW test)
                         # of courses                          3.78          4.63       0.062              0.125
                         GPA                                   3.37         3.52        0.070              0.167
                         # of exams                            0.40          0.46       0.654              0.771
 Cost Factors




                         # of major assignments                0.75         0.76        0.973              0.996
                         # of minor assignments                2.13         2.83        0.096              0.085
                         Have job?                             0.40         0.56        0.151              0.150
                         # of clubs                            1.33          1.37       0.881              0.855
                         Time studying                        15.58         20.27       0.644              0.582
                         Time family                           1.93         2.61        0.682              0.187
                         Time job                              5.58         5.63        0.972              0.666
                         Time socializing                      9.43         8.39        0.592              0.407
                         Conscientious                         4.03         4.07        0.797              0.852
 Psychological Factors




                         Often late (assignments)              1.80         1.59        0.335              0.441
                         Often on time (appointments)          4.13         4.24        0.587              0.321
                         Not dependable                        2.30          2.44       0.598              0.404
                         Detail oriented                       3.90          4.10       0.273              0.286
                         Not organized                         2.48         2.15        0.158              0.120
                         Follow schedule                       3.50          3.78       0.253              0.312
                         Unexpected events                     3.10         2.93        0.398              0.480
                         Impatience (Ideal allocation)         5.90         6.20        0.533              0.613
                         Temptation allocation                 6.15         6.80        0.282              0.428
                         Perceived actual allocation           6.03         6.51        0.376              0.695
                            Higher numbers indicate more of the particular characteristic.


intuitive. More conscientious and more punctual subjects complete tasks earlier. Similarly,
more impatient subjects and subjects who anticipate more unexpected events also complete
the task earlier. Both of these are intuitive because the option value of delaying is lower for
such subjects. The cost factors for the 1T treatment also have intuitive signs. Subjects with
more major assignments and subjects who spend more time socializing complete tasks later.
Interestingly, having a job implies earlier task completion – perhaps because such subjects
are better at managing their time – but the more time subjects anticipate working, the later
they complete the tasks.




                                                                      53
     Table C.4: Self-Reported Characteristics and Timing (Conditional on Completion)

                                                              3T Treatment               1T Treatment
                 Task                                         2.080∗∗∗ (0.196)
                 # of major assign.                                                      0.925∗∗ (0.395)
                 # of minor assign.                         −0.284∗∗          (0.111)
                 Have job?                                                              −2.274∗∗ (0.962)
                 Time job                                                                0.261∗∗∗ (0.073)
                 Time socializing                                                        0.099∗∗ (0.043)
                 Conscientious                              −0.993∗∗          (0.479)
                 Unexpected events                          −0.795∗∗          (0.369)
                 Often on time (appts.)                     −0.985∗∗∗         (0.381)
                 Impatience (ideal alloc.)                  −0.325∗           (0.168)
                 Beliefs: All tasks                                                     −0.047∗∗ (0.019)
                 Constant                                      0.028  (3.269)           −2.018   (1.741)
                 Observations                                   244                       41
                 LL                                          -627.958                   -84.055
Standard errors in parentheses.   ∗   p < 0.10;   ∗∗   p < 0.05;   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01




                                                                    54
