                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TOBACCO CONTROL CAMPAIGN IN URUGUAY:
   IMPACT ON SMOKING CESSATION DURING PREGNANCY AND BIRTH WEIGHT

                                              Jeffrey E. Harris
                                               Ana Inés Balsa
                                              Patricia Triunfo

                                          Working Paper 19878
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19878


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2014




We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Bloomberg Foundation through an unrestricted
grant to the Ministry of Public Health (Ministerio de Salud Pública), Uruguay. Neither the Bloomberg
Foundation nor the Ministry of Public Health exerted any influence on the conduct of this study or
the drafting of this manuscript. We further acknowledge valuable inputs from Winston Abascal, Rafael
Aguirre, Wanda Cabella, Fernando Esponda, Elba Estévez, Marinés Figueroa, Ana Lorenzo, Luis
Mainero, and Giselle Tomasso. The opinions expressed in this paper are ours and ours alone. We have
no conflicts of interest to declare. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Jeffrey E. Harris, Ana Inés Balsa, and Patricia Triunfo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tobacco Control Campaign in Uruguay: Impact on Smoking Cessation during PregnancyDQG%LUWK
:HLJKW
Jeffrey E. Harris, Ana Inés Balsa, and Patricia Triunfo
NBER Working Paper No. 19878
January 2014
JEL No. D12,I12,I18

                                              ABSTRACT
Background. In 2005, Uruguay instituted a nationwide tobacco control campaign that has resulted
in a substantial decline in nationwide smoking rates. We sought to determine the quantitative contributions
of each of the major tobacco control measures adopted by the Uruguayan government. We focused
sharply on smoking cessation by pregnant women and on the effect of quitting smoking during pregnancy
on birth weight.

Data. We analyzed a nationwide registry of all pregnancies in Uruguay during 2007–2012, supplemented
by data on cigarette prices and various governmental policies.

Methods. We estimated linear probability models of quitting smoking in the third trimester as well
as linear models of the effect of quitting on birth weight. Our explanatory variables included maternal
characteristics, provider-level and national-level policy interventions, and real price. In our models
of quitting smoking, we used taxes as an instrument to address price endogeneity. In our models of
birth weight, we used tobacco control policies as instruments to address the endogeneity of smoking
cessation.

Results. During 2007–2012, the proportion of pregnant women who had quit smoking by their third
trimester increased markedly from 15 to 42 percent. Each of the major non-price tobacco control measures
– including programs to treat nicotine dependence at health centers, banning of advertising nationwide,
rotating warnings with pictograms on each pack, restriction of brands to a single presentation, and
an increase in the size of pictograms to 80% of the front and back of each pack – was separately associated
with a significant increase in the rate of quitting. During 2007–2009, tobacco manufacturers responded
to tax increases and non-price policies by moderating their pretax prices. Quitting smoking by the
third trimester increased birth weight by an estimated 163 grams.

Conclusion. Uruguay’s nationwide tobacco control campaign led to a substantial increase in the likelihood
that a pregnant smoker would quit by her third trimester. Each of the major tobacco control measures
adopted by the government had a measurable impact on the rate of quitting and thus on neonatal health.

Jeffrey E. Harris                                    Patricia Triunfo
Department of Economics, E18-258                     Departamento de Economía
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                Facultad de Ciencias Sociales
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  Universidad de la República
and NBER                                             Montevideo 11200, Uruguay
jeffrey@mit.edu                                      patricia.triunfo@cienciassociales.edu.uy

Ana Inés Balsa
Departamento de Economía
Facultad de Ciencias Empresariales y Economía
Universidad de Montevideo
Montevideo 11500, Uruguay
abalsa@um.edu.uy
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



Abstract
        Background. In 2005, Uruguay instituted a nationwide tobacco control campaign that has
resulted in a substantial decline in nationwide smoking rates. We sought to determine the
quantitative contributions of each of the major tobacco control measures adopted by the
Uruguayan government. We focused sharply on smoking cessation by pregnant women and on
the effect of quitting smoking during pregnancy on birth weight.
        Data. We analyzed a nationwide registry of all pregnancies in Uruguay during 2007–
2012, supplemented by data on cigarette prices and various governmental policies.
        Methods. We estimated linear probability models of quitting smoking in the third
trimester as well as linear models of the effect of quitting on birth weight. Our explanatory
variables included maternal characteristics, provider-level and national-level policy
interventions, and real price. In our models of quitting smoking, we used taxes as an instrument
to address price endogeneity. In our models of birth weight, we used tobacco control policies as
instruments to address the endogeneity of smoking cessation.
        Results. During 2007–2012, the proportion of pregnant women who had quit smoking by
their third trimester increased markedly from 15 to 42 percent. Each of the major non-price
tobacco control measures – including programs to treat nicotine dependence at health centers,
banning of advertising nationwide, rotating warnings with pictograms on each pack, restriction
of brands to a single presentation, and an increase in the size of pictograms to 80% of the front
and back of each pack – was separately associated with a significant increase in the rate of
quitting. During 2007–2009, tobacco manufacturers responded to tax increases and non-price
policies by moderating their pretax prices. Quitting smoking by the third trimester increased birth
weight by an estimated 163 grams.
        Conclusion. Uruguay’s nationwide tobacco control campaign led to a substantial
increase in the likelihood that a pregnant smoker would quit by her third trimester. Each of the
major tobacco control measures adopted by the government had a measurable impact on the rate
of quitting and thus on neonatal health.
        Key Words: economic evaluation, cigarette taxes, package warnings, advertising bans,
tobacco control, pregnancy, birth weight
        JEL: I18 (government policy, regulation, public health), I12 (health production), D12
(consumer economics, empirical analysis)
                                                                                                    2
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



Introduction
        The tobacco epidemic continues to represent a serious public health threat throughout the
world. By one recent estimate, the worldwide annual mortality burden has already reached 5
million deaths from direct tobacco smoking and another 600,000 deaths attributable to the effects
of environmental smoke (World Health Organization 2012). Within the next 20 years, annual
deaths from tobacco are projected to continue to rise to 8 million, of which more than 80% will
occur in low- and middle-income countries (Mathers, Boerma et al. 2008).
        Beginning in 2005, Uruguay instituted a series of aggressive anti-smoking measures that
placed this small South American country of 3.3 million inhabitants in the forefront of tobacco
control policy worldwide. By 2012, the Uruguayan government had banned nearly all advertising
and promotion of tobacco products, prohibited smoking in enclosed public spaces and
workspaces, mandated that pictograms with warnings cover 80% of the front and back of every
pack, outlawed multiple versions of the same brand such as Silver or Blue, banned misleading
marketing terms such as “light” and “mild,” required healthcare providers to treat nicotine
dependence, and raised tobacco taxes.
        In a previous report, two of us (JH and PT) found that Uruguay’s comprehensive
nationwide antismoking campaign was associated with a substantial, unprecedented decrease in
tobacco use (Abascal, Esteves et al. 2012). During 2005–2011, per capita cigarette consumption
decreased by 4.3% per year, while the 30-day prevalence of cigarette use among students aged
13–17 years and the overall population prevalence of current tobacco use declined at annual rates
of 8.0% and 3.3%, respectively. The observed declines in each of these three indicators of
tobacco use were significantly larger than those seen in Argentina, which had not conducted a
comprehensive antismoking campaign.
        These prior results provided estimates of the impact of Uruguay’s tobacco control
program taken as a whole. They did not permit us to identify the contributions of each of the
component anti-smoking measures. Identification of the impacts of individual components is
important in assessing the generalizability of Uruguay’s experience to other jurisdictions that
have instituted some but not all such tobacco control policies. Identification is further important
because two of the country’s anti-smoking policies – the requirement that pictograms with
warnings cover 80% of the front and back of each pack, and the “single presentation rule” that
bars multiple versions of the same brand – have recently come under legal challenge (Philip
                                                                                                      3
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



Morris International 2010). Moreover, our prior work focused solely on measures of tobacco use.
Assessment of health outcomes is a critical component of the evaluation of tobacco control
programs (Lien and Evans 2005, Kabir, Connolly et al. 2008, Adams, Markowitz et al. 2012).
        In this article, we study the impact of Uruguay’s tobacco control campaign on a critical
target population: pregnant women. Cigarette smoking is one of the most important modifiable
risk factors associated with adverse perinatal outcomes, including low birth weight and preterm
birth (Sexton and Hebel 1984, Permutt and Hebel 1989, da Veiga and Wilder 2008, McCowan,
Dekker et al. 2009). These adverse outcomes impose substantial private and social costs as a
result of increased morbidity and mortality, low income and poor educational trajectories over a
lifetime (Petrou, Sach et al. 2001, Adams, Miller et al. 2002, Boardman, Powers et al. 2002,
Black, Devereux et al. 2007).
        We used data from a continuous nationwide registry of pregnancies to assess the impact
of Uruguay’s tobacco control campaign on a pregnant smoker’s decision to quit smoking, as well
as the resulting impact on birth weight. In contrast to prior studies that have focused narrowly on
the effects of cigarette prices (Evans and Ringel 1999, Ringel and Evans 2001, Colman,
Grossman et al. 2003, Lien and Evans 2005, Levy and Meara 2006) or workplace restrictions on
smoking (Adams, Markowitz et al. 2012, Bharadwaj, Johnsen et al. 2012), we sought to
decompose the effects of a series of tobacco control measures on smoking cessation rates. Our
identification strategy depended critically on two aspects of Uruguay’s multifaceted anti-
smoking campaign. First, different tobacco control measures came into effect – and, in some
cases, went out of effect – at different times from 2005 onward. Second, certain policies –
particularly those directed at improving healthcare providers’ treatment of nicotine dependence
during pregnancy – were implemented at different health centers providing prenatal care at
different times.
        We found that the proportion of pregnant women who quit smoking by their third
trimester increased markedly from 15 percent in 2007 to 42 percent in 2012. Taking into account
women’s personal characteristics and incorporating fixed effects for the health centers where
they received prenatal care, we found that the major policy interventions adopted by the
Uruguayan government had significant, positive impacts on pregnant smokers’ probability of
quitting. The estimated price elasticity of quitting was on the order of 0.4 at the sample mean.
The absolute individual impact of each non-price policy intervention on the probability of
                                                                                                   4
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



quitting ranged from 3 to 14 percentage points. Cigarette price played a relatively minor role in
the overall increase in smoking cessation, as manufacturers moderated their pre-tax prices in
response to tax increases and other non-price policies, particularly during 2007–2009. Each
pregnant smoker who quit smoking in her third trimester in response to Uruguay’s tobacco
control policies experienced a mean increase in birth weight of 163 grams.

Health Policy in Uruguay
Nationwide Anti-Smoking Policies
        In July 2004, Uruguay’s legislature ratified the Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control (FCTC), a treaty originally adopted in May 2003 at the 56th World Health Assembly of
the World Health Organization (WHO) and now accepted by 177 countries (World Health
Organization 2013). In 2005, the newly elected administration created a National Program for
Tobacco Control within its Ministry of Public Health to serve as a focal point for implementing a
series of measures codified under the FCTC. There followed a succession of progressively more
stringent tobacco control policies (Abascal, Esteves et al. 2012). In May 2005, the Ministry
established clearly delimited, ventilated smoking areas in private bars, restaurants and other
entertainment venues. In July of that year, the Ministry further decreed that all public offices,
including government, public service companies and public schools, be 100% free of tobacco
smoke. By March 2006, all enclosed public spaces and all public and private workspaces were
declared 100% smoke-free. In June 2008, another ministerial decree extended the scope of
tobacco-free spaces to taxis, buses, airplanes and other public transport.
        These curbs on smoking in certain public and private spaces were paralleled by
restrictions on tobacco advertising. A May 2005 ministerial decree barred cigarette advertising
on television during children’s viewing hours (that is, before 21:30). The decree also prohibited
advertising, promotion or sponsorship by tobacco companies of all sporting events. These
restrictions were subsequently codified in March 2008, when comprehensive tobacco control
legislation (Law 18.256) prohibited all advertising and promotion of tobacco products except at
point of sale. In October 2008, logos, trademarks and other tobacco-related symbols were banned
on non-tobacco products.
        At the same time, the Uruguayan government promulgated warning requirements on
cigarette packages and imposed restrictions on manufacturers’ branding practices. A May 2005

                                                                                                    5
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                            29-Jan-2014



ministerial decree banned all references to “light,” “ultra light,” “mild,” “low tar” and other
descriptors that might misleadingly imply reduced harm. The decree also required that a series of
rotating warnings with images was to cover 50% of the front and back of each cigarette pack.
The deadline for compliance with the first round of these rotating warnings was April 2006.
Subsequent rounds had respective deadlines of December 2007, February 2009, February 2010,
January 2012, and April 2013. A “single presentation rule,” issued as a ministerial decree along
with the third round of warnings, barred the marketing of multiple versions of the same brand,
such as Silver or Blue. A 2009 decree mandated that the size of the warnings be increased to
80% of the front and back of each pack. This requirement was implemented with the fourth
round of warnings and became effective by February 2010.1
        Figure 1 shows a timeline summarizing the major nationwide non-price regulatory
measures from 2005–2013. The blue text describes each of the six rounds of package warnings,
while the red text describes regulatory measures other than the mandated warnings. The black
lines point to the compliance deadlines for each regulatory measure.2
        Figure 2 further describes the six rounds of rotating package warnings. In each round, we
show only one of several mandated images. The first, third and fourth rounds, in particular,
included warnings and accompanying images that directly addressed the consequences of
smoking during pregnancy. The relative sizes of the images in the figure correspond to their
relative sizes on each pack, with the last three rounds reflecting the required increase from 50%
to 80% of the front and back surfaces.

Smoking Cessation Programs Directed at Healthcare Providers
        In 2003, National Resource Fund (“Fondo Nacional de Recursos” or FNR), the
governmental agency responsible for financing resource-intensive medical technologies, began
to establish quit-smoking services at hospitals aimed initially at preventing a recurrent heart
attack in patients who had undergone cardiac bypass. In 2005, the FNR expanded its smoking
cessation program to cover the entire Uruguayan patient population. A key element of the

1
 This “80% rule” was promulgated 3 months before the issuance of the fourth round of images. However, we have
no evidence of significant compliance with the 80% rule before the deadline for compliance with the fourth round of
images.
2
  With the exception of the comprehensive tobacco control law, all measures provided for a 180-day compliance
period. By specifying the end of the compliance period as the effective date of each measure, we assumed that
tobacco manufacturers waited until each deadline to comply.
                                                                                                                  6
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



expanded nationwide program was a system of agreements (“convenios”) between the FNR and
individual clinics and hospitals, in which the FNR trained healthcare providers in the diagnosis
and treatment of tobacco dependence and provided free nicotine patches and bupropion (a
medicine widely used to blunt the symptoms of nicotine withdrawal) in return for setting up a
smoking cessation program with little or no patient copayments (Esteves, Gambogi et al. 2011).
        In 2008, the comprehensive tobacco control law (Law 18.256) mandated that every
primary care provider, whether public or private, incorporate the diagnosis and treatment of
tobacco dependence into its menu of basic services. Pursuant to this legislation, the FNR and the
Ministry of Public Health in 2009 established national guidelines for primary care providers on
the diagnosis and treatment of nicotine dependence. Healthcare institutions that had no
agreements with the FNR were required to provide smoking cessation services in accordance
with the guidelines, but they were permitted to charge nontrivial copayments to patients.
        By 2010, the FNR had trained 657 health professionals, while a total of 21,527 patients in
45 healthcare institutions had been treated under the program. Among all patients enrolled in
FNR’s smoking cessation protocol, the reported one-year abstinence rate was 14 percent. Among
those with at least 4 visits to the program, the reported one-year abstinence rate was 22 percent
(Esteves, Gambogi et al. 2011).
        Institutions caring for pregnant women likewise participated in the FNR’s system of
agreements. Among all sites providing prenatal care to pregnant women, the proportion with
FNR agreements increased from 6 to 10 percent during 2005–2012. Concurrently, the proportion
of all pregnant women receiving prenatal care at sites with FNR agreements increased from 24%
in 2005 to 35% in 2007, but then declined to 32% by 2012.

Cigarette Tax Increases
        In addition to the foregoing policy interventions, the Uruguayan government increased its
indirect taxes on tobacco products. Imposed solely at the national level, these taxes consist of an
excise tax (“impuesto específico interno” or IMESI) and a value added tax (“impuesto al valor
agregado” or IVA). The IMESI, which was first applied to cigarettes in 1993, underwent a series
of discrete increases in June 2002, May 2003, July 2007, June 2009, and February 2010. The
IVA, by contrast, was first applied to cigarettes in July 2007 and since then has constituted 22%
of the pre-tax price including the IMESI or, equivalently, 18% of the retail price. We describe

                                                                                                      7
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                 29-Jan-2014



the quantitative impact of these tax increases on the real price of cigarettes in the Data section
below.
         In Uruguay, an estimated 99% of tobacco users smoke manufactured cigarettes, hand-
rolled cigarettes, or both (Abascal, Esteves et al. 2012). Manufactured cigarettes, in particular,
make up more than 85% of taxable cigarette consumption (Dirección General Impositiva 2012).
During 2004–2012, by one estimate, contraband cigarette sales constituted approximately 12%
of total cigarette consumption on average (Curti 2013). With the possible exception of less
densely populated provinces (“departamentos”) along Uruguay’s borders with Brazil and
Argentina, where contraband tobacco use appears more prevalent, there has been little effective
geographical variation in retail price.

Expanding Access to Prenatal Care
         Through a series of reforms beginning in 2008, the Uruguayan government established an
integrated national health system (“Sistema Nacional Integrado de Salud” or SNIS) aimed at
universal coverage financed by premiums based on a graduated share of income (Ministerio de
Salud Pública 2010). These reforms included a series of new incentives to reorient the healthcare
system toward primary care, disease prevention and early diagnosis, particularly in the area of
reproductive health (Ministerio de Salud Pública 2010). In July 2008, the Uruguayan government
began to compensate healthcare institutions for adhering to specific quantitative goals (“metas”)
for a range of performance indicators. In the area of maternity care, one quantitative goal was
based on the proportion of pregnancies with an initial visit in the first trimester and at least six
prenatal visits prior to delivery. An additional goal addressed the completeness of individual
patient data entered into the national perinatal registry, a database that we describe in detail
below (Junta Nactional de Salud (JUNASA) 2009, González, Olesker et al. 2010). From 2007–
2012, the percentage of pregnant women initiating prenatal care in the first trimester increased
from 59 to 77 percent, while the percent initiating care in the third trimester dropped from 8 to 4
percent.

Literature Review
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes
         Maternal smoking during pregnancy causes a wide range of adverse birth outcomes,
including low birth weight, preterm birth, intrauterine growth retardation, spontaneous abortion,
                                                                                                       8
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



and mental retardation, among other conditions. These adverse effects have been documented in
epidemiological studies (Andres and Day 2000, Lindley, Becker et al. 2000, Windham, Hopkins
et al. 2000, Phung, Bauman et al. 2003, Ward, Lewis et al. 2007, da Veiga and Wilder 2008,
McCowan, Dekker et al. 2009) and in clinical trials (Sexton and Hebel 1984, Permutt and Hebel
1989, Ershoff, Quinn et al. 1990, Shipp, Croughan-Minihane et al. 1992, Pollack 2001).
        Smoking cessation early in pregnancy has been associated with a reduction in the risk of
adverse outcomes (Vardavas, Chatzi et al. 2010). Even delayed cessation of smoking during the
second or third trimester can reduce the adverse effects of smoking during pregnancy
(Lieberman, Gremy et al. 1994, Raatikainen, Huurinainen et al. 2007, Batech, Tonstad et al.
2013, Yan and Groothuis 2013).
        Some economists have suggested that the impact of smoking on birth outcomes may be
smaller in magnitude than traditionally estimated. These authors have used either maternal fixed
effects in longitudinal databases that included pregnancies among non-twin siblings (Abrevaya
2006, Abrevaya and Dahl 2008, Walker, Tekin et al. 2009, Wüst 2010, Juarez and Merlo 2013)
or anti-tobacco policies as instrumental variables (Lien and Evans 2005).

Tobacco Control Policies and Smoking During Pregnancy
        Another strand of the literature has evaluated the effects of tobacco control policies on
smoking and birth outcomes. With few exceptions, these studies have focused on the impact of
changes in cigarette prices. Evans and colleagues found that US pregnant women responded
significantly to increases in cigarette excise taxes, and that smoking during pregnancy reduced
birth weight by 182 grams and doubled the risk of low birth weight (Evans and Ringel 1999,
Ringel and Evans 2001, Lien and Evans 2005). Other authors have also found that the price
elasticity of smoking participation is higher among pregnant women than in the general
population (Gruber and Koszegi 2001, Colman, Grossman et al. 2003).
        More recent studies of the U.S., however, have found smaller reductions in smoking
participation in response to tax hikes. Levy and Meara examined the effect of the large,
unprecedented price increase following the 1998 Master Settlement Agreement (MSA) between
various state attorneys general and the major tobacco manufacturers. Compared with the
prevalence of prenatal smoking predicted by secular trends leading up to the MSA, prenatal
smoking prevalence was found to have declined proportionally by less than 3 percent (Levy and

                                                                                                    9
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



Meara 2006). Similarly, Adams and colleagues (Adams, Markowitz et al. 2012) found that
increases in excise taxes and restrictions on indoor smoking were effective in improving birth
outcomes, but the effects were small in magnitude and limited to infants born to mothers in
certain age groups. Bharadwaj and colleagues found that the extension of smoking bans to bars
and restaurants in Norway in 2004 decreased smoke exposure in utero for children of female
workers in restaurants and bars, and concomitantly decreased rates of very low birth weight
(Bharadwaj, Johnsen et al. 2012).

Warnings and Images on Cigarette Packs; Advertising Restrictions
        Numerous studies point to the critical role of pack design in the marketing of cigarettes,
particularly for creating an in-store presence at the point of purchase, for communicating brand
image, and for reinforcing false perceptions about smoking risks (Mutti, Hammond et al. 2011).
Experimental studies and surveys suggest that pack-based warnings decrease the perceived
attractiveness of the package, produce higher levels of negative affect, and increase smokers’
risk perception and intention to quit (Kees, Burton et al. 2006, Hammond 2011). Hammond,
Fong and colleagues assessed the impact of graphic Canadian cigarette warning labels on self-
reported smoking of 616 adult subjects before and after the enactment of new warnings. They
found that smokers who had read, thought about, and discussed the new warnings at baseline
were more likely to have quit, made a quit attempt, or reduced their smoking three months later
(Hammond, Fong et al. 2003, Hammond, Fong et al. 2004). Marketing studies in experimental
and naturalistic settings indicate that plain packaging – with no imagery, colors or symbols –
reduced the appeal of tobacco products, increased the prominence and effectiveness of health
warnings, and neutralized those package designs that tend to mislead consumers about the
harmfulness of tobacco products (Hoek, Wong et al. 2011, Moodie, Hastings et al. 2011,
Thrasher, Rousu et al. 2011). In a cross-sectional study conducted during the rollout phase of
Australia’s plain packaging law, Wakefield and colleagues found that smokers of plain packs
perceived their cigarettes to be lower in quality and less satisfying, and gave a higher priority to
quitting (Wakefield, Hayes et al. 2013).
        Economists have studied the effects of restrictions and bans on cigarette advertising with
mixed results. Saffer and Chaloupka, in a study of OECD countries, concluded that a
comprehensive set of tobacco advertising bans could reduce tobacco consumption, but that a

                                                                                                     10
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                29-Jan-2014



limited set of advertising bans would have little or no effect (Saffer and Chaloupka 2000). In a
study of 30 developing countries, Blecher found even stronger evidence for the effectiveness of
advertising bans in reducing tobacco consumption (Blecher 2008). Nelson, on the other hand, has
argued that tobacco advertising elasticities are small and that advertising bans have had no effect
on cigarette consumption (Nelson 2003, Nelson 2006). In a recent analysis of data from 19
developing countries, Kostova and Blecher maintained that individual advertising exposure is
endogenous, and that the positive relation between advertising and consumption can be
explained largely by the disproportionately higher propensity of smokers to observe advertising
(Kostova and Blecher 2012).

Data
Perinatal Information System (SIP)
        Our source of micro data on the smoking practices of pregnant women was the Perinatal
Information System (“Sistema Informático Perinatal” or SIP), a mandatory nationwide electronic
registry operating in all prenatal care clinics in Uruguay since 1990. Developed and overseen by
the Latin American Center for Perinatology (“Centro Latinoamericano de Perinatología” or
CLAP) of the Pan American Health Organization, the database contained information at the level
of the individual pregnancy on maternal characteristics, self-reported smoking behavior, current
and past obstetric history, the timing of prenatal care, the sites of prenatal care and delivery, and
birth outcomes including birth weight (CLAP 2001). In 2012, the SIP covered an estimated 94%
of all live births in Uruguay.
        Prior to 2007, each individual record in the SIP database contained the pregnant woman’s
smoking status only during the trimester in which she initiated prenatal care. It did not show
changes in smoking, if any, during the course of her pregnancy. Under a new data entry system
beginning in 2007, the prenatal record noted the woman’s smoking status separately in each
trimester of her pregnancy. For example, if a woman initiated prenatal care in her second
trimester, the healthcare provider recorded her smoking status in the first trimester, based on her
recall, as well as in the current trimester. Her smoking status would subsequently be recorded in
a follow-up prenatal visit during her third trimester.
        Under the new data entry system, we had data for 251,260 pregnancies terminating in a
live birth during 2007 through 2012. Elimination of pregnancy records of less than 25 weeks of

                                                                                                    11
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                29-Jan-2014



gestation or unknown gestation, as well as multiple-birth records or records with unknown
multiplicity, left 241,270 records (96%).

Smoking Cessation
        Our analysis of quitting behavior was confined to the new SIP system, covering the
period 2007–2012, when data on smoking habits during each trimester were available. We
studied the subpopulation of pregnant smokers, which included any woman recorded as currently
smoking during at least one trimester of her pregnancy. Among these smokers, our principal
outcome variable was quitting smoking. We defined a woman as having quit smoking if she was
specifically recorded as not currently smoking during the third trimester. Pregnant women who
smoked in the first or second trimester but whose smoking status was recorded as unknown in
the third trimester were excluded from our primary analyses. In secondary analyses of
robustness, however, we included such individuals as smokers. As a further robustness check, we
studied quitting in the second trimester as well. Eliminating non-smokers, records encoded under
the old SIP data entry system by health centers that were still making the transition to the new
system during 2007–2008, and records of smokers with unknown smoking status in the third
trimester, gave us an analytic sample of 28,597 observations.
        Figure 3 shows the trend in the proportion of pregnant smokers who quit smoking by the
third trimester, based on our analytic sample. The horizontal axis shows the year corresponding
to the midpoints of each woman’s third trimester. Each plotted point represents the annual mean,
while the capped vertical bars represent 95% confidence intervals. The quit rate increased from
15% in 2007 to 42% in 2012.

Maternal and Pregnancy Characteristics
        Table A1 in Appendix A shows the individual-level material characteristics, derived from
the SIP registry, that we used in our econometric analyses. These include variables referable to:
the timing of the first prenatal visit (first-trimester prenatal care); the mother’s age (<16, 17–19,
20–34, 35–39, and 40+ years), marital status (single, married, cohabiting, other), and educational
attainment (primary, secondary, university); the number of prior deliveries (0, 1, 2, 3, 4+);
number of prior abortions; a history of diabetes or hypertension; whether any complications of
pregnancy were observed, in particular, the presence of preeclampsia or eclampsia; the mother’s
body mass index based on her self-reported height and weight prior to the pregnancy

                                                                                                    12
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                29-Jan-2014



(underweight, normal weight, overweight, obese); the mother’s use of alcohol or illicit drugs; the
sites of prenatal care (not shown in Appendix Table A1); and the newborn’s sex and birth
weight. To avoid loss of observations, we included dummy variables equal to 1 when some
maternal characteristics were missing.

Nationwide Tobacco Control Measures
         We assigned a binary indicator variable to each of the five temporally distinct tobacco
control measures that entered into effect during 2007–2012, as delineated in Figure 1. These
tobacco control measures, along with the respective dates on which they entered into effect,
were: (1) second round of package warnings (8-Dec-2007); (2) comprehensive tobacco control
law (6-Mar-2008); (3) third round of package warnings and single presentation rule (14-Feb-
2009); (4) fourth round of package warnings and 80% coverage requirement (28-Feb-2010); and
(5) fifth round of package warnings (07-Jan-2012). We did not include binary variables for the
comprehensive ban on smoking on enclosed public spaces and public and private workspaces or
for the first and sixth round of warnings, as they occurred outside our interval of analysis (2007–
2012).

Cigarette Prices and Taxes
         We constructed a monthly time series of the real retail price of a pack of 20 cigarettes, as
well as a corresponding monthly series of real total taxes per pack. Based on unpublished data
made available from the Billion Prices Project (Cavallo 2013), we first computed the nominal
average price of a pack of 20 Nevada cigarettes, the best-selling brand, for each month from
October 2007 through May 2013. As detailed in Appendix B, we found that these average retail
prices quite closely tracked the tobacco consumer price index maintained by Uruguay’s National
Statistical Institute (Instituto Nacional de Estadística 2013). We then used the predicted values
from a linear regression of the average retail price of Nevada on the tobacco price index to
construct a complete monthly series of nominal retail prices. Nominal prices were then converted
to real prices based on the monthly all-goods consumer price index (Instituto Nacional de
Estadística 2013). In our econometric analyses, our principal price variable was the logarithm of
the calculated real price per pack.
         As noted in our description of tobacco control policies, Uruguay’s tobacco taxes consist
of an excise tax (“impuesto específico interno” or IMESI) and a value added tax (“impuesto al

                                                                                                    13
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                29-Jan-2014



valor agregado” or IVA). The IMESI has undergone a series of discrete increases since it was
first applied to cigarettes in 1993. The IVA, by contrast, was first applied to cigarettes in July
2007 and since then has constituted 22% of the pre-tax price, including the IMESI. Total
nominal taxes were likewise converted to real values based on the monthly all-goods consumer
price index. In our econometric analyses, our principal tax variable was the logarithm of the
calculated real tax per pack.
        Figure 4 shows our calculations of real cigarette price and taxes on a monthly basis from
2001–2012. Although we use only the data from 2007 onward in our econometric analyses of
smoking cessation, we show the entire series for completeness. Only 45% of the abrupt increase
in cigarette taxes in July 2007 was passed on to consumers in the form of higher retail prices. By
contrast, cigarette manufacturers raised their prices in December 2011 without any
corresponding change in tax rates. Below, we consider the implications of these findings for the
treatment of real price as an endogenous variable and real tax as an instrumental variable.

Interventions at the Level of the Healthcare Provider
        For our econometric analyses, we constructed a binary indicator variable that equaled 1 if
the clinic or hospital where a pregnant woman received prenatal care had an agreement
(“convenio”) with the FNR during the year in which she delivered her baby. We based our
construction of this variable on a list of formal agreements provided by the FNR. In the public
sector, however, these formal agreements often specified the governing national or municipal
healthcare authority, but not the specific health center. While we attempted to map every such
agreement into specific health centers, it is likely that we undercounted the number of publically
sponsored health centers with such agreements.

Methods
Smoking Cessation: Model Specification
        Let the binary dependent variable qijt denote the smoking status of woman i who

received prenatal care at site j , and who was in her third trimester of pregnancy at calendar date
t . We let qijt = 1 if the woman was a quitter at that time. If the woman had at least one recorded

prenatal visit during her third trimester, we computed t as the average date among all such



                                                                                                     14
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                29-Jan-2014



visits. If all dates of prenatal care in the third trimester were unknown, we defined t as 30 days
prior to delivery, which was the sample mean for our population.
        Let Xi denote a vector of personal characteristics of woman i that remained constant
during her pregnancy, including her age, education, marital status, history of prior abortions,
number of prior deliveries, body mass index before becoming pregnant, history of diabetes or
hypertension, and whether she suffered from preeclampsia or eclampsia. This vector also
included an indicator variable equal to 1 if the woman began her prenatal care in the first
trimester. For consistency with our model of birth weight, to be described below, it also included
the newborn’s sex.
        Let A jt denote a binary variable equal to 1 if the site of care j had an agreement for the

treatment of tobacco dependence with the FNR at calendar date t . Let log Pt denote the
logarithm of the real price of a pack of cigarettes at date t . We explicitly considered the
possibility that cigarette price is endogenous. That is, tobacco manufacturers might respond to
tax increases and other anti-tobacco policies by reducing their pre-tax prices. As observed in
Figure 4, for example, the increase in real cigarette taxes in mid-2007 was accompanied by a
much smaller increase in real cigarette price.
        Finally, for each k = 1,…,5 , let Z kt denote a binary variable equal to 1 if national-level
tobacco control measure k was in effect on calendar date t . In particular, for the first binary
variable ( k = 1) , which corresponded to the second round of package warnings (line C in Figure
4), we reverted Z1t = 0 on the date that the third round of warnings went into effect (line E in

Figure 4). For the second binary variable ( k = 2 ) , which corresponded to the comprehensive
tobacco control law (line D in Figure 4), Z 2t remained equal to 1 from the date that the law went

into effect and did not revert to 0. For the third binary variable ( k = 3) , which corresponded to
the single presentation rule and the third round of warnings (line E in Figure 4), Z 3t also
remained equal to 1 from the date that the rule went into effect. For the fourth binary variable
( k = 4 ) , which corresponded to the 80-percent rule and the fourth round of warnings (line F in
Figure 4), Z 4t likewise remained equal to 1 from the date that the rule went into effect. For the

fifth binary variable ( k = 5 ) , which corresponded to the fifth round of warnings (line G in Figure
4), Z 5t remained equal to 1 from the date that the warning went into effect through the end of
                                                                                                       15
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                           29-Jan-2014



2012, when our period of analysis terminated. Although the third and fourth rounds of warnings
were of limited duration, we could not revert the corresponding binary variables Z 3t and Z 4t to
0, as these measures were coupled with rules that remained permanently in effect.
        Based on the foregoing notation, our econometric specification for the smoking cessation
model was
                                            5
(1)     qijt = Xiα + γ A jt + δ log Pt + ∑ β k Z kt + ν j + ε ijt
                                           k=1


where the vector α and the scalars γ , δ , and {β1 ,…, β 5 } are the unknown parameters of

interest, ν j is the fixed effect for site of care j , and ε ijt is an error term.

        While the parameter γ in equation (1) gauges the effect of tobacco control measures at

the healthcare provider level, the parameters {β k } capture the incremental effects of non-price
tobacco control measures at the national level. For example, if a woman was observed in the
third trimester of her pregnancy on 1-July-2007, before any of the five specific measures went
into effect, then the corresponding values of the variables { Z kt } would be {0,0,0,0,0} , and the
                                                                            5
combined effect of all non-price national-level measures would be          ∑β Z   k   kt   = 0 . On the other
                                                                            k=1

hand, if a woman was observed in the third trimester of her pregnancy on 1-January-2011, then
the corresponding values of the variables { Z kt } would be {0,1,1,1,0} , and the combined effect
of all non-price national-level measures would be β 2 + β 3 + β 4 . Thus, in the evaluation of the
five specific policy measures, our reference case was the interval during 2007 when the
prohibition of smoking in public spaces and enclosed public and private work spaces (line A in
Figure 4) and the first round of warnings (line B in Figure 4) were in effect.

Smoking Cessation: Identification Strategy
        In our specification in equation (1), we sought to identify three different types of tobacco
control policies. The first represents policies operating at the level of the healthcare provider,
specifically, the tobacco cessation clinics established through agreements with the FNR. Here,
our identification strategy was based on both temporal and provider-specific variation in these
agreements, so that equation (1) effectively corresponds to a difference-in-difference model.


                                                                                                                16
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                    29-Jan-2014



        The second set of policies refers to tax increases that operate through retail prices. Here,
our identification strategy was based on temporal variation in cigarette prices at the national
level. Entertaining the possibility that cigarette price was endogenous, we chose cigarette taxes
as an instrument.
        The third set of policies refers to non-price nationwide tobacco control measures,
including rotating warnings on packages, restrictions of brands to a single presentation,
increasing the size of package warnings, and a ban on nearly all tobacco advertising. Here, our
identification strategy was based on differences in the timing of these measures. We specified a
separate binary variable covering the time period when each measure remained in force, and we
linked each measure to the date when each woman was in the midpoint of the third trimester of
her pregnancy. Thus, we did not address the possibility that a recently enacted measure became
effective only with a delay, or that an expiring measure (as in the case of the second round of
warnings) may have had a persistent effect. By assuming an additive linear model for each
binary policy variable, we effectively attempted to identify its average effect over time. By
assuming that our binary policy variables are exogenous, we excluded the possibility of policy
endogeneity, which might occur if the decision to implement a particular policy depended on the
observed effects of a prior policy.

Smoking Cessation: Estimation Methods
        We estimated equation (1) as a linear probability model, both by ordinary least squares
(OLS) and via two-stage least squares (2SLS), in each case with robust standard errors. Our
instrument for the endogenous price variable log Pt was the logarithm of real total taxes per
pack. To assess the validity of logTt as an instrument, we checked its significance in the first
stage equation.
        The linear probability model has the advantage that the estimates of the parameters

                                                                                  { }
α , γ , δ , and {β k } will be consistent even if the estimates of the fixed effects ν j are

inconsistent due to small numbers of smokers in some sites of care. However, in our subsequent
decomposition of the effects of policy measures, maternal and health center characteristics, we
relied upon the estimated values of these fixed effects. Accordingly, we excluded all
observations from any site of care in any given year that had fewer than 15 smokers in that year.


                                                                                                       17
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                      29-Jan-2014



Smoking Cessation: Tests for Potential Measurement Bias
        In Appendix C we consider two additional sources of bias in the measurement of quit
rates. First, we studied whether the reporting of smoking cessation was subject to non-response
bias. Second, we studied the possibility of selection bias resulting from earlier observation
during the course of pregnancy, as women increasingly responded to policies urging them to
seek timely prenatal care.

Birth Weight: Econometric Specification
        Let the continuous dependent variable wijt denote the birth weight of the newborn

delivered by woman i , who received prenatal care at site j , and who was in her third trimester
of pregnancy at calendar date t . We assumed the following econometric specification:


(2)     wijt = Xi λ + θ qijt + µ j + ηijt


where qijt and Xi are defined in (1), the vector λ and the scalar θ are the unknown parameters

of interest, µ j is a fixed effect for site of care j , and ηijt is an error term.

        As a consequence of unobserved heterogeneity, the error term ηijt in (2) is likely to be

correlated with the error term ε ijt in (1), and thus the variable qijt in (2) is likely to be

endogenous. In principle, the correlation between the two error terms ε ijt and ηijt could be

positive or negative. A woman with a propensity to engage in risky behaviors will tend not to
quit smoking and deliver a low-weight baby. In that case, the correlation will be positive, and
failure to account for the unobserved heterogeneity will overestimate the parameter θ .
Alternatively, a woman who runs into complications during her pregnancy will be under pressure
to quit smoking and tend to deliver a low-weight baby. In that case, the correlation will be
negative and the parameter θ will be underestimated.

Birth Weight: Identification and Estimation Methods
        We used instrumental variables to identify the key parameter θ in equation (2). Our

                                                                           {
instruments included the full set of tobacco control policy variables logTt , A j , Z1 ,…, Z 5    }
defined above. We estimated the parameters of equation (2) using 2SLS with robust standard

                                                                                                         18
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



errors. We used Hansen’s J statistic to test for over-identifying restrictions. We used the Wald F
based on the Kleibergen-Paap statistic and the Stock-Yogo critical values for weak instruments
to check for instrument relevance and to reject weak instruments (Stock and Yogo 2005, Baum,
Schaffer et al. 2007).

Robustness Checks
        In addition to estimating equations (1) and (2), we considered several alternative
specifications. In particular, we tested whether the effect of price was different for women who
sought care at health centers located along the frontiers with Argentina and Brazil, where
significant traffic contraband cigarettes was a possibility. We further tested interactions between
the maternal characteristics, site-level tobacco control measures and national-level tobacco
control measures including price. While the timing of prenatal care was not the focus of our
investigation, we recognized that our variable corresponding to initiation of care in the first
trimester could be endogenous due to unobserved heterogeneity. For example, pregnant women
with heightened perceptions of risk and thus a higher likelihood of quitting might seek care
earlier. To address this possibility, we ran our model solely on the subset of pregnant smokers
who initiated care in the first trimester.
        As additional robustness checks, we varied the sample used to test our model. In
particular, we reran our model excluding women who received care at the Centro Hospitalario
Pereira Rossell, the largest public maternity hospital in the country, which had not made the
transition to the new SIP data entry system until 2009. We also reran our model excluding all
observations in 2007, which had fewer observations than subsequent years (Figure 4). Finally,
we varied the threshold for the minimum number of smokers required to include observations on
a particular site of care in a given year.
        Other robustness checks entailed changes in the definitions of our variables. In particular,
we assumed that women with missing values of their third-trimester smoking status had
continued to smoke. Alternatively, we redefined a quitter as a pregnant woman who did not
smoke in both the second and third trimesters. We also varied the list of maternal characteristics
Xi , adding the use of alcohol and other drugs during pregnancy. Finally, in our linear models, we
estimated clustered standard errors based on year and site of prenatal care. We also computed
2SLS estimates of the birth weight model using alternative subsets of instruments.

                                                                                                   19
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                   29-Jan-2014



Quitting, Relapse and Repeat Quitting between Pregnancies
        In addition to our econometric analyses of smoking cessation, we performed a descriptive
analysis of transitions between quitting, relapse and repeat quitting for the subset of women who
had at least two pregnancies recorded in the new SIP data entry system during 2007–2012.

Results
Smoking Cessation
        Table 1 displays the principal results of our regression models, with a focus on the
impacts of tobacco control policies on smoking cessation. The complete listing of parameter
estimates is shown in Table A2 of Appendix A. The first column (1) shows the results of
ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation. The remaining two columns (2 and 3) show the results
of two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimation, where real price was treated as endogenous and
real cigarette tax was included as an exogenous instrument. In particular, column (2) shows the
results of the first stage equation, in which the dependent variable was the logarithm of real
price, while column (3) shows the estimated effects on quitting smoking.
        With OLS estimation, the coefficient of the real price variable was not significant.
However, our treatment of real price as endogenous (column 3) gave a significant coefficient
with the theoretically expected positive sign. In particular, a unit increase in the log real price
was found to increase the probability of quitting by 0.143. At the sample mean value of the
dependent variable equal to 0.368 (see Table A1), our 2SLS model gave an estimated price
                                                    ⎛ 1 ⎞ ⎛ dq ⎞ ⎛ 1 ⎞
elasticity of third-trimester quitting equal to ε = ⎜ ⎟ ⎜          ⎟ =⎜      ⎟ ( 0.143) = 0.39 .
                                                    ⎝ q ⎠ ⎝ d ln P ⎠ ⎝ 0.368 ⎠
        The estimated effect of each non-price nationwide tobacco control policy was statistically
significant with a positive sign. The earlier policies that took effect during 2007–2009 had larger
quantitative impacts than subsequent measures entering into effect during 2010–2012. In
particular, in column (3) (2SLS), the combination of the single presentation rule and the third
round of package warnings, which entered into effect in February 2009, had the largest estimated
impact, with an absolute increase of 14 percentage points in the quit rate. The presence of an
agreement between the National Resource Fund (FNR) and the healthcare provider for the
diagnosis and treatment of tobacco dependence during the year in which the mother gave birth
had a statistically significant positive impact of 5 percentage points.

                                                                                                      20
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                            29-Jan-2014



        The first stage estimates of our 2SLS model (column 2) show a significant positive
coefficient of the log real tax, supporting its validity as an instrument for log real price. The
significant negative coefficients of the first three non-price tobacco control measures, enacted
during 2007–2009, suggest that the tobacco industry responded to these measures by moderating
its pre-tax price.
        Figure 5 shows the contribution of different groups of explanatory variables to the overall
trend in quit rates. All data are plotted according to the year corresponding to each woman’s
third trimester of pregnancy. The circles show the observed quit rates. Line (1) shows the
predicted values from our 2SLS model, as given in Table 1. The other plotted lines, each
annotated by a number in parenthesis, show the predicted quit rate as the following groups of
explanatory values were successively held constant at their mean values for 2007: (2) all non-
price policy measures; (3) real cigarette price; (4) the presence of an agreement for treating
nicotine addiction, as well as all maternal characteristics other than the fixed effects for the site
of prenatal care. Comparison of the four line segments permits us to observe the cumulative
effects of different groups of explanatory variables over time, taking the midpoint of 2007 as the
starting point and the midpoint of 2012 as the ending point.
        It is evident from Figure 5 that the non-price nationwide tobacco control measures were
responsible for the vast proportion of the observed rise in quit rates during 2007-2012. The
observed quit rate increased from 15.4% in 2007 to 41.6% in 2012, while the corresponding
predicted values were 15.3% in 2007 and 41.5% in 2012 (curve 1). Setting all non-price
nationwide tobacco control measures to their 2007 mean values reduced the predicted quit rate in
2012 to 15.8% (curve 2). Setting both the non-price nationwide measures and real cigarette price
to their 2007 mean values further reduced the predicted quit rate to 13.1% (curve 3). Eliminating
the influence of all explanatory variables except the fixed effects for each site of care reduced the
predicted quit rate to 12.5% in 2012 (curve 4).3
        The minor contribution of price to the observed rise in quit rates was due in great part to
the relatively small net increase in mean real price. Specifically, during 2007–2012, the mean


3
 The 2-percentage-point decline between 2008–2009 in curve 4 was attributable to a substantial drop in the
proportion of pregnant smokers attending a particular health center. As a result of changes in the national health
system, this health center had attracted a large number of nonsmoking adolescent patients who effectively crowded
out many pregnant smokers.

                                                                                                                 21
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                               29-Jan-2014



logarithm of real price increased by 0.19 (equivalent to a 20-percent increase in real price). With

an estimated price coefficient of δˆ = 0.143 , the estimated net change in the quit rate due to price
would be 2.7 percentage points. This is to be compared to an absolute predicted increase of
26.2 = 41.5 − 15.3 percentage points during 2007-2012.4
         Nor did the contractual agreements between the National Resource Fund and healthcare
providers appear to have played a major role in the overall increase in smoking cessation during
pregnancy, despite the significant coefficient ( γˆ = 0.047 ) observed in Model 2 (Table 1). Within
the complete SIP registry, the estimated proportion of women who received care at health centers
with FNR agreements went from 35% in 2007 to 32% in 2012. Within our sample of pregnant
smokers, the corresponding participation rates were 27% in 2007 and 24% in 2012. Our inability
to identify agreements between the FNR and some public health centers may explain part of the
difference in penetration between smokers and the entire population.
         In addition to the results displayed in Table 1 and Figure 5, we ran a wide variety of
robustness checks, as described above in the Methods section. Our findings, which are detailed
in Table D1 in Appendix D, were generally consistent with our principal results.

Birth Weight
         Table 2 shows our principal regression results for birth weight, based on equation (2)
above. The complete results are given in Table A2 of Appendix A. Column (1) shows the results
of our OLS regression of birth weight (measured in grams) on the fact of quitting, along with the
same maternal and site-specific covariates used in our regression model for quitting (Table 1).
According to our OLS estimate, quitting smoking by the third trimester was associated with an
increase of 122 grams in birth weight.
         Columns (2) and (3) present the results of our 2SLS estimation procedure. Column (2), in
particular, shows the first stage, in which the fact of quitting is a linear function of all maternal
and site-specific covariates, as well as the following seven additional instruments: the five non-
price nationwide policies, the log real cigarette tax, and the presence of a tobacco treatment
agreement with the health center during the year of delivery. All instruments had significant


4
 This calculation, which is based on annual averages, does not take into account the increase in real price within the
year 2007. However, the change in logarithm of real price from January 2007 through December 2012 was 0.23,
which would yield an estimated increase in the quit rate of 3.3 percentage points. See Table 3 below for an
alternative calculation of the mean population-attributable effects of each tobacco control policy.
                                                                                                                    22
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                             29-Jan-2014



positive coefficients. Moreover, all tests rejected the hypotheses of weak instruments or over-
identification. The application of 2SLS, based on the foregoing instruments, increased the
estimated impact of quitting smoking to 163 grams (column 3).
        The results in Table 2 permit us to calculate the mean population-level impact on birth
weight of each of the tobacco control measures used as instruments. These calculations are
shown in Table 3. Column (1) reproduces the coefficients of the seven instruments from the first-
stage regression in Table 2. Column (2) shows the mean change in each policy variable during
the entire observation period 2007–2012, that is, the sample mean value less its pre-2007 base
value. Column (3) computes the mean population-level impact on the probability of quitting as
the product of columns (1) and (2). Column (4) computes the mean population-level impact on
birth weight as the product of column (3) and the estimate of 163 grams derived from Table 2.

Quitting, Relapse, and Repeat Quitting, 2007–2012
        For women with more than one pregnancy during 2007–2012, we could also assess rates
of relapse and other transitions in smoking status from one pregnancy to another. Based on
unique identifiers, we located 37,521 records among 18,325 women who had at least two
pregnancies. Within this sample, we defined three mutually exclusive states: (1) did not smoke
during pregnancy; (2) smoked during pregnancy but had quit by the third trimester; and (3)
smoked during pregnancy but had not quit by the third trimester.
        Table 4 shows the resulting transition matrix. An estimated 89.9 percent of women who
did not smoke in a prior pregnancy remained nonsmokers in their subsequent pregnancy. Among
those who smoked but did not quit in a prior pregnancy, 36.8 percent were either nonsmokers or
quit smoking during the next pregnancy. Among women who had quit smoking in a prior
pregnancy, 51.2 percent remained nonsmokers, while 48.8 percent were found to have relapsed
in their subsequent pregnancy. However, within the relapsing group, the probability of quitting
once again in the next pregnancy was 0.199 0.488 = 40.8 percent.

Discussion
        Since 2005, Uruguay has embarked on an unprecedented nationwide tobacco control
campaign. In order to assess the impact of the campaign, we analyzed Uruguay’s comprehensive
nationwide registry of pregnancies ending in a live birth during 2007–2012. We focused sharply
on smoking cessation among those women who reported smoking at any time during pregnancy,
                                                                                                  23
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                             29-Jan-2014



as well as the consequences of smoking cessation for birth weight. We observed a striking
increase in the proportion of pregnant smokers who had quit by their third trimester, from 15% in
2007 to 42% in 2012 (Figure 3). In an econometric analysis of individual-level data on nearly
29,000 pregnant smokers, we found that the tobacco control campaign, taken as a whole, was in
fact responsible for the marked increase in quit rates. We were able to identify a quantitative
impact of price, with an estimated elasticity of quitting on the order of 0.4, similar to that
observed in demand studies of the general population. However, we found that price increases
explained only a small proportion of the overall rise in smoking cessation during pregnancy
(Figure 5). This was due in great part to the reaction of tobacco manufacturers, who responded to
tax increases and non-price policies by moderating their pretax prices. To the contrary, nearly all
of the observed increase in quit rates from 2007–2012 could be explained by a series of non-
price nationwide tobacco control measures, including rotating pictograms with warnings on
cigarette packs, a ban on almost all tobacco advertising, and the restriction of all cigarette brands
to a “single presentation” (Figures 1 and 2). The latter measure, in particular, appeared to have
had the largest quantitative impact on quit rates (Table 1). Based upon our results, the “single
presentation” rule in combination with the third round of rotating images had a quantitative
impact equivalent to a 168-percent increase in real price.5
         Numerous economic studies of the determinants of tobacco use have concentrated on the
effects of two factors: price and restrictions on smoking in public spaces and private workspaces.
Specialists in marketing and consumer psychology have conducted many experimental studies of
the influence of cigarette pack design on smokers’ perceptions. We are unaware, however, of any
prior economic evaluations, based on individual-level data on actual smoking behavior, of the
impacts of the non-price tobacco control measures studied in this paper.
         In a study of women who had more than one pregnancy, we documented the presence of
significant recidivism. During the 2007–2012, about half of the women who quit smoking in the
third trimester were reported to be smoking again at the onset of prenatal care in a subsequent
pregnancy. A significant proportion of those who relapsed subsequently quit during the next
pregnancy (Table 3). We did not have sufficient data to test whether the rate of relapse after

5
 From Table 1, the estimated impact of tobacco control policy k = 3 on the probability of quitting was β̂ 3 = 0.141,
while the marginal effect of a change in logarithm of real price δˆ = 0.143 . The impact of policy k = 3 is thus
                                               (      )
equivalent to multiplying the real price by exp β̂ 3 δˆ = 2.68 .
                                                                                                                  24
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



giving birth had changed over time. Still, our analysis of the impact on birth weight indicated
that cessation in the third trimester, even if impermanent, had a substantial impact on neonatal
health. Permanent cessation of smoking remains an important public health goal.
        The deceleration in the upward trend of the quit rate after 2010 (Figure 3) is consistent
with diminishing marginal returns to tobacco control policies. One interpretation is that during
the 5-year period from 2007-2012, the subpopulation of women of reproductive age who were
most susceptible to Uruguay’s sequence of tobacco policies was gradually being exhausted. This
explanation focuses on the extensive margin. Another interpretation is that each successive
tobacco control measure had a smaller marginal impact for each woman. This explanation
focuses on the intensive margin. By our estimates, those non-price nationwide measures entering
into force during 2007–2009 had substantially larger effects on quitting than those enacted later
(Table 1). What we cannot determine from this study are two critical counterfactuals – namely,
what would have been the impact on quit rates if the order of these measures had been reversed
or if the time intervals between them had increased.
        In Table 1, we found that the combination of the single presentation rule and the third
round of warnings increased the rate of quitting by 14.1 percentage points. This coefficient was
significantly larger than those estimated for the second round (7.9 percentage points), the
comprehensive law banning nearly all advertising (7.7 percentage points), the 80% rule
combined with the fourth round (2.9 percentage points) and the fifth round (3.1 percentage
points). The single presentation rule effectively went into effect at the same time as the third
round of rotating images on cigarette packs, while the third round was immediately followed by
the fourth, which was in turn coincident with the 80% rule (Figure 1). Unless we made overly
strong assumptions about the common mean impact of the warnings, we could not distinguish
the effect of the single presentation rule from the third round (nor the effect of the 80% rule from
the fourth round). Nonetheless, there are reasons to believe that the single presentation rule was
by itself a critically important measure. A manufacturer that previously marketed both red and
gold varieties of the same brand had to choose between the two, thus alienating one or another
group of previously loyal customers. The same would apply to the choice between plain and
menthol varieties of the same brand.
        We do not see the tobacco control policies adopted by the Uruguayan government as
subject to significant policy endogeneity. Once Uruguay’s legislature ratified the Framework
                                                                                                    25
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



Convention on Tobacco Control, the Ministry of Public Health essentially followed a roadmap
established by the FCTC. On the other hand, we uncovered strong evidence that the conduct of
tobacco manufacturers was in fact an endogenous response to governmental policies. We found,
in particular, that the industry reduced price in response to those non-price tobacco control
measures enacted during 2007–2009 (Table 1). Endogenous responses of the tobacco industry to
state and nationwide tax increases have been previously documented in the U.S. (Harris 1987,
Harris, Connolly et al. 1996).
        At the individual level, the smoking cessation programs established under agreement with
the FNR had a significant effect on the probability of quitting (Table 1). The relatively low,
declining penetration of these programs, however, resulted in a small attributable impact at the
population level (Figure 5). Our findings suggest that enhanced targeting of healthcare providers,
as well as increased recruitment of patients, could have a high payoff. We cannot address here
the cost-effectiveness of programs targeted at healthcare providers relative to national level
policies.
        As noted above, some economists have suggested that the impact of smoking cessation
during pregnancy on birth weight, as estimated from cross-sectional databases, is exaggerated by
the presence of unobserved heterogeneity. That is, a woman who tends to engage in risky
behaviors will continue to smoke during pregnancy and have lower weight babies. However, the
presence of unobserved heterogeneity can also result in an understatement of the impact of
smoking cessation. Thus, a woman who encounters complications in the third trimester, such as
intrauterine growth retardation, will quit smoking and have a lower weight baby. Our OLS
estimate of the effect of quitting on birth weight was 122 grams (95% CI, 108–136). When we
used Uruguay’s tobacco control policies as instruments for quitting smoking, our 2SLS estimate
was 163 grams (95% CI, 40–285). While our 2SLS estimate reinforces the conclusions that
smoking cessation during pregnancy, even in the third trimester, has a significant positive effect
on birth weight, the confidence interval surrounding that estimate is too wide to draw definitive
conclusions about the direction of bias, if any, in the OLS estimate.

Study Limitations
        Our study has several limitations. We could not evaluate the impacts of tobacco control
measures prior to 2007, as the old SIP registry did not report data on smoking separately by

                                                                                                   26
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



trimester. Only 15 percent of pregnant women quit smoking during their third trimester in 2007
(Figure 3). This finding might suggest that those measures enacted prior to 2007 – including the
first round of package warnings and the nationwide regulations on smoke-free public and private
spaces, both of which went into effect in 2006 (Figure 1) – had little or no effect on the quit rate.
However, our analysis of women with multiple pregnancies (Appendix C) pointed to an
extremely low rate of quitting prior to the initiation of the nationwide tobacco control campaign
in 2005. Moreover, in a cohort of 716 pregnant women attending two maternity clinics in
Montevideo, Uruguay, who were interviewed during January–May 2005, only 5.2 percent
reported thus far having quit smoking during pregnancy (Althabe, Colomar et al. 2008).
        We had data only on temporal variations in the nationwide real price of legally sold
cigarettes and no reliable data on the prices of contraband cigarettes. Nonetheless, we
constructed an indicator variable for those healthcare centers located along the international
borders with Argentina and Brazil, where the possibility of increased contraband sales might
result in effectively lower prices. This indicator variable, when interacted with price, had no
significant effect on the quit rate (Appendix D, Table D1, column (4)).
        The data on smoking in the SIP registry were self-reported. The use of such self-reported
data can potentially lead to measurement errors. Nonetheless, a number of authors have found a
strong correlation between self-reported cigarette consumption and objectively measured levels
of nicotine metabolites (Castellanos, Munoz et al. 2000, Althabe, Colomar et al. 2008, Himes,
Stroud et al. 2013). Uruguay’s tobacco control campaign in all likelihood increased the social
pressure for a pregnant woman to deny smoking when queried by her obstetrician. If a pregnant
smoker falsely denied smoking at all, from her first prenatal visit onward, she would not enter
into our analytic sample of smokers. If she admitted smoking initially, but then falsely stated that
she had quit, inclusion of her case would tend to overstate the quit rate.
        Our analysis did not explicitly take account of the substantial growth in real per capita
income that took place in Uruguay during 2007–2012 (World Bank 2013). Nor did it consider
possible changes in attitudes and perceptions about the risks of smoking independent of those
brought about by Uruguay’s anti-smoking campaign. To the extent that cigarettes are a normal
good, an increase in incomes would tend to enhance demand and thus decrease quit rates.
Argentina, a country with a common international border, language and culture, experienced a
comparable rise in real incomes during this period, but did not launch a nationwide tobacco
                                                                                                    27
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



control campaign until 2011. As we have previously noted, consumption of cigarettes among
adolescents and the general population declined substantially more in Uruguay than Argentina
(Abascal, Esteves et al. 2012).

Conclusions
        A series of nationwide tobacco control measures adopted in Uruguay was associated with
a marked increase in the proportion of pregnant smokers who quit during their third trimester,
from 15% in 2007 to 42% in 2012. The accumulated evidence strongly points to a causal
relationship. In an econometric study of individual-level data derived from a comprehensive
national registry of pregnancies during 2007–2012, we estimated the separate quantitative
contribution of each of the country’s major anti-smoking policies. These included the
establishment of units to treat nicotine dependence at health centers, a comprehensive tobacco
control law that banned nearly all advertising, changes in cigarette price through tax increases, a
series of rotating pictograms with warnings on each pack, the banning of multiple presentations
of the same brand, and an increase in the size of the required pictograms to 80% of the front and
back of each pack. While each of these policies was found to have a significant impact on the
rate of quitting during pregnancy, the non-price policies dominated.
        Our findings have important implications for future research and for the future design of
tobacco control policies. While we had sufficient data to identify the individual contributions of
price and non-price tobacco control policies, we were unable to assess possible synergies
between them. Nor were we able to address critical questions concerning the order and temporal
spacing of tobacco control policies. These should be core areas for future investigation. At the
same time, our findings strongly suggest that non-price policies can have an important impact in
reducing tobacco use. Such policies include not only those directed to the consumer, but also to
the healthcare provider.

Acknowledgments
        We acknowledge valuable inputs from	  Winston Abascal, Rafael Aguirre, Wanda Cabella,
Fernando Esponda, Elba Estévez, Marinés Figueroa, Ana Lorenzo, Luis Mainero, and Giselle
Tomasso. The opinions expressed in this paper are ours and ours alone.




                                                                                                   28
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



Financial Support
        We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Bloomberg Foundation through
an unrestricted grant to the Ministry of Public Health (Ministerio de Salud Pública), Uruguay.
Neither the Bloomberg Foundation nor the Ministry of Public Health exerted any influence on
the conduct of this study or the drafting of this manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest
        We have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Author Contributions
        All three coauthors contributed to the conceptualization and design of this study, the
analysis of the data, and the writing of this report.




                                                                                                 29
Text Tables


Table 1. Smoking Cessation Model: Principal Results a,b

                                                                  OLS                      2SLS
                                                                             First Stage      Second Stage
Dependent variable                                                Quit          Log real      Quit smoking
                                                                smoking          price
                                                                   (1)            (2)                  (3)
Log real price per pack                                        0.070                               0.143**
                                                              (0.052)                             (0.061)
Second round of package warnings                               0.081***        -0.088***           0.079***
                                                              (0.023)         (0.004)             (0.024)
Comprehensive tobacco control law                              0.073***        -0.027***           0.077***
                                                              (0.019)         (0.001)             (0.019)
Third round of package warnings / single-presentation
rule                                                           0.152***        -0.036***           0.141***
                                                              (0.027)         (0.005)             (0.028)
Fourth round of package warnings / 80% coverage rule           0.038***         0.030***           0.029***
                                                              (0.010)         (0.002)             (0.011)
Fifth round of package warnings                                0.028***         0.004***           0.031***
                                                              (0.008)         (0.001)             (0.008)
Tobacco treatment agreement at site of prenatal care           0.047**         -0.009***           0.047**
                                                              (0.021)         (0.002)             (0.020)
Log real tax per pack                                                        0.501***
                                                                             (0.007)
Maternal and pregnancy characteristics                             yes             yes                 yes
Site of care fixed effects                                         yes             yes                 yes
Constant                                                       -0.314        2.316                 -0.604**
                                                              (0.212)        (0.028)***           (0.246)

a. Coefficients and standard errors in parentheses. *** = p < 0.01; ** = p < 0.05; * = p < 0.10
b. Based on a sample of 28,597 pregnant smokers during 2007–2012.
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                       29-Jan-2014



Table 2. Birth Weight: Principal Regression Results a,b,c

                                                                OLS                          2SLS
                                                                               First Stage     Second Stage
Dependent variable                                             Birth weight       Quit         Birth weight
                                                                                Smoking
                                                                   (1)             (2)              (3)
Quit smoking                                                   122.102***                       162.735***
                                                                 (7.250)                         (62.505)
Second round of package warnings                                                0.067***
                                                                                 (0.025)
Comprehensive tobacco control law                                               0.073***
                                                                                 (0.019)
Third round of package warnings / single-presentation rule                      0.137***
                                                                                 (0.029)
Fourth round of package warnings / 80% coverage rule                            0.033***
                                                                                 (0.010)
Fifth round of package warnings                                                 0.031***
                                                                                 (0.008)
Tobacco treatment agreement at site of prenatal care                             0.048**
                                                                                 (0.021)
Log real tax per pack                                                            0.071**
                                                                                 (0.031)
Maternal and pregnancy characteristics                             yes             yes             yes
Site of care fixed effects                                         yes             yes             yes
Constant                                                       2923.694***      -0.272**       2912.188***
                                                                 (40.256)        (0.108)         (44.052)

a. Coefficients and standard errors in parentheses. *** = p < 0.01; ** = p < 0.05; * = p < 0.10
b. Based on a sample of 28,563 pregnant smokers during 2007–2012.
c. For tests of weak instruments and over-identification of instruments, see notes to Table A3.




                                                                                                          31
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                  29-Jan-2014




Table 3. Calculation of Mean Population-Level Impacts of Each Tobacco Control Policy

Policy Variable                                          1st Stage     Mean    Population   Population
                                                        Coefficient   Change    Effect:      Effect:
                                                                                 Quit         Birth
                                                                                             Weight
                                                           (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)
Second round of package warnings                          0.067       0.105      0.007         1.1
Comprehensive tobacco control law                         0.073       0.964      0.070        11.5
Third round of package warnings / single presentation     0.137       0.877      0.120        19.6
Fourth round of package warnings / 80% coverage rule      0.033       0.654      0.022         3.5
Fifth round of package warnings                           0.031       0.209      0.006         1.1
Tobacco treatment agreement at site of prenatal care      0.048       0.038      0.002         0.3
Log real tax per pack                                     0.071       0.866      0.061        10.0
Total Effect                                                                     0.289        47.1

(1) From Table 2, Column (2)
(2) Sample mean during 2007–2012 less baseline value at end of 2006
(3) Column (1) × Column (2)
(4) Column (3) × 163 grams (from Table 2, Column (3))




                                                                                                         32
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                     29-Jan-2014




Table 4. Transition Probabilities during 2007–2012.a

                                 Did not         Smoked and        Smoked and          Number of
                                 smoke b           quit c          did not quit d     transitions e

                                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

 Did not smoke                    0.899             0.037              0.064          15,134

 Smoked and quit                  0.512             0.199              0.289           1,024

 Smoked and did not quit          0.252             0.116              0.632           3,038


    a. Calculated from 37,521 records among 18,325 women with at least two pregnancies, representing
       a total of 19,196 transitions between pregnancies. The rows represent the woman’s smoking state
       in the prior pregnancy. Columns (1) through (3) represent the same woman’s smoking state in her
       subsequent pregnancy. Column (4) shows the number of transitions between pregnancies. In each
       row, the transition probabilities in columns (1) through (3) add to 1.0, subject to rounding error.
    b. Recorded as not smoking in all three trimesters.
    c. Recorded as smoking in at least one trimester, but not smoking in the third trimester.
    d. Recorded as smoking in at least one trimester, but either smoking or unknown smoking status in
       third trimester.
    e. The total number of transitions between pregnancies (19,196) exceeds the total number of women
       (18,325) because some women had more than two pregnancies during 2007–2012.




                                                                                                        33
Text Figures



                                                            3rd round of
                                                            package warnings.
                     Comprehensive tobacco
                                                            Brands restricted to
                           control legislation.
                                                            a single presentation.
                       All advertising except
                       point-of-sale banned.                         4th round of
                                                                     package warnings.
                                                                     Warnings must cover
                             2nd round of                            80% of both front & back.
                        package warnings.

              1st round of                                                            5th round of
      package warnings.                                                               package warnings.
    Warnings must cover
 50% of both front & back.
                                                                                                 6th round of
       Smoking prohibited                                                                        package warnings.
     in all enclosed public
    spaces and all public
 and private work spaces.



                 2005     2006      2007      2008   2009    2010     2011     2012    2013      2014


Figure 1. Timeline of Nationwide Non-Price Tobacco Control Measures. The blue text refers to
the deadlines for each of the six rounds of rotating package warnings, while the red text refers to
other tobacco control measures.
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                 29-Jan-2014



                                                                    “Tobacco smoke makes

                                        “What life did you
                                           give him?”



            “No matter how you look




                                                    “Smoking,
                                                                           “In what stage of the
                                                                             disease are you?”
   “Did you ask him if he
    wanted to smoke?”




     2005      2006     2007    2008     2009     2010       2011   2012    2013     2014

Figure 2. Timeline of Six Rounds of Rotating Package Warnings. Each round displays only one
of several mandated images. The relative sizes of the images correspond to their relative sizes on
each pack, with the last three rounds reflecting the required increase from 50% to 80% of the
front and back surfaces.




                                                                                                    35
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                       29-Jan-2014




                                            40
          Percent Quit by Third Trimester
                                            30
                                            20
                                            10
                                            0




                                                 2007   2008   2009          2010   2011   2012
                                                                      Year



Figure 3. Annual Proportion of Current Smokers Who Had Quit Smoking by the Third
Trimester. The data are plotted in relation to the year containing the midpoint of each woman’s
third trimester. The capped vertical bars represent 95% confidence intervals. The estimates were
derived from 28,597 observations in the analytic sample for our regression models in Table 1.




                                                                                                          36
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                                                             29-Jan-2014




                                                      80
          Uruguayan Pesos per Pack of 20 Cigarettes


                                                      70
                                                      60
                  (Base = December 2010)
                                                      50



                                                                    Real Price
                                                      40
                                                      30




                                                                    Real Taxes
                                                                  (Excise + VAT)
                                                      20




                                                                                          A B      C   D     E    F          G      H
                                                      10
                                                      0




                                                           2001      2003          2005     2007           2009       2011       2013
                                                                                            Year



Figure 4. Real Price and Real Taxes per Pack of 20 Cigarettes, 2001–2012. The vertical lines
show the timing of non-price nationwide policy measures, as described in Figure 1. A: Smoking
prohibited in all enclosed public spaces and all public and private workspaces. B: 1st round of
package warnings. C = 2nd round of package warnings. D: Comprehensive tobacco control
legislation. E: 3rd round of package warnings; brands restricted to a single presentation. F: 4th
round of package warnings; warnings must cover 80% of front and back. G: 5th round of
package warnings. H: 6th round of package warnings.




                                                                                                                                                37
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                              29-Jan-2014




                                                                            Observed
                                                                            Quit Rates
                                                                                                   (1)

                                           40
         Percent Quit by Third Trimester
                                           30
                                           20




                                                                                                  (2)
                                                                                                  (3)
                                                                                                  (4)
                                           10
                                           0




                                                2007   2008   2009          2010         2011   2012
                                                                     Year



Figure 5. Decomposition of the Effects of Groups of Explanatory Variables on the Predicted Quit
Rate, 2007–2012. All data are plotted according to the year corresponding to each woman’s third
trimester of pregnancy. The circles show the observed quit rates. Line (1) shows the predicted
values from our 2SLS estimates, as given in column 3 of Table 1. The other plotted lines, each
annotated by a number in parenthesis, show the predicted quit rate as the following groups of
explanatory values were successively held constant at their mean values for 2007: (2) all non-
price policy measures; (3) real cigarette price; (4) the presence of an agreement for treating
nicotine addiction, as well as all maternal characteristics other than the fixed effects for the site
of prenatal care.




                                                                                                                 38
 Appendix A. Smoking Cessation: Descriptive Statistics and Regression Results
 Table A1. Descriptive Statistics of Analytic Sample of Smokers, 2007–2012.a

                                                                                     Sample   Sample
Variable Name b        Variable Definition   c , d, e
                                                                                      Mean      S.D.
Outcomes
QUIT *                 Not smoking in third trimester                                 0.368    0.482
BIRTH WEIGHT           Birth weight                                                   3157       556
Price variables
                       Logarithm of real price per pack (Uruguayan pesos, base =
LOGPRICE
                       Dec-2010)                                                      4.162    0.100
                       Logarithm of real tax per pack (Uruguayan pesos, base =
LOGTAX
                       Dec-2010) †                                                    3.792    0.154
Tobacco-Control Measures
ROUND2 *               Second round of package warnings (8-Dec-2007)                  0.105    0.307
LAW *                  Comprehensive tobacco control law (6-Mar-2008)                 0.964    0.187
                       Third round of package warnings and single-presentation
ROUND3_SINGLE *
                       rule (14-Feb-2009)                                             0.877    0.329
                       Fourth round of package warnings and 80% coverage
ROUND4_80PCT *
                       requirement (28-Feb-2010)                                      0.655    0.476
ROUND5 *               Fifth round of package warnings (07-Jan-2012)                  0.209    0.407
Provider-level Variables
                       Prenatal care site had tobacco treatment agreement with the
AGREEMENT *
                       FNR in the year of delivery                                    0.254    0.435
Maternal characteristics
TRIM1 *                Prenatal care initiated in 1st trimester                       0.574    0.494
AGE<16 *               Age < 16 years                                                 0.016    0.127
AGE17–19 *             Age 17–19 years                                                0.155    0.361
AGE20–34 *             Age 20–34 years §                                              0.726    0.446
AGE35–39 *             Age 35–39 years                                                0.079    0.270
AGE40+ *               Age 40 or more years                                           0.023    0.151
ABORT *                At least one prior abortion                                    0.206    0.405
ABORT_MISS *           Data on prior abortions missing                                0.105    0.307
EDUC_PRIM *            Did not complete secondary school education §                  0.357    0.479
EDUC_SEC *             Completed secondary school education                           0.568    0.495
EDUC_UNIV *            Completed university education                                 0.052    0.222
EDUC_MISS *            Completed education missing                                    0.023    0.151
STAT_SINGLE *          Marital status single                                          0.244    0.429
STAT_MARRIED *         Marital status married §                                       0.165    0.371
STAT_COHABIT *         Marital status cohabitation                                    0.577    0.494
STAT_OTHER *           Marital status other                                           0.015    0.120
STAT_MISS *            Marital status missing                                         0.040    0.197
 Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                   29-Jan-2014



PREECLAMP *      Preeclampsia reported during pregnancy                                0.020           0.141
PREECLAMP_MISS * Preeclampsia report missing                                           0.191           0.393
ECLAMPSIA *      Eclampsia reported during pregnancy                                   0.001           0.029
ECLAMPSIA_MISS * Eclampsia report missing                                              0.192           0.394
DIABETES *       Prior history of diabetes reported                                    0.026           0.159
DIABETES_MISS * Diabetes report missing                                                0.193           0.395
HYPERT *         Prior history of hypertension reported                                0.016           0.125
HYPERT_MISS *    Hypertension report missing                                           0.191           0.393
MALE *           Gender of newborn male                                                0.510           0.500
GENDER_MISS *    Gender of newborn missing                                             0.003           0.054
DELIV0 *         No prior deliveries §                                                 0.369           0.482
DELIV1 *         One prior delivery                                                    0.268           0.443
DELIV2 *         Two prior deliveries                                                  0.160           0.367
DELIV3 *         Three prior deliveries                                                0.089           0.285
DELIV4+ *        Four or more prior deliveries                                         0.113           0.317
DELIV_MISS *     Number of prior deliveries missing                                    0.086           0.281
BMI<18.5 *       Body Mass Index (BMI) at onset of pregnancy < 18.5                    0.087           0.282
BMI18.5–24.9 *   18.5 ≤ BMI < 25 at onset of pregnancy §                               0.724           0.447
BMI25–29.9 *     25 ≤ BMI < 30 at onset of pregnancy                                   0.131           0.338
BMI30+ *         30 ≤ BMI at onset of pregnancy                                        0.058           0.234
BMI_MISS *       BMI at onset of pregnancy missing                                     0.211           0.408
ALCOHOL *        Alcohol use reported during pregnancy ‡                               0.030           0.172
DRUGS *          Use of drugs reported during pregnancy ‡                              0.041           0.198
                 Received prenatal care in the Centro Hospitalario Pereira
CHPR *                                                                                 0.117           0.322
                 Rossell, the largest public obstetric hospital in Uruguay ‡
                 Site of prenatal care located close to the international
FRONTIER *                                                                             0.069           0.253
                 frontier with Brazil or Argentina ‡

a. Based on a sample of 28,597 pregnant smokers during 2007–2012, for whom all principal variables were
observed.
b. Binary variables are marked with (*).
c. Omitted reference categories are marked with (§).
d. Variables used in alternative specifications are marked with (‡).
e. Instrumental variables are marked with (†).




                                                                                                       40
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                             29-Jan-2014




Table A2. Regression Results: Probability of Quitting Smoking by the Third Trimester. a
                                              OLS                             2SLS
                                                             First Stage        Second Stage
                     b
Dependent variable                            Quit smoking   Log real price     Quit smoking
                                              (1)            (2)                (3)
LOGPRICE                                         0.070                             0.143**
                                               (0.052)                           (0.061)
ROUND2                                           0.081***     -0.088***            0.079***
                                               (0.023)       (0.004)             (0.024)
LAW                                              0.073***     -0.027***            0.077***
                                               (0.019)       (0.001)             (0.019)
ROUND3_SINGLE                                    0.152***     -0.036***            0.141***
                                               (0.027)       (0.005)             (0.028)
ROUND4_80PCT                                     0.038***      0.030***            0.029***
                                               (0.010)       (0.002)             (0.011)
ROUND5                                           0.028***      0.004***            0.031***
                                               (0.008)       (0.001)             (0.008)
AGREEMENT                                        0.047**      -0.009***            0.047**
                                               (0.021)       (0.002)             (0.020)
AGE<16                                          -0.005         0.002              -0.005
                                               (0.023)       (0.002)             (0.023)
AGE17–19                                        -0.022***      0.000              -0.022***
                                               (0.008)       (0.001)             (0.008)
AGE35–39                                         0.006        -0.000               0.006
                                               (0.010)       (0.001)             (0.010)
AGE40+                                          -0.004         0.001              -0.004
                                               (0.018)       (0.001)             (0.018)
TRIM1                                            0.069***     -0.001               0.069***
                                               (0.006)       (0.000)             (0.006)
ABORT                                           -0.013*       -0.001              -0.013*
                                               (0.007)       (0.000)             (0.007)
ABORT_MISS                                       0.014        -0.001               0.014
                                               (0.011)       (0.001)             (0.011)
EDUC_SEC                                         0.063***      0.000               0.063***
                                               (0.006)       (0.000)             (0.006)
EDUC_UNIV                                        0.117***      0.001               0.117***
                                               (0.015)       (0.001)             (0.014)
EDUC_MISS                                       -0.028        -0.001              -0.028
                                               (0.018)       (0.002)             (0.018)
                                                                                                41
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                   29-Jan-2014



BMI<18.5                                       -0.050***     0.000      -0.049***
                                              (0.010)      (0.001)     (0.010)
BMI25–29.9                                      0.026***    -0.001       0.026***
                                              (0.008)      (0.001)     (0.008)
BMI30+                                          0.025**     -0.002**     0.025**
                                              (0.012)      (0.001)     (0.012)
BMI_MISS                                       -0.041***     0.000      -0.041***
                                              (0.007)      (0.001)     (0.007)
STAT_COHABIT                                   -0.026***    -0.000      -0.026***
                                              (0.009)      (0.001)     (0.009)
STAT_SINGLE                                    -0.047***    -0.000      -0.047***
                                              (0.010)      (0.001)     (0.010)
STAT_OTHER                                     -0.032       -0.001      -0.032
                                              (0.023)      (0.002)     (0.023)
STAT_MISS                                      -0.039**     -0.002*     -0.039**
                                              (0.017)      (0.001)     (0.016)
PREECLAMP                                       0.077***     0.001       0.077***
                                              (0.021)      (0.001)     (0.021)
PREECLAMP_MISS                                  0.001        0.001       0.002
                                              (0.060)      (0.004)     (0.060)
DELIV1                                         -0.111***    -0.000      -0.111***
                                              (0.008)      (0.001)     (0.008)
DELIV2                                         -0.154***    -0.001      -0.154***
                                              (0.009)      (0.001)     (0.009)
DELIV3                                         -0.192***    -0.000      -0.192***
                                              (0.011)      (0.001)     (0.011)
DELIV4+                                        -0.227***    -0.001      -0.226***
                                              (0.010)      (0.001)     (0.010)
DELIV_MISS                                     -0.029**     -0.000      -0.029**
                                              (0.015)      (0.001)     (0.015)
DIABETES                                        0.050***    -0.002**     0.050***
                                              (0.017)      (0.001)     (0.017)
DIABETES_MISS                                  -0.061**     -0.005      -0.062**
                                              (0.029)      (0.003)     (0.029)
HYPERT                                          0.004        0.003*      0.004
                                              (0.022)      (0.001)     (0.022)
HYPERT_MISS                                    -0.030        0.010**    -0.031
                                              (0.044)      (0.004)     (0.044)
ECLAMPSIA                                       0.035       -0.007       0.035
                                              (0.100)      (0.006)     (0.100)

                                                                                      42
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                   29-Jan-2014



ECLAMPSIA_MISS                                  0.100            -0.008               0.100
                                              (0.072)           (0.006)             (0.071)
MALE                                           -0.006            -0.000              -0.006
                                              (0.005)           (0.000)             (0.005)
GENDER_MISS                                    -0.026             0.001              -0.026
                                              (0.044)           (0.004)             (0.044)
LOGTAX                                                         0.501***
                                                               (0.007)
Site of care fixed effects                    yes              yes                 yes
Constant                                       -0.314          2.316                 -0.604**
                                              (0.212)          (0.028)***           (0.246)

a. Coefficients and standard errors in parentheses. *** = P < 0.01; ** = P < 0.05; * = P < 0.10
b. For variable definitions, see Table A1. Sample size: 28,597 pregnant smokers during 2007–2012.




                                                                                                      43
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                  29-Jan-2014




Table A3. Regression Results: Birth Weight a

                                                                                    2SLS
                                                                                c
                                                      OLS         First stage           Second stage
                     b
Dependent variable                                Birth weight        Quit              Birth weight
                                                       (1)            (2)                    (3)
QUIT                                            122.102***                            162.735***
                                                (7.250)                              (62.505)
AGE<16                                          -54.738**         -0.004              -54.577**
                                               (24.772)          (0.023)             (24.756)
AGE17–19                                        -10.520           -0.022***            -9.629
                                                (9.594)          (0.008)              (9.693)
AGE35–39                                        -85.849***         0.007              -86.212***
                                               (13.556)          (0.010)             (13.532)
AGE40+                                         -113.309***        -0.004             -112.984***
                                               (23.690)          (0.018)             (23.623)
TRIM1                                            43.728***         0.069***            40.622***
                                                (7.011)          (0.006)              (8.480)
ABORT                                           -14.744*          -0.013**            -14.200*
                                                (8.400)          (0.007)              (8.412)
ABORT_MISS                                      -24.987*           0.013              -24.781*
                                               (13.645)          (0.011)             (13.632)
EDUC_SEC                                         37.730***         0.063***            35.050***
                                                (7.356)          (0.006)              (8.425)
EDUC_UNIV                                        24.941            0.117***            19.931
                                               (17.009)          (0.015)             (18.565)
EDUC_MISS                                        35.430           -0.029               36.633
                                               (23.374)          (0.018)             (23.372)
BMI<18.5                                       -152.623***        -0.049***          -150.569***
                                               (11.325)          (0.010)             (11.749)
BMI25–29.9                                      135.777***         0.026***           134.643***
                                                (9.763)          (0.008)              (9.871)
BMI30+                                          192.759***         0.025**            191.608***
                                               (15.787)          (0.012)             (15.842)
BMI_MISS                                        -19.138**         -0.041***           -17.154*
                                                (9.109)          (0.007)              (9.670)
STAT_COHABIT                                     -4.402           -0.026***            -3.600
                                               (10.533)          (0.009)             (10.575)
STAT_SINGLE                                     -32.608***        -0.047***           -30.977**
                                               (12.089)          (0.010)             (12.311)

                                                                                                       44
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                     29-Jan-2014



STAT_OTHER                                     -10.047       -0.032        -8.984
                                              (29.022)      (0.023)      (28.969)
STAT_MISS                                       1.453        -0.039**       3.065
                                              (19.660)      (0.017)      (19.785)
PREECLAMP                                     -212.399***     0.077***   -215.436***
                                              (33.137)      (0.021)      (33.387)
PREECLAMP_MISS                                 -17.404        0.002       -17.059
                                              (94.348)      (0.060)      (93.851)
DELIV1                                          69.555***    -0.111***     74.099***
                                               (9.122)      (0.008)      (11.391)
DELIV2                                          53.491***    -0.154***     59.724***
                                              (11.037)      (0.009)      (14.566)
DELIV3                                          59.408***    -0.193***     67.208***
                                              (13.652)      (0.011)      (17.898)
DELIV4+                                         80.339***    -0.226***     89.481***
                                              (13.815)      (0.010)      (19.543)
DELIV_MISS                                      19.972       -0.030**      21.234
                                              (17.150)      (0.015)      (17.159)
DIABETES *                                     135.748***     0.049***    133.555***
                                              (23.531)      (0.017)      (23.684)
DIABETES_MISS                                  -40.161       -0.063**     -37.887
                                              (36.161)      (0.029)      (36.249)
HYPERT                                         -66.089**      0.004       -66.121**
                                              (32.810)      (0.022)      (32.726)
HYPERT_MISS                                    -99.849*      -0.029       -98.554*
                                              (58.169)      (0.044)      (58.373)
ECLAMPSIA                                     -193.199        0.034      -195.069
                                              (134.957)     (0.101)      (133.526)
ECLAMPSIA_MISS                                 176.203*       0.100       173.702
                                              (105.798)     (0.072)      (105.705)
MALE                                           100.402***    -0.006       100.665***
                                               (6.378)      (0.005)       (6.382)
GENDER_MISS                                    -81.472       -0.064       -78.052
                                              (73.056)      (0.047)      (72.969)
ROUND2                                                        0.067***
                                                            (0.025)
LAW                                                           0.073***
                                                            (0.019)
ROUND3_SINGLE                                                 0.137***
                                                            (0.029)

                                                                                        45
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                 29-Jan-2014



ROUND4_80PCT                                                            0.033***
                                                                      (0.010)
ROUND5                                                                  0.031***
                                                                      (0.008)
AGREEMENT                                                               0.048**
                                                                      (0.021)
LOGTAX                                                                  0.071**
                                                                      (0.031)
Site of care fixed effects                                yes               yes           yes
Constant                                            2923.694***        -0.272**     2912.188***
                                                    (40.256)          (0.108)       (44.052)

a. Coefficients and standard errors in parentheses. *** = P < 0.01; ** = P < 0.05; * = P < 0.10
b. For variable definitions, see Table A1. Sample size: 28,563 pregnant smokers during 2007–2012.
c. First-stage statistics:
Tests for weak instruments:
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F(7, 28374) statistic                               61.13
Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values (Stock and Yogo 2005)
             5% maximal IV relative bias                             19.86
            10% maximal IV relative bias                             11.29
            20% maximal IV relative bias                             6.73
            30% maximal IV relative bias                             5.07
                 10% maximal IV size                                 31.5
                 15% maximal IV size                                 17.38
                 20% maximal IV size                                 12.48
                 25% maximal IV size                                 9.93
Overidentification test of instruments:
Hansen J statistic                                                   4.799
χ (6) P =
  2
                                                                     0.570




                                                                                                    46
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



Appendix B. Computation of Real Cigarette Prices
        The filled circles in Figure B1 represent the monthly mean values of the nominal price of
a pack of the best-selling Nevada cigarettes during October 2007 through May 2013, as derived
from a major online merchandizing outlet in Uruguay (Cavallo 2013). The connected black line
labeled “Nominal Retail Price” shows the fitted values of a regression of the monthly mean
Nevada price on the monthly tobacco component of the consumer price index (“Índice de Precios
del Consumo,” or IPC) extended out of sample to January 2001 (Instituto Nacional de Estadística
2013). Specifically, the fitted regression equation without constant term was: NEVADA = 0.6985
× IPC (standard error of slope = 0.00131, R2 = 0.91).
        The connected brown line labeled “Nominal Excise Tax” shows the monthly nominal
excise tax per pack (“impuesto específico interno,” or IMESI), based on unpublished data from
the Dirección General Impositiva. The light blue line labeled “Nominal Excise Tax + VAT” adds
the value added tax (“impuesto al valor agregado,” or IVA) to the monthly nominal excise tax.
The value added tax was computed as 22% of the price, inclusive of the excise tax.
        Prior to July 2007, tobacco products were excluded from the value added tax. This
exclusion was abruptly eliminated with the fiscal reforms (Law 18.083) that became effective in
that month. During June-July 2007, nominal total taxes increased by approximately 16
Uruguayan pesos per pack, whereas the nominal retail price increased by approximately 7 pesos
per pack. That is, suppliers bore approximately 55 percent of the total tax increase at that point.




                                                                                                      47
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                                     29-Jan-2014




                                                     80
                                                                                             Nominal Retail Price
         Uruguayan Pesos per Pack of 20 Cigarettes
                                                     70
                                                     60
                                                                                                        Nominal
                                                                                               Excise Tax + VAT
                                                     50
                                                     40




                                                                                             Nominal Excise Tax
                                                     30
                                                     20
                                                     10
                                                     0




                                                          2001   2003   2005   2007   2009    2011      2013
                                                                               Year



Figure B1. Estimated Nominal Retail Price, Nominal Excise Tax, and Total Taxes per Pack,
Monthly, 2001–2012. The filled circles represent the nominal average retail price of a pack of 20
Nevada cigarettes during October 2007 through May 2013. The connected black line at the top
shows the fitted values of a regression of mean Nevada price on the tobacco component of the
consumer price index, extended to January 2001. The light blue and brown lines show nominal
total taxes and nominal excise taxes, respectively.




                                                                                                                        48
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                                 29-Jan-2014



Appendix C. Analysis of Potential Biases in the Measurement of Quit Rates
         In this Appendix, we investigate two potential sources of bias in the measurement of quit
rates: non-response bias, and selection bias due to changes in the timing of the first prenatal visit.

Non-response Bias
         Figure C1 shows the annual trends during 2000–2012 in the proportion of pregnant
women reporting that they currently smoke (“Prevalence,” left axis) and the mean gestational age
at initiation of prenatal care (“Weeks Gestation,” right axis). These trends are plotted in relation
to the calendar year in which the mother gave birth. The prevalence calculations are based on the
mother’s smoking status at the first prenatal visit, which was the only data on smoking reported
under the old SIP system (2000–2006). After remaining stable at approximately 21% during
2000–2005, the prevalence of smoking at the onset of prenatal care declined to 19% in the year
2006, 17% in 2007, and 16% in 2008. Thereafter, smoking prevalence appears to have increased
to approximately 18% during 2009–2012. Concurrently, the mean gestational age at initiation of
prenatal care declined progressively from 16.3 weeks in 2000 to 15.2 weeks in 2005, to 11.5
weeks in 2012.
         Figure C2 reexamines the trend in smoking prevalence during 2004–2012, but with a
more refined timeline divided into calendar months. The dark blue-filled points (“Prevalence,”
left axis) show the proportion of pregnant women reporting that they currently smoke, as
recorded at the time of the first prenatal visit. By contrast, the red-filled points (“Proportion
Missing”, right axis) show the proportion of pregnancy records with missing data on smoking
status at the onset of care. Both time series are plotted in relation to the calendar month in which
the mother gave birth.
         The apparent increase in smoking prevalence during the full year 2009 (Figure C1)
corresponded to a discrete jump in smoking prevalence in April 2009 (Figure C2). This abrupt
increase in prevalence occurred nine months after the Uruguayan government initiated its system
of financial incentives to meet specific performance goals (“metas”), including goals for the
completion of perinatal records in the SIP registry.6 Moreover, the abrupt increase in prevalence
was nearly coincident with a marked decline in the proportion of missing values for smoking
6
  In statistical tests of both the individual level data and the aggregated data, we consistently rejected the hypothesis
that this jump was the result of random variation. In particular, a linear discontinuity regression on quarterly
prevalence data with an ARIMA error structure gave an estimated discrete increase in prevalence of 4.05 percentage
points, with a 95% confidence interval of [3.39, 4.61].
                                                                                                                       49
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



status at the time of initiation of care. During 2000 through early 2009, the proportion of missing
values had gradually increased from approximately 10 to 18% of pregnancy records. By mid
2009, the proportion of missing data was back down to approximately 10%, and by the year
2012, the proportion had fallen to under 5%.
        The discontinuity in the monthly prevalence series, coinciding with new regulatory
incentives to submit more complete registry data, pointed to a non-response bias in the
ascertainment of smoking status at the onset of prenatal care. That is, women whose records
contained missing data in fact had higher smoking rates than those women whose smoking status
was reported. As a result, the abrupt inclusion of previously missing data raised the observed
smoking prevalence in mid 2009 and likely retarded the observed decline in prevalence
thereafter.
        We performed two tests to determine whether the non-response bias observed in the
prevalence data extended to the measurement of quit rates. First, we found no discontinuity
around April 2009 in the corresponding monthly series of quit rates. Second, we reran our
regression model under the strong assumption that all smokers with missing data on smoking
status in the third trimester had not quit. The results, shown in column (5) of Appendix Table D1,
showed somewhat smaller coefficients of the tobacco policy variables. However, within the
precision of our model, these coefficients were indistinguishable from those of our core model,
shown in column (1) of the same table.
        While our tests excluded significant non-response bias in the measurement of quit rates,
there remains a serious problem of non-response bias in the measurement of prevalence rates.
We leave the quantitative analysis of this non-response bias, along with the construction of a
corrected series of prevalence rates, to another report.

Selection Bias
        The progressive decline in the mean gestational age at initiation of prenatal care,
observed in Figure C1 (“Weeks Gestation,” red points, right axis), suggested another potential
source of bias in the measurement of smoking prevalence as a result of earlier observation during
the course of pregnancy. The underlying hypothesis was that pregnant women tend to quit
smoking as soon as they find out that they are pregnant, which typically occurs within the first 15
weeks of gestation. Thus, a woman who arrived for her first prenatal visit at the end of her first

                                                                                                     50
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                    29-Jan-2014



trimester, after she had quit smoking on her own, would report that she was not currently
smoking. But if she were urged to seek prenatal care early in her first trimester, before she quit
smoking on her own, then she would instead report that she was currently smoking at her first
prenatal care visit. What’s more, when she returned for prenatal care in her second trimester, she
would be recorded as having quit smoking.
        We used longitudinal data on successive pregnancies of the same woman to assess the
magnitude of this potential selection bias. Let yim be a binary indicator of the smoking status of
woman i at the time she initiated prenatal care in pregnancy m , where yim = 1 if the woman was
smoking. Let xim denote the corresponding number of weeks of gestation at initiation of prenatal
care. If changes in xim during successive pregnancies were the result of exogenous policies to
encourage early prenatal care, but national-level and provider-level measures to encourage
smoking cessation during pregnancy had no effect on smoking cessation, then the relation
between yim and xim would trace out the natural history of smoking cessation in pregnancy.
        We identified 121,105 pregnancies among 55,026 women who had at least two
pregnancies during 2001–2012 and whose date of initiation of prenatal care and smoking status
upon initiation of care were known. Within this database, we estimated various linear probability
models of the relation between yim and xim , all of which had the functional form:

(C1)    yim = f ( xim ) + ϕ i + ξit

where ϕ i is a fixed effect for woman i and ξit is an error term. In one specification of the

function f ( x ) , we assumed a fixed effect for each week of gestation from x = 4 to x = 40 . The
estimated fixed effects are plotted as individual points in Figure C3. In an alternative
specification, we assumed a linear spline function with a node at 15 weeks gestation:
                 ⎧⎪       θ 0 + θ1 x,           if x ≤ 15
(C2)    f ( x) = ⎨
                    θ + 15θ1 + θ 2 ( x − 15 ) , if x > 15
                  ⎩⎪ 0
The estimated parameters of specification (C2), with standard errors in parentheses, were

θˆ0 = 0.281 ( 0.005 ) , θˆ1 = −0.0034 ( 0.0005 ) , and θˆ2 = −0.00019 ( 0.00023) . Effectively, the
probability of smoking declines absolutely by 0.34 percentage points per week up to the fifteenth




                                                                                                       51
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                               29-Jan-2014



week of gestation. The estimated function f ( x ) of equation (C2) is shown as the piecewise
linear plot in Figure C3.7
         To assess the magnitude of a possible selection bias, for each pregnant woman i , we first
computed xi, max = max { xim } , that is, the week of her most delayed prenatal visit. We then
                        m


                                               (      )
calculated the expectation of Δyim = f xi, max − f ( xim ) across all women i and all pregnancies

m . For the spline model (C2), the overall expectation during 2000–2012 was E [ Δyim ] = 0.0053 ,
that is, the potential selection bias was on the order of 0.53 percentage points. This expectation
varied from 0.3% in 2001 through 0.8% in 2012. These quantities are small in comparison to the
observed 5% absolute decline in smoking prevalence during 2005–2008, as well as the observed
rebound in prevalence in 2009. Accordingly, the data are inconsistent with the hypothesis that
the observed trends in smoking prevalence were simply the result of selection bias due to
changes in the timing of the first prenatal visit.
         Such a selection bias would likewise contribute little to the observed trend in the
proportion of smokers who quit in the third trimester. Consider the extreme case of a woman
who initiated prenatal care at 16.3 weeks gestation in 2000 (the mean for the entire SIP registry
in that year) and, in a subsequent pregnancy, initiated care at 11.5 weeks in 2012 (the
corresponding mean for that year). The model of equation (C2) implies an increase in the
probability of smoking on the first visit from 23% in 2000 to 24% in 2012. Such a 1-percent
increase in prevalence would correspond to a 1 24 ≈ 4 percentage-point increase in the
proportion quitting, as compared to a 27 percentage-point increase in the quit rate actually
observed during 2007–2012 (Figure 3). This calculation also implies a low baseline rate of
quitting during pregnancy prior to the initiation of tobacco control campaign.




7
 When we ran the model (C2) only for women who had at least two pregnancies during 2001–2006, the estimated
parameters were θˆ = −0.279 ( 0.0134 ) , θˆ = −0.0017 ( 0.0011) , and θˆ = −0.00006 ( 0.00042 ) . Thus, the use of
                   0                       1                             2

data confined to 2001–2006 would result in a smaller estimate of potential selection bias, as well as a smaller
estimate of the rate of smoking cessation before 2007.
                                                                                                                     52
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                                                      29-Jan-2014




                                             25




                                                                                                     20
                                                    Prevalence




                                                                                                          at Initiation of Prenatal Care (weeks)
        at Initiation of Prenatal Care (%)
        Prevalence of Current Smoking

                                             20




                                                                                                     18
                                                                                                                   Mean Gestational Age
                                             15




                                                                                                     16
                                             10




                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                     12
                                             5




                                                                                Weeks Gestation




                                                                                                     10
                                             0




                                                  2000   2002    2004   2006   2008   2010    2012




Figure C1. Annual Prevalence of Current Smoking at Initiation of Prenatal Care (“Prevalence,”
blue points, left axis) and Mean Gestational Age at Initiation of Prenatal Care, 2007–2012
(“Weeks Gestation,” red points, right axis). Both data series are plotted in relation to the calendar
year in which each woman gave birth. The calculations were based on 247,721 records in the
old SIP system (2000–2006) and 251,260 records in the new SIP system (2007–2012).




                                                                                                                                                   53
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                                                29-Jan-2014




                                          25
     at Initiation of Prenatal Care (%)                        Prevalence
          Prevalence of Smoking



                                          20
          (Missing Data Excluded)




                                                                                                                           on Smoking at Initiation of Care (%)
                                          15




                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                              Proportion with Missing Data
                                          10




                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                      15
                                          5




                                                                                                                      10
                                          0




                                                              Proportion
                                                              Missing




                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                      0
                                               2004   2005   2006   2007    2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                                                                      Year/Month of Birth



Figure C2. Monthly Trends in the Prevalence of Smoking (“Prevalence”, blue points, left axis)
and the Proportion of Observations with Missing Data on Smoking (“Proportion Missing,” red
points, right axis) at the Initiation of Prenatal Care, 2007–2012. The data are plotted in relation to
the calendar month in which each woman gave birth. The vertical line corresponds to the second
quarter of 2009.




                                                                                                                                                                  54
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                               29-Jan-2014




                                              35
                                              30
         Probability of Current Smoking (%)
                                              25
                                              20
                                              15
                                              10
                                              5
                                              0




                                                   4   8   12   16       20     24        28   32   36   40
                                                                     Weeks of Gestation



Figure C3. Estimated Natural History of Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy. The figure shows
the results of two models estimated on a panel of 55,026 women who had at least two
pregnancies during 2001-2012. In the first model, each week of gestation had a separate fixed
effect, as represented by the blue points. In the second model, the decline in the probability of
smoking was a linear spline function with a node at 15 weeks, as represented by the brown
connected line segment.




                                                                                                                  55
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



Appendix D. Robustness Checks: Smoking Cessation
        In addition to our principal regression results in Tables 1 and 2, we ran a wide variety of
robustness checks. Each of these checks was performed on both our model of smoking cessation
and our model of birth weight. Table D1 summarizes our most salient findings. Each column of
the table represents an alternative regression model, to be described below. The upper panel
shows the corresponding 2SLS estimates of the tobacco control policies in our model of smoking
cessation (“Dependent Variable: Smoking Cessation in the Third Trimester”). The lower panel
shows the corresponding estimated coefficient of quitting, again estimated by 2SLS, in our
model of birth weight (“Dependent Variable: Birth Weight (grams)”).
        First, we tested additional covariates, including reported consumption of alcohol and
drugs during pregnancy (column 2) and an indicator for the location of a healthcare center along
the international border (column 3). In our model of quitting, drug but not alcohol consumption
significantly reduced the probability of quitting. Proximity to international frontiers had no effect
on quitting, nor did women who sought prenatal care in health centers near international borders
have a differential response to price. (Coefficients not shown.) In our model of birth weight, drug
use likewise was associated with lower birth weight, while proximity to international borders had
no effect. (Coefficients not shown.) However, as indicated in columns 2 and 3, the inclusion of
these covariates did not significantly alter the coefficients of the policy variables in our model of
quitting or the coefficient of quitting in our model of birth weight.
        Second, we studied alternative definitions of the dependent variable. In the model of
column 4, we defined quitting as reporting non-smoking in both the second and third trimesters.
With the exception of a statistically insignificant coefficient for the fourth round of warnings
combined with the 80% rule, the results for our model of smoking cessation were
indistinguishable from those of our core model (column 1). However, the change in the
definition of quitting reduced its impact on birth weight from 163 grams (column 1) to 122
grams (column 4). Women who quit only in the third trimester were evidently more likely to
have complications of pregnancy, including intrauterine growth retardation. When these women
were included in our core model, the 2SLS estimates effectively corrected for this source of
unobserved heterogeneity (Table 2). But with the exclusion of these women from the group of
quitters, our 2SLS estimate of the impact of quitting did not differ from the OLS estimate
(column 4).
                                                                                                   56
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014



        In column 5, by contrast, we treated those pregnant smokers with unknown smoking
status in the third trimester as continuing smokers. As noted in Appendix C above, this strong
assumption resulted in somewhat smaller coefficients of the tobacco control variables in our
model of quitting, but these coefficients remained statistically significant. On the other hand, this
alternative definition significantly reduced the impact of quitting on birth weight. This finding
suggests that many women with unknown smoking status in the third trimester were not, in fact,
continuing smokers.
        Third, we explored changes in our analytic sample. In the model of column 6, we
excluded women who had prenatal care at the Centro Hospitalario Pereira Rossell, the largest
public maternity hospital in the country. In alternative robustness checks, we excluded women
whose third trimester occurred in 2007 (column 7), as well as women who did not initiate care in
the first trimester (column 8).
        Data on changes in smoking practices during pregnancy became available only with the
introduction of a new prenatal questionnaire and coding system in 2007. However, during 2007–
2008, many providers of prenatal care were still making the transition from the old to the new
SIP system. Our removal of those providers still in transition resulted in smaller sample sizes for
those years. (See the larger confidence intervals in Figure 3.) Under the old SIP system, in which
a pregnant woman reported her smoking status only in the trimester of her first prenatal visit, a
patient who reported smoking when she received prenatal care in the first trimester could be
falsely coded as smoking in all three trimesters. Consequently, incorrect retention on our part of
records coded under the old SIP system could result in understatement of the quit rate in the first
two years.
        Nonetheless, exclusion of women from the Pereira Rossell hospital, which did not make
the transition to the new SIP system until 2009, had little discernable effect on the policy-related
coefficients in our model of quitting or on the effect of quitting on our model of birth weight
(column 6). Exclusion of women whose third trimester occurred in 2007 (column 7) had a
marked effect on estimated price coefficient, as this exclusion effectively removed observations
surrounding the tax increase in mid 2007 (Figure 4). It also reduced the estimated impact of the
agreements for treating nicotine dependence, but otherwise had little effect on the estimates in
both our quitting and birth weight models.


                                                                                                    57
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                29-Jan-2014



        We recognized that our variable corresponding to initiation of care in the first trimester
could be endogenous due to unobserved heterogeneity. To address this possibility, we ran our
model solely on the subset of pregnant smokers who initiated care in the first trimester (column
8). With the exception of the fourth round of warnings combined with the 80% rule as well as a
tobacco treatment agreement at the site of prenatal care, the exclusion of women with later
initiation of care enhanced the policy coefficients in our quitting model and the coefficient of
quitting in our model of birth weight.
        We also ran a number of other robustness checks not highlighted in Table D1. In our core
model, we excluded sites of care in those years when there were fewer than 15 pregnant smokers.
Changing the threshold to 25 smokers had no significant effects on either the tobacco policy
coefficients or the impact of quitting on birth weight. Attempts to identify interactions between
maternal characteristics and tobacco control policies, or between different tobacco control policy
variables yielded insignificant coefficients. We also estimated clustered standard errors based on
year and site of prenatal care, but the coefficients of the tobacco control policy variables in the
quitting equation and the quitting variable in the birth weight equation remained significant.
Finally, in our 2SLS estimates of the birth weight equation, we tested different subsets of
instruments, but the results remained essentially unchanged.
        In our analysis of the probability of quitting during pregnancy, we relied on linear models
(Table 1). A well-known limitation of the linear probability model is that the predicted values of
the dependent variable can fall outside the unit interval. Figure D1 shows the distribution of the
predicted probability of quitting smoking, calculated from our core model of Tables 1 and 2
(repeated in column 1 of Table D1). Only 1.8% of the predicted values of the dependent variable
were situated outside the unit interval.
        We recognize that equation (1) for quitting smoking could have been estimated by
nonlinear methods where the dependent variable is binary but some regressors are endogenous
(Newey 1987). Likewise, we could have used nonlinear methods to estimate equation (2) for
birth weight, where the endogenous regressor is binary (Woolridge 2010). These methods
generally require parametric assumptions about the underlying distribution of a latent variable
that are unverifiable and, if they are incorrectly specified, may lead to inconsistent parameter
estimates. We took advantage of the linear structure of our models to decompose the marked
increase in the observed quit rate into policy-specific components (Figure 3 and Table 3), and to
                                                                                                      58
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                              29-Jan-2014



estimate the mean population-attributable effects of different tobacco control policies on birth
weight (Table 3). Our approach is consistent with recent trends in the use of linear models for
policy evaluations (Angrist and Krueger 2001).




                                                                                                   59
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                               29-Jan-2014




                                   2
                                   1.5
         Percent of Observations
                                   1
                                   .5
                                   0




                                         5      0                      .5             1
                                             Predicted Probability of Quitting



Figure D1. Distribution of Predicted Probabilities of Quitting Based on 2SLS Model. The
histogram shows the percentage distribution of the predicted probability of quitting among
28,597 women who smoked during pregnancy and gave birth during 2007–2012. The proportion
of predicted values outside the unit interval (whose boundary is marked by the vertical red lines)
was 1.8%. The green curve shows the fitted normal density based on the mean and standard
deviation of the predicted probabilities.




                                                                                                  60
Table D1: Robustness Analyses of the Smoking Cessation Model
                                                               Core Model           Additional Covariates             Change in Variable Definitions                  Changes in Analytic Sample
                                                                            Alcohol and drugs International       Quit smoking in Unknown smoking Exclusion of           Exclusion of all   Exclusion of
                                                                                               border and         second trimester status in 3rd      Pereira Rossell    women whose 3rd women not
Dependent variable: Smoking cessation in the third trimester                                   interaction of                       trimester assumed Hospital           trimester occurred initiating care in
                                                                                               international                        to be smoker                         in 2007            1st trimester
                                                                                               border with prices
                                                               (1)          (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)               (7)                 (8)
Dependent variable: Smoking cessation in the third trimester

Log real price per pack                                          0.143**      0.138**            0.136**            0.187***           0.120**            0.189***          0.026               0.215**
                                                               (0.061)      (0.061)            (0.062)            (0.061)            (0.058)            (0.065)           (0.062)             (0.089)
Second round of package warnings                                 0.079***     0.081***           0.078***           0.070***           0.050**            0.078***          0.057               0.120***
                                                               (0.024)      (0.024)            (0.024)            (0.021)            (0.021)            (0.024)           (0.054)             (0.036)
Comprehensive tobacco control law                                0.077***     0.077***           0.077***           0.074***           0.072***           0.080***          0.071***            0.077***
                                                               (0.019)      (0.019)            (0.019)            (0.020)            (0.017)            (0.019)           (0.019)             (0.029)
Third round of package warnings and single presentation          0.141***     0.143***           0.140***           0.107***           0.128***           0.133***          0.134**             0.195***
                                                               (0.028)      (0.028)            (0.028)            (0.025)            (0.025)            (0.028)           (0.056)             (0.042)
Fourth round of package warnings & 80% coverage                  0.029***     0.030***           0.029***           0.010              0.032***           0.026**           0.044***            0.021
                                                               (0.011)      (0.011)            (0.011)            (0.011)            (0.010)            (0.012)           (0.011)             (0.016)
Fifth round of package warnings                                  0.031***     0.031***           0.031***           0.040***           0.030***           0.027***          0.025***            0.040***
                                                               (0.008)      (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.007)            (0.008)           (0.008)             (0.010)
Tobacco treatment agreement at site of prenatal care             0.047**      0.049**            0.047**            0.049**            0.060***           0.046**           0.026               0.033
                                                               (0.020)      (0.020)            (0.020)            (0.020)            (0.019)            (0.020)           (0.022)             (0.029)
Maternal and pregnancy characteristics                         yes          yes                yes                yes                yes                yes               yes                 yes
Site of care fixed effects                                     yes          yes                yes                yes                yes                yes               yes                 yes
N                                                                28597        28597              28597            28597                30728              25237             28130               16422
Dependent variable Birth Weight (grams)

Quit smoking in third trimester                                163.***      174.***            162.***            122.*              109.*              146.**            153.*               183.**
                                                               (63.)        (62.)              (62.)              (70.)              (60.)              (63).             (79.)               (73.)
Maternal and pregnancy characteristics                         yes          yes                yes                yes                yes                yes               yes                 yes
Site of care fixed effects                                     yes          yes                yes                yes                yes                yes               yes                 yes
N                                                              28563        28563              28563              28515              30684              25205             27880               16400

Coefficients and standard errors in parentheses.
* = P < 0.10, ** = P < 0.05, *** = P < 0.01
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                            29-Jan-2014




References
    Abascal, W., E. Esteves, B. Goja, F. Gonzalez Mora, A. Lorenzo, A. Sica, P. Triunfo and J.
E. Harris (2012). "Tobacco control campaign in Uruguay: a population-based trend analysis."
Lancet 380(9853): 1575-1582.
    Abrevaya, J. (2006). "Estimating the effect of smoking on birth outcomes using a matched
panel data approach." Journal of Applied Econometrics 21(4): 489-519.
    Abrevaya, J. and C. M. Dahl (2008). "The effects of birth inputs on birthweight: evidence
from quantile estimation on panel data." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 26(4): 379-
397.
    Adams, E. K., S. Markowitz, V. Kannan, P. M. Dietz, V. T. Tong and A. M. Malarcher
(2012). "Reducing prenatal smoking: the role of state policies." Am J Prev Med 43(1): 34-40.
    Adams, E. K., V. P. Miller, C. Ernst, B. K. Nishimura, C. Melvin and R. Merritt (2002).
"Neonatal health care costs related to smoking during pregnancy." Health Econ 11(3): 193-206.
    Althabe, F., M. Colomar, L. Gibbons, J. M. Belzan and P. Buekens (2008). "Tabaquismo
durante el embarazo en Argentina y Uruguay [Smoking during pregnancy in Argentina and
Uruguay]." Madicina (Buenos Aires) 68: 48-54.
    Andres, R. L. and M. C. Day (2000). "Perinatal complications associated with maternal
tobacco use." Seminars in Neonatology 5(3): 231-241.
    Angrist, J. D. and A. B. Krueger (2001). "Instrumental Variables and the Search for
Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15(4): 69-85.
    Batech, M., S. Tonstad, J. S. Job, R. Chinnock, B. Oshiro, T. Allen Merritt, G. Page and P.
N. Singh (2013). "Estimating the impact of smoking cessation during pregnancy: the San
Bernardino County experience." J Community Health 38(5): 838-846.
    Baum, C. F., M. E. Schaffer and S. Stillman (2007). "Enhanced routines for instrumental
variables/GMM estimation and testing." Stata Journal 7(4): 465-506.
    Bharadwaj, P., J. V. Johnsen and K. Vellesen Loken (2012). Smoking bans, maternal
smoking and birth outcomes. Bonn, Germany, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion
Paper Series No. 7006, November.



                                                                                                  62
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                                29-Jan-2014



    Black, S. E., P. J. Devereux and K. G. Salvanes (2007). "From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes." Quarterly Journal of Economics
112(1): 409-439.
    Blecher, E. (2008). "The impact of tobacco advertising bans on consumption in developing
countries." J Health Econ 27(4): 930-942.
    Boardman, J. D., D. A. Powers, Y. C. Padilla and R. A. Hummer (2002). "Low birth weight,
social factors, and developmental outcomes among children in the United States." Demography
39(2): 353-368.
    Castellanos, M. E., M. I. Munoz, M. Nebot, A. Paya, M. T. Rovira, S. Planasa, M. Sanroma
and R. Carreras (2000). "[Validity of the declared tobacco consumption in pregnancy]." Aten
Primaria 26(9): 629-632.
    Cavallo, A. (2013). Prices of cigarettes in Uruguay from the Billion Prices Project, 2007-
2013 (unpublished data).
    CLAP (2001). Sistema Informático Perinatal en el Uruguay 15 Años de Datos 1985-1999.
Montevideo, Uruguay, Centro Latinoamericano de Perinatologia y Desarrollo Humano,
Publicación Científica del CLAP 1485.
    Colman, G., M. Grossman and T. Joyce (2003). "The effect of cigarette excise taxes on
smoking before, during and after pregnancy." J Health Econ 22(6): 1053-1072.
    Curti, D. (2013). El comercio ilícito en Uruguay y su relación con los impuestos: resultados
de investigación [Illicit trade in Uruguay and its relation to taxes: research results]. Montevideo,
Centro de Investigación para la Epidemia de Tabaquismo (CIET), May 9.
    da Veiga, P. V. and R. P. Wilder (2008). "Maternal smoking during pregnancy and
birthweight: a propensity score matching approach." Matern Child Health J 12(2): 194-203.
    Dirección General Impositiva (2012). Volúmenes físicos de bienes gravados por el IMESI -
Series anuales (archivo xls). Montevideo Dirección General Impositiva, República Oriental del
Uruguay.
    Ershoff, D. H., V. P. Quinn, P. D. Mullen and D. R. Lairson (1990). "Pregnancy and medical
cost outcomes of a self-help prenatal smoking cessation program in a HMO." Public Health Rep
105(4): 340-347.
    Esteves, E., R. Gambogi, G. Saona, A. Cenández and T. Palacio (2011). "Tratamiento de la
dependencia al tabaco: experiencia del Fondo Nacional de Recursos [Treatment of tobacco

                                                                                                    63
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                            29-Jan-2014



dependence: experience of the National Resource Fund]." Revista Uruguaya de Cardiología
26(3): 78-83.
    Evans, W. N. and J. S. Ringel (1999). "Can higher cigarette taxes improve birth outcomes?"
Journal of Public Economics 72(1): 135-154.
    González, T., D. Olesker, I. Oreggioni, M. Setaro, G. Pradere, M. Buglioli, P. Carrasco, M.
Rodríguez and A. Dean (2010). La construcción del Sistema Nacional Integrado de Salud, 2005-
2009. Montevideo, Uruguay, Ministerio de Salud Pública,
http://www.psico.edu.uy/sites/default/files/cursos/nas_la_construccion.pdf.
    Gruber, J. and B. Koszegi (2001). "Is addiction rational? Theory and evidence." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116(4): 1261-1303.
    Hammond, D. (2011). "Health warning messages on tobacco products: a review." Tob
Control 20(5): 327-337.
    Hammond, D., G. T. Fong, P. W. McDonald, K. S. Brown and R. Cameron (2004). "Graphic
Canadian cigarette warning labels and adverse outcomes: evidence from Canadian smokers." Am
J Public Health 94(8): 1442-1445.
    Hammond, D., G. T. Fong, P. W. McDonald, R. Cameron and K. S. Brown (2003). "Impact
of the graphic Canadian warning labels on adult smoking behaviour." Tob Control 12(4): 391-
395.
    Harris, J. E. (1987). The 1983 Increase in the Federal Excise Tax on Cigarettes. Tax Policy
and the Economy. L. H. Summers. Cambridge MA, M.I.T. Press. 1: 87-111.
    Harris, J. E., G. N. Connolly, D. Brooks and B. Davis (1996). "Cigarette smoking before and
after an excise tax increase and an antismoking campaign--Massachusetts, 1990-1996." MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 45(44): 966-970.
    Himes, S. K., L. R. Stroud, K. B. Scheidweiler, R. S. Niaura and M. A. Huestis (2013).
"Prenatal tobacco exposure, biomarkers for tobacco in meconium, and neonatal growth
outcomes." J Pediatr 162(5): 970-975.
    Hoek, J., C. Wong, P. Gendall, J. Louviere and K. Cong (2011). "Effects of dissuasive
packaging on young adult smokers." Tob Control 20(3): 183-188.
    Instituto Nacional de Estadística (2013). Índice de Precios del Consumo, Base Diciembre
2010 = 100. Montevideo, various monthly issues.



                                                                                                  64
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                            29-Jan-2014



    Juarez, S. P. and J. Merlo (2013). "Revisiting the effect of maternal smoking during
pregnancy on offspring birthweight: a quasi-experimental sibling analysis in Sweden." PLoS
One 8(4): e61734.
    Junta Nactional de Salud (JUNASA) (2009). Rendición de Cuentas, Ejercicio 2009.
Montevideo, Uruguay, Ministerio de Salud.
    Kabir, Z., G. N. Connolly, L. Clancy, H. K. Koh and S. Capewell (2008). "Coronary heart
disease deaths and decreased smoking prevalence in Massachusetts, 1993-2003." Am J Public
Health 98(8): 1468-1469.
    Kees, J., S. Burton, J. C. Andrews and J. Kozup (2006). "Tests of graphic visuals and
cigarette package warning combinations: implications for the framework convention on tobacco
control." Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 25(2): 212.
    Kostova, D. and E. Blecher (2012). "Does Advertising Matter? Estimating the Impact of
Cigarette Advertising on Smoking Among Youth in Developing Countries." Contemporary
Economic Policy 31(3): 37–548.
    Levy, D. E. and E. Meara (2006). "The effect of the 1998 Master Settlement Agreement on
prenatal smoking." J Health Econ 25(2): 276-294.
    Lieberman, E., I. Gremy, J. M. Lang and A. P. Cohen (1994). "Low birthweight at term and
the timing of fetal exposure to maternal smoking." Am J Public Health 84(7): 1127-1131.
    Lien, D. S. and W. N. Evans (2005). "Estimating the Impact of Large Cigarette Tax Hikes:
The Case of Maternal Smoking and Infant Birth Weight." Journal of Human Resources 40(2):
373-392.
    Lindley, A. A., S. Becker, R. H. Gray and A. A. Herman (2000). "Effect of continuing or
stopping smoking during pregnancy on infant birth weight, crown-heel length, head
circumference, ponderal index, and brain:body weight ratio." Am J Epidemiol 152(3): 219-225.
    Mathers, C. D., T. Boerma and D. Ma Fat (2008). The Global Burden of Disease: 2004
Update. Geneva, World Health Organization.
    McCowan, L. M., G. A. Dekker, E. Chan, A. Stewart, L. C. Chappell, M. Hunter, R. Moss-
Morris and R. A. North (2009). "Spontaneous preterm birth and small for gestational age infants
in women who stop smoking early in pregnancy: prospective cohort study." BMJ 338: b1081.
    Ministerio de Salud Pública (2010). Cuentas Nacionales de Salud 2005 - 2008. Montevideo.



                                                                                               65
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                             29-Jan-2014



    Ministerio de Salud Pública (2010). Guía para Implementar Servicios para la Atención de la
Salud Sexual y Salud Reproductiva en las Instituciones Prestadoras de Salud. Montevideo.
    Moodie, C., G. Hastings and L. Joossens (2011). "Young adult smokers' perceptions of illicit
tobacco and the possible impact of plain packaging on purchase behaviour." Eur J Public Health.
    Mutti, S., D. Hammond, R. Borland, M. K. Cummings, R. J. O'Connor and G. T. Fong
(2011). "Beyond light and mild: cigarette brand descriptors and perceptions of risk in the
International Tobacco Control (ITC) Four Country Survey." Addiction 106(6): 1166-1175.
    Nelson, J. P. (2003). "Cigarette demand, structural change, and advertising bans:
international evidence." Contributions in Economic Analysis and Policy 2(1).
    Nelson, J. P. (2006). "Cigarette advertising regulation: A meta-analysis." International
Review of Law and Economics 26(2): 195-226.
    Newey, W. K. (1987). "Efficient estimation of limited dependent variable models with
endogenous explanatory variables." Journal of Econometrics 36: 231-250.
    Permutt, T. and J. R. Hebel (1989). "Simultaneous-equation estimation in a clinical trial of
the effect of smoking on birth weight." Biometrics 45(2): 619-622.
    Petrou, S., T. Sach and L. Davidson (2001). "The long-term costs of preterm birth and low
birth weight: results of a systematic review." Child Care Health Dev 27(2): 97-115.
    Philip Morris International (2010). PMI statement and background information regarding the
company's Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) claim against the government of Uruguay (Press
Release). New York, Philip Morris International Management SA, October 5.
    Phung, H., A. Bauman, T. V. Nguyen, L. Young, M. Tran and K. Hillman (2003). "Risk
factors for low birth weight in a socio-economically disadvantaged population: parity, marital
status, ethnicity and cigarette smoking." Eur J Epidemiol 18(3): 235-243.
    Pollack, H. A. (2001). "Sudden infant death syndrome, maternal smoking during pregnancy,
and the cost-effectiveness of smoking cessation intervention." Am J Public Health 91(3): 432-
436.
    Raatikainen, K., P. Huurinainen and S. Heinonen (2007). "Smoking in early gestation or
through pregnancy: a decision crucial to pregnancy outcome." Prev Med 44(1): 59-63.
    Ringel, J. S. and W. N. Evans (2001). "Cigarette taxes and smoking during pregnancy." Am J
Public Health 91(11): 1851-1856.



                                                                                                   66
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                             29-Jan-2014



    Saffer, H. and F. Chaloupka (2000). "The effect of tobacco advertising bans on tobacco
consumption." J Health Econ 19(6): 1117-1137.
    Sexton, M. and J. R. Hebel (1984). "A clinical trial of change in maternal smoking and its
effect on birth weight." JAMA 251(7): 911-915.
    Shipp, M., M. S. Croughan-Minihane, D. B. Petitti and A. E. Washington (1992).
"Estimation of the break-even point for smoking cessation programs in pregnancy." Am J Public
Health 82(3): 383-390.
    Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005). Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression
(Chapter 5). Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas J.
Rothenberg. J. H. S. a. D. W. K. Andrews, Cambridge University Press.
    Thrasher, J. F., M. C. Rousu, D. Hammond, A. Navarro and J. R. Corrigan (2011).
"Estimating the impact of pictorial health warnings and "plain" cigarette packaging: evidence
from experimental auctions among adult smokers in the United States." Health Policy 102(1):
41-48.
    Vardavas, C. I., L. Chatzi, E. Patelarou, E. Plana, K. Sarri, A. Kafatos, A. D. Koutis and M.
Kogevinas (2010). "Smoking and smoking cessation during early pregnancy and its effect on
adverse pregnancy outcomes and fetal growth." Eur J Pediatr 169(6): 741-748.
    Wakefield, M. A., L. Hayes, S. Durkin and R. Borland (2013). "Introduction effects of the
Australian plain packaging policy on adult smokers: a cross-sectional study." BMJ Open 3(7).
    Walker, M. B., E. Tekin and S. Wallace (2009). "Teen Smoking and Birth Outcomes."
Southern Economic Journal 75(3): 892-907.
    Ward, C., S. Lewis and T. Coleman (2007). "Prevalence of maternal smoking and
environmental tobacco smoke exposure during pregnancy and impact on birth weight:
retrospective study using Millennium Cohort." BMC Public Health 7: 81.
    Windham, G. C., B. Hopkins, L. Fenster and S. H. Swan (2000). "Prenatal active or passive
tobacco smoke exposure and the risk of preterm delivery or low birth weight." Epidemiology
11(4): 427-433.
    Woolridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, 2d Edition.
Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
    World Bank (2013). Data: Uruguay, http://data.worldbank.org/country/uruguay.



                                                                                                    67
Smoking Cessation during Pregnancy, Uruguay                                          29-Jan-2014



    World Health Organization (2012). WHO Global Report: Mortality Attributable to Tobacco.
Geneva, World Health Organization.
    World Health Organization (2013). Parties to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control (FCTC). Geneva, World Health Organization [accessed 22-Oct-2013].
    Wüst, M. (2010). The effect of cigarette and alcohol consumption on birth outcomes.
Copenhagen, Aarhus School of Business, Department of Economics Working Paper 10-05.
    Yan, J. and P. A. Groothuis (2013). Timing of Prenatal Smoking Cessation or Reduction and
Infant Birth Weight: Evidence from the United Kingdom Millennium Cohort Study. Boone, NC,
Appalachian State University, Department of Economics Working Paper, Number 13-16,
August.




                                                                                             68
