NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK AVERSION AND THE DESIRABILITY OF ATTENUATED LEGAL CHANGE
Steven Shavell
Working Paper 19879
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19879
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School. I thank Louis Kaplow,
Dean Lueck, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Kathryn Spier, Michael Trebilcock, and Abraham Wickelgren
for comments on this article, Kenneth Abraham, Tom Baker, David Bassi, Patricia Danzon, Scott
Harrington, and Micah Woolstenhulme for discussions about insurance, Edward Dumoulin, David
Geiger, Divya Subrahmanyam, and Jodie-Jane Tingle for research assistance, and the John M. Olin
Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for research support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Risk Aversion and the Desirability of Attenuated Legal Change
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 19879
February 2014
JEL No. H8,K10,K20
ABSTRACT
This article develops two points. First, insurance against the risk of legal change is largely unavailable,
primarily because of the correlated nature of the losses that legal change generates. Second, given
the absence of insurance against legal change, it is generally desirable for legal change to be attenuated.
Specifically, in a model of uncertainty about two different types of legal change—in regulatory standards,
and in payments for harm caused—it is demonstrated that the optimal new regulatory standard is less
than the conventionally efficient standard, and that the optimal new payment for harm is less than
the harm.
Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu

Risk Aversion and the Desirability of Attenuated Legal Change
Steven Shavell*

This article develops two points. First, insurance against the risk of legal change is
largely unavailable, primarily because of the correlated nature of the losses that legal change
generates. Second, given the absence of insurance against legal change, it is generally desirable
for legal change to be attenuated. Specifically, in a model of uncertainty about two different
types of legal change—in regulatory standards, and in payments for harm caused—it is
demonstrated that the optimal new regulatory standard is less than the conventionally efficient
standard, and that the optimal new payment for harm is less than the harm.
JEL codes: H8, K10, K20
1. Introduction
One of the major categories of risk facing individuals and firms is that the law may
change. Homeowners, for example, confront the prospect that the mortgage interest tax
deduction will be eliminated; firms bear the risk that new regulations concerning workplace
safety or environmental harm will be enacted; and fishermen live with the possibility that a
fishery will be declared off-limits. Such risks of legal change are inevitable, as they are a natural
byproduct of economic, technological, and political uncertainties.
A hallmark of the risk of legal change is that it is largely uninsurable. As is described in
Section 2.1, insurance against legal change is for the most part nonexistent as an empirical
matter. In contrast, insurance against property losses, medical needs, and all manner of other
adverse events is widespread.
Why is insurance coverage against legal change mainly unavailable? I suggest in Section
2.2 that the root of the explanation lies in the correlated nature of the losses usually associated
with changes in legal rules. If, for instance, the use of a fishery were barred, all fishermen
earning income from it would simultaneously suffer losses. Hence, insurers could face
substantial risks were they to sell coverage against changes in the law. However, as I also
discuss, insurers should be able to alleviate these risks in various ways, implying that a fully
satisfactory explanation of reality involves factors in addition to the correlation of losses.
In any event, because insurance against legal change is generally unavailable in fact, I
assume that such coverage cannot be purchased in a model of uncertainty about the law that I
analyze in Section 3. Under that assumption, as well as the assumption that parties subject to the
law are risk averse, the principal analytical point of the article is developed: legal change should
be attenuated, that is, legal change should be less than would be conventionally efficient
(efficient in a risk-neutral world—efficient according to the customary cost-benefit calculus).
*

Samuel R. Rosenthal Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School. I thank Louis Kaplow,
Dean Lueck, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Kathryn Spier, Michael Trebilcock, and Abraham Wickelgren for comments on
this article, Kenneth Abraham, Tom Baker, David Bassi, Patricia Danzon, Scott Harrington, and Micah
Woolstenhulme for discussions about insurance, Edward Dumoulin, David Geiger, Divya Subrahmanyam, and
Jodie-Jane Tingle for research assistance, and the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at
Harvard Law School for research support.

1

To amplify, in the model, there is a risk that an activity will be discovered to be harmful
by the state. In that case, a law addressing the harmful activity will be adopted; thus there is a
risk of legal change. If the activity is found to be harmful, individuals are able to reduce the
likelihood of harm by exercising costly care (effort or investment in safety).
One type of legal change that is considered is the adoption of a regulation, under which
the state would mandate a level of care. (Regulation may also be interpreted as effective control
of care by the courts through the application of the negligence rule.) The uninsurable risk borne
by parties involved in the activity is that, if it is revealed to be harmful, a regulation will be
employed and parties will have to expend resources to meet the required level of care. For
example, gasoline service station owners might have to replace their gasoline holding tanks with
different tanks that are less likely to leak in order to satisfy new environmental regulations. In
the presence of such risks of bearing regulatory compliance costs, it is shown that the optimal
regulatory standard is less than the conventionally efficient standard.
The rationale for this basic result is, in essence, that if the stipulated standard of care were
equal to the conventionally efficient level, a marginal relaxation of the standard would leave
expected social costs essentially unchanged.1 But the slight reduction of the standard would
produce a social benefit by lowering risk-bearing for the risk-averse parties subject to the
standard. Thus, it is always socially desirable for the standard of care to be less than (and
perhaps to be much less than) the level that would be conventionally efficient.
The other type of legal change that is analyzed is the adoption of strict liability, requiring
a payment of damages to victims of harm. (Strict liability is effectively equivalent in the model
to fines or corrective taxes.) Here the risk that individuals bear concerns damages2 as well as
costs of care (for individuals will be induced to take care if the activity is found to be harmful).
It is shown that the optimal magnitude of damages is less than the harm.3 The ground for this
conclusion is similar to that for the conclusion about the desirable regulatory standard of care.
In Section 4, I make several concluding comments about the model, concerning its
generality and importance, the attenuation of legal change in reality (such as through delayed
implementation of laws and grandfathering), and a policy of government compensation for legal
change.
Before proceeding, let me comment on prior writing on which I build. The most closely
related articles to this one are by Blume and Rubinfeld (1984), who address governmental
takings, and by Masur and Nash (2010), who examine legal change generally. In both of these
articles, the authors observe that insurance against the legal risks that they consider does not
exist, and they propose that the provision of compensation by the government might be desirable
as a substitute. I consider a different policy response to the absence of insurance, namely,
1

At the conventionally efficient level of care, the marginal gain from the cost savings due to a reduction in
the level of care must equal the marginal loss from the resulting increase in expected harm.
2

More precisely, the risk is of having to pay expected damages. In particular, I assume in the model that, if
strict liability is adopted, individuals can then purchase liability insurance coverage at actuarially fair rates.
Therefore, individuals do not turn out to bear a risk of having to pay actual damages. However, individuals still face
the risk of having to pay the insurance premium for the damages coverage that they will elect to purchase.
3

This is true whether victims of harm are risk neutral or risk averse, as shown in Propositions 3 and 4. It is
also demonstrated that the optimal level of damages is zero for all harms sufficiently low; see Proposition 3.

2

attenuation of legal change.4 Moreover, I offer an alternative primary explanation for the
absence of insurance coverage—correlation of the losses caused by legal change.5
The foregoing articles are part of a larger, economically-oriented literature on legal
change. This literature began with Graetz (1977) and Kaplow (1986), and continued with Logue
(1993), Levmore (1999), Shaviro (2000), and Nash and Revesz (2007), among others.6
Somewhat surprisingly, with the exception of the two articles noted in the preceding paragraph,
none of the writing on legal change recognizes the unavailability of insurance against it.7 As a
partial consequence, Graetz (1977) and Kaplow (1986) come to the judgment that legal change
should be guided by conventional efficiency criteria and that compensation for legal change
ordinarily should not be provided. Although other writers sometimes differ in their conclusions,
that is not because of the absence of insurance coverage for legal change.
Also of relevance is an earlier article of mine, Shavell (1982), which begins with an
analysis of optimal liability rules in the absence of insurance. I show there that optimal damages
under strict liability are less than harm, which is similar to the result here when there is a risk that
a strict liability rule will be adopted. But my earlier article also concludes that the optimal
standard of care equals the conventionally efficient level, which is different from the result
demonstrated here when there is a risk that a new standard of care will be employed.8
2. The Absence of Insurance against Legal Change
2.1 The fact of the absence of insurance
Insurance against legal change is not generally sold in the insurance market. That this is
so can be verified in a number of ways. First, the categories of coverage that insurers state that
they market do not include legal change. For example, insurers such as Allstate, Geico, and
Travelers list as major categories of coverage automobile, property, life, health, homeowners,
liability, and a number of others, but none mention legal change as a type of coverage.9 Second,
reference works and textbooks on insurance do not describe legal change as a distinct risk for

4

Neither Blume and Rubinfeld (1984) nor Masur and Nash (2010) analyze the policy of relaxing regulatory
standards. Instead, as just stated, they focus on the policy of government compensation for legal change. Similarly,
other writing about legal change (see the next paragraph) also mainly considers the policy of government
compensation for legal change, not the policy of reducing regulatory standards.
5

Blume and Rubinfeld (1984) emphasize moral hazard as the main explanation, and Masur and Nash
(2007) focus on the inability of insurers to price coverage. I discuss their views in Section 2.2.
6

See also Quinn and Trebilcock (1982), Kaplow (1992), Logue (1996), Georgakopolous (1997), Levmore
(1998), and Shavell (2008).
7

Notably, neither Graetz (1977) nor Kaplow (1986) addresses the question whether insurance against legal
change exists. Kaplow, however, considers the theoretical possibility of this type of insurance (at pp. 536-550) and
argues that there should be no significant problem with its efficient supply by the market.
8

See also notes 36, 39, and 53 below on the analysis in my prior article.

9

For an overview of Allstate’s insurance products, see www.allstate.com/about/product-overview.aspx;
for Geico, see www.geico.com and the pull-down menu “type of insurance”; for Travelers, see www.travelers.com.

3

which coverage is available.10 Third, knowledgeable individuals whom I have contacted in the
insurance industry and in academia concur that insurance coverage against legal change is
chiefly unavailable.11
Thus, if we ask whether the risks due to legal change that I mentioned in the Introduction
are insurable, the answer is no. It does not seem possible for homeowners to purchase insurance
coverage against elimination of the mortgage interest tax deduction, for gasoline service station
owners to arrange coverage for the expense of having to install new gasoline holding tanks or for
businesses generally to secure coverage against the cost of meeting new regulatory requirements,
or for fishermen to obtain coverage against bans on fishing.12
There is, however, an implicit exception to the absence of coverage against legal change
of note. Namely, significant protection against modifications in liability rules is provided by
standard liability insurance policies. Although the principal role of liability insurance is to cover
insureds against the risk of liability resulting from the application of existing laws, liability
insurance also shields insureds against changes in liability rules as long as the changes concern
the insured categories of liability.13 Hence, for instance, physicians and other professionals
would likely be covered under their malpractice policies against expansions in their exposure to
liability for malpractice. Nevertheless, this type of protection against changes in liability rules is
incomplete: it does not compensate insureds for the costs of any additional precautions that they
are led to take, and it does not prevent insurers from raising premiums at the time of policy

10

I have examined Appleman (1996) and Couch (2009), major treatises on insurance law; Abraham (2010)
and Baker (2008), leading casebooks on insurance law and policy; and Harrington and Niehaus (2004) and Vaughan
and Vaughan (2008), well-known textbooks on the business and economics of insurance. These resources cover
mainly the following major categories of insurance: health, disability, life, homeowners, marine, commercial,
automobile, fire, property, theft, and liability. None discusses legal change as an area of coverage.
11

These individuals include David Bassi of Plymouth Rock Assurance Company and Micah
Woolstenhulme of Guy Carpenter & Company, Kenneth Abraham and Tom Baker, legal academics whose focus is
on insurance law, and Patricia Danzon and Scott Harrington, academic economists whose primary research is on
insurance. (They also agree with the essence of the qualification that I make below about the coverage against legal
change that is bound up in liability insurance policies.)
12

To my knowledge, no insurance exists against a long term ban on fishing. It might be asked, however,
whether business interruption insurance coverage would compensate fishermen against a temporary ban, such as for
a period after an oil spill due to the risk of contamination. The answer appears to be negative, mainly because
business interruption coverage ordinarily requires that a loss be associated with property owned by the insured and
that this property have actually sustained physical damage. See, for example, Abraham (2010, pp. 226-232) and
Baker (2008, pp. 41, 314-321).
13

Baker (2004) makes this point in a broad discussion of the risks of change that liability insurance covers.

4

renewal,14 from excluding new liability risks at that time,15 or from canceling coverage
altogether.16
There also exist scattered explicit exceptions to the absence of insurance coverage against
legal change, such as coverage against expropriation of corporate assets by foreign
governments17 and individually-negotiated coverage against specific changes in tax laws.18
Another proviso concerning the unavailability of insurance coverage against legal change
is that parties can sometimes hedge against it through the use of market transactions. For
instance, homeowners facing the risk of elimination of the mortgage interest tax deduction might
consider selling short shares in home building companies, for these companies would be
expected to suffer from a fall in demand for new homes if the deduction was disallowed. Yet
such hedging opportunities may not be practical,19 or limited,20 and, in any case, require a degree
of sophistication that many parties do not possess.
2.2 The explanation for the absence of insurance
Subject to the qualifications discussed above, parties are unable to insure against legal
change. What is the explanation for this fact? Are there distinctive aspects of legal change that
set it apart from the broad swath of risks—from automobile accidents, to fires, to theft—for
which insurance coverage is widely sold?
A salient characteristic of legal change is that it tends to affect many parties at once.
Thus, as I observed, if a restriction on fishing were imposed, all fishermen subject to it would
suffer concurrent losses of income, and similarly if the mortgage interest tax deduction were
eliminated or if a requirement that gasoline service stations install new gasoline holding tanks
were adopted, all individuals with mortgages and all service station owners would
simultaneously sustain losses.
14

See, for example, Priest (1987), finding that insurers raised liability insurance premiums dramatically due
to the expansion of tort liability, Viscusi (1991, pp. 176-177), stating that insurers raised product liability insurance
premiums due to heightened product liability exposure, and Abraham (1977, pp. 489-491), suggesting that insurers
increased medical malpractice premiums due to increased risks of liability for medical malpractice.
15

See, for example, Abraham (2010, pp. 570-575) and Harrington and Niehaus (2004, pp. 616-617), noting
the greater use of exclusions for pollution-related liability due to a broadening of the legal grounds for such liability.
16

See, for example, Church (2005), discussing the cancellation of a wide array of types of liability
insurance policies on account of greater liability risks.
17

This coverage is offered by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC); see
http://www.opic.gov/what-we-offer/political-risk-insurance.
18

Personal communication with David Bassi of Plymouth Rock Assurance Company.

19

How would gasoline service station owners hedge against the possibility that they would have to install
new gasoline holding tanks?
20

The ability to sell short shares in home building companies seems circumscribed because the aggregate
capitalization of these companies is probably only a fraction of the total risk facing owners of mortgages from
elimination of the deduction, because there are costs of selling short, and because selling short requires an individual
to have a brokerage account with short-selling privileges. Moreover, selling short involves its own risks—the price
of shares in home building companies could rise.

5

It follows that if an insurer were to sell coverage against legal change, the insurer would
tend to bear a substantial risk and would need to hold large reserves. Suppose that an insurer
writes $1 billion of coverage against the risk of a change in the law. Then the insurer must
maintain reserves fully equal to $1 billion in order to honor its contracts with policyholders—for
regardless of how low the probability of claims is, such as only 1%, the triggering of its coverage
responsibilities would occur simultaneously for its insureds.21 In contrast, if an insurer writes $1
billion worth of coverage against, say, car theft involving a 1% risk of a $25,000 loss per car that
is independent across car owners, the insurer could maintain reserves of only $12 million and be
able to fulfill its contracts with virtual certainty.22
Such a pronounced difference in required reserves illustrates why positive correlation of
losses is a stock reason given in the insurance literature for the nonexistence of coverage.23
Holding large reserves, like $1 billion, is much more expensive than holding modest reserves,
like $12 million, and thus could dramatically increase insurance premiums.24 Moreover, the risk
of losing large reserves could further raise premiums if insurers are considered risk averse.
Hence, the premiums that insurers would be likely to charge for provision of coverage when
losses are correlated could well exceed insureds’ willingness to pay.
Correlation of losses therefore seems to provide a plausible candidate explanation for the
general absence of insurance coverage against changes in legal rules.
It should also be noted that the correlation-of-losses hypothesis is reconcilable with the
fact that liability insurance policies furnish implicit coverage against changes in liability rules.
In particular, a change in a liability rule does not lead to simultaneous losses for the holders of
liability insurance coverage. When a liability rule changes, typically only a small minority of
insureds will make claims as a consequence, for only those insureds who turn out to cause harm
and are found liable as a result of the modification of the liability rule would add to the claims
the insurer must pay.
21

An insurer might choose to hold reserves of $1 billion in order to prevent bankruptcy and to give
insureds confidence in their insurance. Another possibility is that an insurer would be forced to hold the reserves by
an insurance regulator. A different possibility is that an insurer would purchase reinsurance to cover its $1 billion
risk. In that case, though, the reinsurers might need to hold reserves of $1 billion in order to be able to honor their
policies.
22

Since the assumption is that the insurer writes $1 billion of coverage and each individual’s loss from car
theft would be $25,000, the insurer must be covering 40,000 individuals. The standard deviation of an individual’s
loss if not insured is $2,487 (namely, [.01($25,000 – $250)2 + .99(–$250)2]1/2), implying that the standard deviation
of the average loss among the 40,000 insured individuals is only $2,487/(40,000)1/2 = $12.44. Now if the insurer has
$12 million in reserves, it will have reserves of $300 per individual. Hence, for the reserves to be exhausted, the
average loss must exceed $300. Since the mean loss per individual is $250, the average loss would have to exceed
the mean by at least $50 for reserves to be depleted. But $50/$12.44 is 4.02, which is to say, more than four
standard deviations. The odds of such an event are less than one in 10,000 for a normal distribution.
23

See, for example, Harrington and Niehaus (2004, p. 182) and Vaughan and Vaughan (2008, p. 43).

24

Suppose that the financing cost of maintaining liquid reserves is 4% a year. Then to hold reserves of $1
billion would cost an insurer $40 million a year. This implies that, if the insurer is risk-neutral, its premium revenue
must be five times its expected losses of $10 million a year, because its premium revenue must support its financing
cost and its expected losses. Such a high ratio of premiums to expected losses could discourage purchase of
insurance coverage, that is, eliminate the market for coverage. In contrast, for an insurer to hold reserves of only
$12 million would cost only $480,000. This implies that, if the insurer is risk-neutral, its premium revenue must be
only $12.48 million, which is only1.248 times the expected losses of $10 million a year.

6

However, correlation of losses needs to be supplemented with other factors to
satisfactorily explain the observed absence of insurance coverage against legal change. Among
the reasons are that many risks of legal change affect relatively small numbers of parties,25 that
legal risks can be set off against each other,26 and that legal risks are often uncorrelated with
other categories of risk, including natural disasters and macroeconomic events. These points
suggest that reinsurers and the capital markets could find risk-sharing with insureds and/or the
insurance industry attractive and thus qualify the significance of correlation of losses as an
explanation for the absence of coverage against legal change.27
Finally, let me consider several possible explanations for the unavailability of insurance
that are different from correlation of losses. One standard reason for the nonexistence of
insurance is adverse selection. Namely, when an insurer sells a type of coverage, say theft
insurance, high-risk individuals will be more likely to buy it than low-risk individuals, implying
that the price of coverage (which must reflect the average risk experienced by the insurer) will
become relatively unattractive for low-risk individuals and could lead some of them not to
continue to buy coverage. This could engender an unraveling process in which more low-risk
individuals among the remaining insureds decide not to continue to buy theft insurance,
ultimately vitiating the market for that coverage. Crucially, for adverse selection to occur,
insurers must be unable to identify who are high-risk individuals, for otherwise the insurers
could and would charge them appropriately high premiums.
The phenomenon of adverse selection appears to be of little importance in our context.
On one hand, adverse selection could not possibly occur if insurance were offered against a
specific change in the law (such as a ban on the use of the cod fishery off the coast of Maine), for
then the risk would by definition be the same for all policy holders (namely, the probability of
the named ban on the cod fishery)—in other words, there could not be any high-risk buyers of
the coverage. On the other hand, adverse selection would be a logical possibility if insurance
were offered against a category of changes in the law (such as any kind of restriction on any type
of fishing on the East Coast), for then there could be high-risk buyers of coverage, that is,
individuals who know that a particular legal change within the covered category is likely. But
such adverse selection seems implausible, because it could occur only if a significant number of
individuals know more about the likelihood of a change in the law than do insurers.
A second standard reason for the nonexistence of insurance is moral hazard, which arises
when a person who purchases insurance behaves in such a way as to increase the risk of loss.
This would result in an elevated premium rate and could discourage the purchase of insurance.
If, for example, a person purchases insurance against loss of his cellphone, he would probably be
less careful with it than otherwise; he might lose his cellphone with a fairly high probability, say
25

Consider, for instance, a change in the tax laws that would apply to only a small subset of farmers or a
change in a municipality’s fire code that would pertain only to local fast food restaurants.
26

Consider the two legal risks mentioned in the previous note.

27

A number of economists have asked me whether the observations of this paragraph imply that the
correlation problem of insurers should be largely overcome, not merely qualified. But important evidence to the
contrary is the paucity of insurance coverage against (and high premiums charged for) catastrophic risks, such as
earthquakes, floods, and hurricanes—even though these correlated risks should in theory also be substantially
alleviated through reinsurance and the participation of the capital markets. On the puzzle represented by the
shortage of coverage against catastrophic risks and possible explanations for it, see especially Froot (2001), who
emphasizes in part 5 various problems with the supply of reinsurance.

7

50 percent, over the course of a year, rather than with only a low probability, say 5 percent, if his
cellphone is not insured. Hence, the person might well prefer not to be insured and bear a 5
percent risk of loss of his cellphone instead of paying an annual premium of 50 percent of the
value of his cellphone.
Blume and Rubinfeld (1984, pp. 593-597) suggest that moral hazard could explain why
insurance against takings does not exist. Their thought is that, if a person were to own takings
insurance, he would be less likely to resist a taking (such as at a hearing before a zoning board).
Their view seems sensible in the context of takings.28
But the moral hazard argument does not appear to extend from takings to the general
setting of changes in the law. For instance, would a single fisherman’s purchase of insurance
against a ban on the use of a fishery be likely to measurably affect the probability of such a ban?
I assume that the answer is no—because impeding a ban would ordinarily be a substantial
undertaking and require the assent of many.29 Hence, moral hazard should not usually operate to
reduce an individual fisherman’s motive to buy insurance coverage against a ban. This point
must be distinguished from a different one: If a mass of fishermen were to purchase coverage
against a ban on the use of a fishery, then the probability of a ban could well rise, since their
collective incentive to resist a ban would be dulled. That phenomenon, however, would not
necessarily depress the demand for insurance coverage—it could easily raise the demand for
coverage—and thus would not constitute a clear reason for coverage not to be offered.30
An additional reason for the nonexistence of insurance against legal change is offered by
Masur and Nash (2010, pp. 421-426), namely, that it would be difficult for insurers to price such
coverage because of uncertainty surrounding the probability of legal change. However, their
hypothesis does not seem consistent with the theory of insurance or with insurance practice.
With regard to theory, an insurer should in principle be indifferent between pricing and selling
coverage against a change in the law that will occur with a probability of 50 percent and pricing
and selling coverage against a change in the law that will occur either with a probability of 25
percent or with a probability 75 percent, each with equal likelihood.31 (This is not to deny a
different point—that an insurer would decidedly prefer to sell coverage against independent and
28

Still, other reasons for the absence of takings insurance coverage are also plausible. Notably, the demand
for coverage may be low because the government often pays compensation for takings (supposedly always for
physical takings of property, and sometimes for regulatory takings).
29

In contrast, a single individual faces a much less daunting task if he is seeking only to prevent the
application of takings law to his particular parcel of land.
30

After a mass of fishermen buy coverage and the probability of a ban rises, the demand for insurance
coverage could either increase or decline. In particular, it is well known that the demand for insurance is a function
of the probability p of loss, rising from zero when p is 0 to a maximum at some probability p* less than 1, and then
falling to zero when p is 1. (In particular, if x > 0 is the possible loss, U a person’s utility function, and y his wealth,
then the expected utility value of insurance coverage (which reflects the strength of demand for coverage), if sold at
actuarially fair rates, is given by U(y – px) – [(1 – p)U(y) + pU(y – x)]. This function equals 0 at p = 0 and p = 1,
achieves a maximum at p* determined by U(y) – U(y – x) = xU′(y – px), and is concave.) Thus, for example, if the
probability of a ban is less than p* before insurance is sold and increases to a probability that is still less than p*
after insurance is sold, the demand for insurance will increase; and if the probability of a ban exceeds p* before
insurance is sold, then after insurance is sold the demand for insurance will decrease.
31

In both cases, the insurer would face a 50 percent risk of a change in the law, and thus a 50 percent risk
that all insureds would simultaneously make claims for loss.

8

identical risks of known magnitude, such as 50 percent, than to sell coverage against independent
and identical risks of unknown magnitude.32) With regard to insurance practice, insurers
routinely sell negotiated policies against a wide range of risks that would be described as
subjective (such as the risk of the destruction of the World Trade Center or the risk of harm to
actress Betty Grable’s legs). Moreover, if the subjective nature of the risks of legal change were
a bar to its sale by insurers, why would liability insurers sell coverage that includes protection
against legal change?
To summarize and conclude the discussion, we have seen in Section 2.1 that, as a matter
of observation, insurance coverage against legal change is mainly unavailable. It has also been
suggested in Section 2.2 that the correlation of losses due to legal change provides a partial
explanation for the absence of coverage and that several major alternative explanations for it
seem problematic. Nevertheless, the correlation hypothesis is not entirely satisfying. In any
case, given that insurance against legal change is largely unavailable in reality, I will make the
simplifying assumption in the model below that insurance against legal change does not exist.
3. The Model
Parties called injurers engage in an activity that may turn out to be harmful to parties
called victims. In particular, the state will learn at a future date whether the activity of injurers is
potentially harmful or is instead harmless. If the activity is determined to be potentially harmful,
the state will announce a legal rule to address the danger. Thus, the risk of legal change is the
risk that the state discovers that the activity is potentially harmful and as a consequence enacts a
legal rule to control the danger. After the announcement of the rule, injurers choose a level of
care to reduce the probability of harm.33 Injurers are identical to each other, as are victims.
Specifically, define
q = probability that the state learns that the activity is harmful and announces a legal rule;
0 < q < 1;
x = expenditure on care by an injurer to reduce the probability of an accident if the
activity is harmful; x ≥ 0;
p(x) = probability of an accident if the activity is harmful; 0 < p(x) < 1; p′(x) < 0;
p″(x) > 0; and
h = harm if an accident occurs; h > 0.
If the activity is harmful, the sum of care and expected harm is
32

To illustrate, suppose that an insurer sells coverage against many identical, independent risks of 50% of
loss of $100 each. Then, by the law of large numbers, if the insurer charges a premium of slightly over $50, it will
be virtually certain to cover the claims it will have to pay (see also note 22). Now suppose that the insurer is
uncertain about the common risk of loss—that it is either 25% or 75%, each with equal probability. Then even
though 50% is the expected risk, it would be folly for the insurer to charge a premium in the neighborhood of $50,
for then if the common risk turns out to be 75%, the insurer would go bankrupt. In fact, the insurer would have to
charge a premium slightly above $75 to avoid a 50% chance of bankruptcy. One way to express these points is that
in the classic context of insurance, where the insured risks are independent and identical, uncertainty about the
common risk generates a species of correlation problem. See, for example, Harrington and Niehaus (2004, p. 182).
33

Although this model captures in a stylized way the basic elements of many legal changes, it does not
directly describe all examples of legal change, such as the possible elimination of the mortgage interest tax
deduction. But some such examples can be accommodated with minor modifications of the model (see note 47 on
the mortgage interest tax deduction), and in any case, it does not seem that the main qualitative conclusion depends
on the particulars of the model (as is suggested by note 41).

9

(1) x + p(x)h.
Let the x that minimizes (1) be denoted x*; and call x* the conventionally optimal level of care
because in models with risk-neutral actors, it is usually assumed that minimization of (1) is the
social objective.34 Since the case in which x* is zero is uninteresting, it will be supposed that x*
is positive, or equivalently, that
(2) p′(x)h = –1
holds for a positive x. Note that since p″(x) > 0 for x ≥ 0, condition (2) holds for a positive x if
and only if
(3) p′(0)h < –1,
so that this inequality will be assumed.
Let
U(·) = utility of wealth of an injurer, and
u = initial wealth of an injurer.
Injurers are assumed to be risk averse or risk neutral, but the case in which they are risk averse
will be emphasized because the risk aversion of those subject to the law is the main concern of
this article. When injurers are assumed to be risk neutral, the utility of an injurer will be taken to
equal the amount of his wealth.
It is assumed that injurers cannot purchase insurance against legal change for the reasons
given in Section 2. The meaning of this assumption will be discussed further below.
Also, let
V(·) = utility of wealth of a victim, and
v = initial wealth of a victim.
Both the case in which victims are risk neutral (with the utility function of a victim taken to
equal the amount of his wealth) and the case in which they are risk averse will be analyzed. The
case of risk-neutral victims is considered both because it is expositionally simpler (the effect of
injurer risk aversion on optimal legal change is most easily understood in isolation from the
possible risk aversion of victims) and because it is sometimes descriptive of reality (when the
harm to each victim is limited or, often, when the government bears the harm). The qualitative
nature of most of the results does not change, however, when victims are risk averse.
Assumptions about victims’ ability to insure in the case in which they are risk averse will also be
discussed below.
We will determine Pareto optimal legal rules.35 A rule is defined to be Pareto optimal for
the parties given an initial situation if there does not exist an alternative rule, and a transfer
payment between injurers and victims, under which the expected utility of both injurers and
victims would be higher. To identify Pareto optimal legal rules, it is necessary and sufficient to
solve the following problem:

34

See, for example, Landes and Posner (1987) and Shavell (1987).

35

It does not make sense to treat minimization of x + p(x)h as the optimality criterion, for that objective
does not reflect risk-bearing by risk-averse parties. (As will be observed, however, the problem of maximizing (4)
subject to (5) reduces to minimization of x + p(x)h when both injurers and victims are risk neutral.) It also does not
make sense to employ the sum of expected utilities as the optimality criterion, for although that goal would be
promoted by bettering the allocation of risk, it would also be furthered by redistribution from wealthy to poor.
(Hence, if some policy advances the sum of expected utilities, the explanation could be that the policy favorably
redistributes wealth rather than that it improves the allocation of risk.)

10

(4)

Maximize the expected utility of injurers EU over possible versions of a legal rule,
subject to the constraint that
(5) the expected utility of victims EV is held constant by means of a transfer payment by
injurers to victims,
where
t = transfer payment by injurers to victims.
It is assumed that t is made before the state learns whether the activity is harmful, that is, before
legal uncertainty is resolved.
I now consider Pareto optimal legal rules when the rules concern regulation of behavior
and then when they concern payments for harm.36
3.1 Regulation of behavior
Assume here that if the state learns that injurers’ activity is harmful, the legal rule that the
state adopts is regulation, by which is meant a standard of care that injurers must exercise. Let
xs = required standard of care if the state learns that injurers’ activity is harmful.
It will be assumed that injurers meet the standard xs, for consideration of its method of
enforcement by the state (through public enforcement or private, under the negligence rule)
would be distracting for our purposes.
Consider first the determination of a Pareto optimal standard of care assuming that
victims are risk neutral. The expected utility of an injurer is then
(6) EU = (1 – q)U(u – t) + qU(u – t – xs).
Note that this expression reflects the assumption that the transfer payment t is made before the
state learns whether the activity is harmful, that the risk borne by an injurer is having to spend xs
to meet the standard, and that injurers do not have insurance coverage against the risk of xs. The
expected wealth of a victim is v + t – qp(xs)h and must satisfy
(7) v + t – qp(xs)h = r,
where r is a reference level of expected wealth. The Pareto optimal standard xs maximizes (6)
subject to (7).37 From (7), we have
(8)
t = r – v + qp(xs)h,
so that the problem at issue reduces to maximizing
(9)
EU(xs) = (1 – q)U(u – r + v – qp(xs)h) + qU(u – r + v – qp(xs)h – xs)
over xs. Denote the Pareto optimal standard xs that maximizes (9) by xs*.38
Before determining the Pareto optimal standard when injurers are risk averse, let me note
what the Pareto optimal standard is when injurers are risk neutral.
Remark 1. Assume that both injurers and victims are risk neutral. Then the Pareto
optimal standard of care xs* is the conventionally optimal level of care x*.

36

In Shavell (1982), I consider Pareto optimal legal rules in an accident model with possibly risk-averse
parties, but with the crucial difference that there is no uncertainty about legal change—whether a legal rule will
apply. See notes 39 and 53 below for further comments on my prior article.
37

That is, maximization of (4) subject to (5) is maximization of (6) subject to (7) in the present context.

38

Since EU″(xs) < 0 will be shown in (11) below, xs* is unique.

11

The claim in this remark holds because, when injurers are risk neutral, the right-hand side
of (9) reduces to u – r + v – q(p(xs)h + xs), which is maximized when p(xs)h + xs is minimized
over xs.
We now have the following result.
Proposition 1. Assume that injurers are risk averse and that victims are risk neutral.
Then the Pareto optimal standard of care xs* is such that 0 < xs* < x*, where x* is the
conventionally optimal level of care. The Pareto optimal standard xs* is determined by (14)
below.
Notes. (a) The explanation for why xs* is positive is as follows. If xs were zero, injurers
would bear no risk—if the activity was discovered to be harmful, the state would impose no
standard. But since a risk-averse party is effectively risk neutral when he begins to bear risk, we
infer that it would be desirable for xs to be raised slightly from zero if that would be desirable for
a risk-neutral injurer. For a risk-neutral injurer, it would be desirable for xs to be raised
marginally from zero, since we know from Remark 1 that it would be desirable for xs to
minimize p(xs)h + xs that for such an injurer. Hence, it must be desirable for xs to be raised
slightly from zero for a risk-averse injurer. In other words, doing so will lower the required
payment t by enough to make the cost of meeting xs worthwhile for him.
(b) The explanation for why xs* is below x*39 flows from the observation that if xs is
marginally reduced from x*, then, because x* minimizes x + p(x)h, the increase in t will
essentially equal the expected reduction in xs.40 Thus, if the injurer were risk neutral, the
marginal effect of the reduction in xs on his well-being would be zero. But since the injurer is
risk averse and is bearing positive risk when xs is x*, he benefits from a reduction in risk-bearing
from the marginal reduction in xs, implying that his expected utility must rise.41
Proof. First, observe that
EU′(xs) = –qp′(xs)h(1 – q)U′(w – qp(xs)h) – (qp′(xs)h + 1)qU′(w – qp(xs)h – xs),
where w denotes u – r + v for notational simplicity. Hence
(11) EU″(xs) = –qp″(xs)h(1 – q)U′(w – qh(xs)) + (qp′(xs)h)2(1 – q)U″(w – qp(xs)h)
– qp″(xs)hqU′(w – qp(xs)h – xs) + (qp′(xs)h + 1)2qU″(w – qp(xs)h – xs) < 0,
since each term is negative.
To show that xs* > 0, note from (10) that
(12) EU′(0) = –qp′(0)h(1 – q)U′(w – qp(0)h) – (qp′(0)h + 1)qU′(w – qp(0)h)
(10)

39

In Shavell (1982), I considered the Pareto optimal standard of care assuming, unlike here, that possibly
risk-averse injurers know ex ante that their activity of injurers is subject to control. Then the Pareto optimal
standard equals the conventionally efficient level x*; see Proposition 3(a) in my earlier article.
40

Since t = r – v + qp(x*)h, the marginal increase in t from a marginal reduction in xs is
–qp′(x*)h. Since the expected cost of meeting the standard is qx*, the marginal reduction in expected costs
is q. And since, by (2), x* satisfies p′(x*)h = –1, we know that –qp′(x*)h = q.
41

Note that this logic explaining the key result that xs* < x* does not depend on the fact that, in the model,
xs affects other parties by influencing expected harm, p(xs)h. It is readily verified that xs* < x* would still be true if
xs were to affect other parties via any positive cost function f(xs) that is decreasing in xs, in which case (7) would be
replaced by v + t – f(xs) = r and x* would be the x minimizing x + f(x).

12

= –q(p′(0)h + 1)U′(w – qh(0)) > 0
since p′(0)h + 1 < 0 by (3).
To show that xs* < x*, it suffices to show that EU′(x*) < 0, since EU″(xs) < 0. Now
(13) EU′(x*) = –qp′(x*)h(1 – q)U′(w – qp(x*)h) – (qp′(x*)h + 1)qU′(w – qp(x*)h – x*)
< –qp′(x*)h(1 – q)U′(w – qp(x*)h – x*) – (qp′(x*)h + 1)qU′(w – qp(x*) – x*)
= [–qp′(x*)h(1 – q) – (qp′(x*)h + 1)q]U′(w – qp(x*)h – x*)
= –q(p′(x*)h + 1)U′(w – qp(x*)h – x*) = 0,
since p′(x*)h + 1 = 0 by (2).
The first-order condition determining xs* is
(14) –qp′(xs)h[(1 – q)U′(w – qp(xs)h) + qU′(w – qp(xs)h – x)] = qU′(w – qp(xs)h – xs).
On the left is the marginal benefit to an injurer of raising the standard; it is the amount –qp′(xs)h
by which the payment to victims falls, weighted by the expected marginal utility of money. On
the right is the marginal cost of raising the standard, which involves a high marginal utility of
money because the cost is incurred when the standard is imposed.42 ~
Let us next consider the case where victims are risk averse. Then the expected utility of a
victim is
(15) EV(xs) = (1 – q)V(v + t) + qV(v + t – p(xs)h).
The risk borne by the victim is the expected harm given the standard, p(xs)h, because it is
assumed that a victim pays the actuarially fair premium for insurance coverage against suffering
a loss h.43 The Pareto optimal standard is therefore determined by maximizing (6) subject to
(16)
(1 – q)V(v + t) + qV(v + t – p(xs)h) = r,
where r is a reference level of expected utility of victims.
I wish to show that an analogue of Proposition 1 holds. A way to view Proposition 1 is
that it shows that when victims are risk neutral, the effect of injurer risk aversion is to lower the
Pareto optimal standard from what it would otherwise be (for when injurers are risk neutral, the
Pareto optimal standard is x* by Remark 1). Hence, a natural analogue of Proposition 1 is that
when victims are risk averse, the effect of injurer risk aversion is also to lower the Pareto optimal
standard from what it would otherwise be.
Proposition 2. Assume that injurers are risk averse and that victims are also risk averse.
Then the Pareto optimal standard of care xs* is such that 0 < xs* < x**, where x** is the Pareto
optimal standard of care when injurers are risk neutral and victims are risk averse. Here x* <
x**, and xs* is determined by (A11) below.
Notes. (a) The explanation for why xs* is positive is similar to that given in Proposition
1. The only difference is that here, because victims are risk averse, the reduction in the payment
t that injurers make if xs is raised slightly from zero is greater than when victims are risk neutral,
for risk averse victims benefit from a reduction in risk bearing. This reinforces the benefit to
injurers from raising xs from zero.
42

I will not comment on first-order conditions in later propositions because their interpretations are similar.

43

If the premium for insurance coverage is actuarially fair, it is a standard result that risk-averse parties
would maximize their expected utility by purchasing full coverage; see, for example, Shavell (1987, chapter 8). In
any event, even if victims cannot insure against h, the essential nature of the conclusion I draw in the next
proposition would not change.

13

(b) The explanation for why xs* < x** is analogous to that given in Proposition 1 for why
xs* < x*. Namely, if xs is marginally reduced from x**, then since the injurer is risk averse and
is bearing positive risk, he benefits from a reduction in risk-bearing, whereas this benefit is not
reflected in the determination of x**.
(c) The explanation for why x* < x** is that when victims are risk averse, they benefit
from higher xs not only because care lowers expected harm but also because care lowers riskbearing. Thus, the reduction in t is greater when xs is raised. Accordingly, risk-neutral injurers
find a higher xs desirable than when victims are risk neutral.
Proof. See the Appendix.
3.2 Payment for harm
Now assume that if the state learns that the activity is harmful, the legal rule that the state
adopts requires injurers to make payments to victims based on harm. Two rules of this type that
will be equivalent under our assumptions will be considered: strict liability and corrective
taxes.44 Under strict liability, injurers must pay damages to victims if harm occurs. Let
d = damages payment that an injurer must make if he causes harm.
In our legal system, d is generally intended to equal h, but here we will determine the Pareto
optimal d, which need not equal h. Under strict liability, it will be assumed that, if the injurer is
risk averse and strict liability is imposed, the injurer can purchase liability insurance at an
actuarially fair rate. Hence, if strict liability is imposed, the injurer will purchase full coverage
against d and pay a premium of p(x)d.45 (Note that the assumption that injurers can buy liability
insurance if the activity is found harmful is consistent with the assumption that injurers cannot
buy coverage against legal change, that is, the risk that the state will employ the rule of strict
liability. In any event, the assumption that liability insurance can be purchased is not
essential.46) Hence, the injurer’s utility will be
(17) EU = (1 – q)U(u – t) + qU(u – t – x – p(x)d).
Under corrective taxes, injurers are required to make a payment of p(x)d if the state learns
that the activity is harmful.47 Hence, if d equals h, the payment equals the expected harm from
the activity. The expected utility of an injurer under the corrective tax is also given by (17).
44

A fine paid to the state would also be equivalent to damages paid to victims given the assumptions in the

model.
45

This presumes that liability insurers can observe x and base the premium on it; see, for example, Shavell
(1987, chapter 8).
46

If instead it was assumed that injurers could not purchase liability insurance, the conclusion to be shown
that d < h is Pareto optimal would only be reinforced, as injurer risk-bearing due to legal uncertainty would be
greater.
47

It would be straightforward to consider a variation of the model in which, in the initial situation before
uncertainty is resolved, a subsidy (a negative corrective tax) is enjoyed by the individuals with utility function U
because of the existence of a positive externality generated by their choice of x. Then, it would be discovered with
probability q that the positive externality does not exist. Hence, the Pareto optimal subsidy would fall to zero if the
parties who had enjoyed the subsidy were risk-neutral, but the subsidy would not fall to zero if they were risk
averse. This variation of the model can be viewed as describing the possible elimination of the mortgage interest tax
deduction, since it is a form of subsidy that could be interpreted as justified by a positive externality associated with
home ownership.

14

Note that the risk borne by the injurer is the cost of care x plus the (premium) payment
p(x)d (whereas under regulation the risk was only the cost of care).
The level of care that an injurer chooses maximizes (17),48 so that it minimizes
(18) x + p(x)d.
Since (18) is strictly convex in x, there exists a unique x minimizing it, which will be denoted
x(d). Further, since the derivative of (18) is 1 + p′(x)d, we know that if 1 + p′(0)d ≥ 0, then x(d)
= 0. Consequently, if d ≤ –1/p′(0), then x(d) = 0. Otherwise, x(d) is positive and is determined
by
(19) 1 + p′(x)d = 0.
From implicit differentiation of (19), we obtain that p″(x)x′(d)d + p′(x) = 0, implying that
(20) x′(d) = –p′(x)/(p″(x)d) > 0.
If victims are risk neutral, the expected wealth of a victim will be v + t – qp(x)(h – d),49 since
victims bear h – d of their losses.50 Thus, we must have
(21) v + t – qp(x)(h – d) = r,
where r is again a reference level of wealth. Hence,
(22) t = r – v + qp(x)(h – d).
The Pareto optimal level of damages d for risk-averse injurers and risk neutral victims thus
maximizes (17) subject to (22). Hence, d* is determined by maximization of
(23) EU(d) = (1 – q)U(u – r + v – qp(x(d))(h – d))
+ qU(u – r + v – qp(x(d))(h – d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d)).
Before we determine this d*, let us note the following.
Remark 2. Assume that both injurers and victims are risk neutral. Then the Pareto
optimal level of damages d* is the harm h.
Remark 2 confirms that when parties are risk neutral, the conventionally optimal level of
liability equal to the harm is Pareto optimal and that the conventionally best corrective tax equal
to the expected harm is Pareto optimal. To demonstrate these conclusions, observe that when
injurers are risk neutral, (23) reduces to
(24) u – r + v – q[p(x(d))h + x(d)].
To maximize (24), [p(x(d))h + x(d)] must be minimized over d. That is achieved if d is h, for by
definition, x(h) minimizes p(x)h + x over x.
Now let me describe the result when injurers are risk averse. We have
Proposition 3. Assume that injurers are risk averse and that victims are risk neutral.
Then the Pareto optimal level of damages d* is such that 0 ≤ d* < h, where h is harm; the Pareto
optimal corrective tax is p(x(d*))d* and thus satisfies 0 ≤ p(x(d*))d* < p(x(d*))h. Further, d* = 0
if h is in [0, h^], where h^ > –1/p′(0), and if d* > 0, it is determined by (32) below.
48

It is supposed that injurers take t as given, the motivation for which is that there are many injurers, so that
actions of any single injurer would have only a negligible effect on t.
49

Here and below, I will sometimes write x instead of x(d) for notational convenience.

50

Under the rule of strict liability, victims are directly compensated by injurers. Under corrective taxes, it
is the government that collects payments and I will interpret the government as the victim.

15

Notes. (a) The explanation for why d* will be zero for h sufficiently low is as follows.
Raising d from zero has no effect on x until d exceeds –1/p′(0), as was noted above. In other
words, a positive level of risk must be imposed on injurers to induce them to begin to raise x and
lower p(x). This imposition of risk-bearing may not be worthwhile because it may exceed the
benefit to injurers from lowering the payment t that they make to victims.51 That h^ > –1/p′(0)
implies that there are h for which x*(h) is positive—the conventionally optimal level of care is
positive—yet for which d* is zero due to the factor of risk-bearing.
(b) The explanation for why d* < h is that if d is slightly lowered from h, then the
increase in t will approximate the expected reduction in care and payments;52 that is, if the
injurer were risk neutral, the marginal effect on his well-being would be zero. But since the
injurer is risk averse and is bearing positive risk, he benefits from a reduction in risk-bearing
from the marginal reduction in d, implying that his expected utility must rise.53
Proof. I first show that EU(d) is strictly decreasing in d for d in [0, –1/p′(0)]. From (23),
we have
(25) EU′(d) = (1 – q)[–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x)]U′(u – r + v – qp(x(d))(h – d))
+ q[–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x) – x′(d) – p′(x)x′(d)d – p(x)]
× U′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d).
Now for d in [0, –1/p′(0)], recall that x(d) = 0. Hence, x′(d) = 0 in the interval. Thus, in that
interval (25) reduces to
(26) EU′(d) = (1 – q)[qp(0)]U′(u – r + v – qp(0)(h – d))
+ q[qp(0) – p(0)]U′(u – r + v – qp(0)(h – d)) – p(0)d).
Hence, for d in (0, –1/p′(0)], we have
(27) EU′(d) < (1 – q)[qp(0)]U′(u – r + v – qp(0)(h – d) – p(0)d)
+ q[qp(0) – p(0)]U′(u – r + v – qp(0)(h – d) – p(0)d) = 0.
Let us next show that for any h in [0, –1/p′(0)], EU(d) is strictly decreasing in d for
d > –1/p′(0) and also that d*(h) = 0. For d > –1/p′(0), we know that x(d) > 0, and from (25) we
see that
(28) EU′(d) < {(1 – q)[–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x)]
+ q[–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x) – x′(d) – p′(x)x′(d)d – p(x)]}
× U′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d)
51

Note the contrast with Proposition 1, where the optimal standard of care xs* must be positive. When the
level of care can be directly controlled as a standard by the state, no risk is imposed on injurers when the standard
begins to be raised from zero. But here, as explained, when the level of care is only indirectly controlled by the state
through imposition of payments for harm, positive risk must be imposed before the standard begins to be raised from
zero. This explains the difference in conclusions.
52

Since t = r – v + qp(x(d))(h – d), the increase in t from a marginal reduction in d is
–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x), so that at d = h, the marginal increase in t is qp(x(h)). Expected care is qx(d), so
the marginal reduction in this quantity at d = h is –qx′(h). Expected payments are qp(x(d))d, so the marginal
reduction in these at d = h is –qp′(x(h))x′(h)h – qp(x(h)). Hence, the change in expected care and payments is –
qx′(h) –qp′(x(h))x′(h)h – qp(x(h)) = –qp(x(h)) since qx′(h) + qp′(x(h))x′(h)h = qx′(h)(1 + p′(x(h))h) = 0. Thus the
marginal increase in t does indeed offset the marginal decrease in expected expenses.
53

In Shavell (1982), I considered the Pareto optimal level of damages assuming, unlike here, that possibly
risk-averse injurers know ex ante that their activity is subject to strict liability. Then, when injurers can purchase
liability insurance, the Pareto optimal level of damages d* equals the harm h; see Proposition 4 in my earlier article.

16

= {[–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d)] –q[x′(d) + p′(x)x′(d)d)]}
× U′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d).
But –qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) < 0 since d > h when d > –1/p′(0) and h is in [0, –1/p′(0)]; and [x′(d) +
p′(x)x′(d)d)] = x′(d)(1 + p′(x)d) = 0 since x(d) satisfies 1 + p′(x)d = 0. Thus, the last line of (28) is
negative, showing that EU′(d) < 0 for d > –1/p′(0). Consequently, EU(d) is decreasing for all d
given that h is in [0, –1/p′(0)]. It thus follows that d*(h) = 0 for such h.
We now show that for h > –1/p′(0) and sufficiently close to –1/p′(0), d*(h) = 0, so that the
asserted h^ exists. We do this using a number of observations. (i) For any h, d*(h) is either 0 or
exceeds –1/p′(0): This is true since EU(d) is strictly decreasing in d in [0, –1/p′(0)], as
demonstrated in the first paragraph in this proof. (ii) Let m(h) = maximum of EU(d, h) over d ≥
–1/p′(0), where EU(d, h) is EU(d) given h. Then m(h) is clearly decreasing in h. (iii) m(–
1/p′(0)) > m(h) for h > –1/p′(0): This follows from (ii). (iv) EU(0, h) = U(u – r + v – qp((0))h)
is continuous in h. (v) EU(0, –1/p′(0)) > EU(–1/p′(0), –1/p′(0)) = m(–1/p′(0)): The inequality
here follows because we showed that EU(d) is decreasing for d in [0, –1/p′(0)], and the equality
follows because we showed that EU(d) is decreasing for larger d when h does not exceed –
1/p′(0). (vi) EU(0, h) > m(–1/p′(0)) for all h above –1/p′(0) and sufficiently close to it: This
follows from (iv) and (v). (vii) EU(0, h) > m(h) for all h above –1/p′(0) and sufficiently close to
it: This follows from (iii) and (vi). (viii) d*(h) = 0 for all h above –1/p′(0) and sufficiently close
to it: This follows from (vii) and (i).
To show that d* < h, rewrite (25), making use of the fact that x′(d)(1 + p′(x)d) = 0 since
x(d) satisfies 1 + p′(x)d = 0, to obtain
(29) EU′(d) = (1 – q)[–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x)]U′(u – r + v – qp(x(d))(h – d))
+ q[–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x) – p(x)]U′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d).
We want to show that (29) is negative for d ≥ h. Since –qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) ≤ 0 for d ≥ h, it
suffices to show that
(30) (1 – q)qp(x)U′(u – r + v – qp(x(d))(h – d))
+ q[qp(x) – p(x)]U′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d) < 0
for d ≥ h. But the left-hand side equals
(31) qp(x)(1 – q)
×[U′(u – r + v – qp(x(d))(h – d)) – U′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d)] < 0.
The first-order condition determining d* is, from (29),
(32) [–qp′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + qp(x)]
× [(1 – q)U′(u – r + v – qp(x(d))(h – d)) + qU′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d)]
= qp(x)U′(u – r + v – qp(x)(h – d)) – x(d) – p(x)d). ~
Let us next consider the case in which victims are risk averse. Hence, the expected utility
of a victim is
(33)
EV(d) = (1 – q)V(v + t) + qV(v + t – p(x(d))(h – d))
since victims pay the fair insurance premium p(x(d))(h – d) for coverage against the risk h – d
that they bear. The Pareto optimal standard is therefore determined by maximizing (17) subject
to
(34)
(1 – q)V(v + t) + qV(v + t – p(x(d))(h – d)) = r,
where r is a reference level of expected utility of victims. We then have
Proposition 4. Assume that injurers are risk averse and that victims are also risk averse.
Then the Pareto optimal level of damages d* is such that 0 < d* < h, where h is harm; the Pareto
17

optimal corrective tax is p(x(d*)d* and satisfies 0 < p(x(d*)d* < p(x(d*)h. Further, d* is
determined by (A27) below.
Notes. (a) The explanation for why d* is positive follows from the point that x(d) = 0 for
d in [0, –1/p′(0)]. In other words, raising d in this interval shifts risk from injurers to victims but
does not change the probability of harm and thus the risk to be shared between them. Since
some degree of risk-sharing of a given risk between two risk-averse parties is desirable, d* must
be positive.54
(b) The explanation for why d* < h follows from the explanation of this result in the
previous proposition, where victims were risk-neutral. Here, although victims are risk averse,
they behave essentially as if they were risk neutral when d = h, for then they bear no risk.
Proof. See the Appendix.
4. Concluding Comments
(a) The generality of the model. The chief qualitative conclusion of the analysis—that
legal change should be attenuated due to the bearing of risk by risk-averse parties subject to the
law—does not depend on a number of simplifying features of the model.
One assumption was that there was a single type of action parties could take: the exercise
of care after a legal change is announced. If other types of action were considered, notably,
decisions about levels of care before a legal change, or decisions about levels of activity before
or after a legal change, nothing essential would be altered. There would then be different
dimensions of conventional inefficiency of behavior engendered by the attenuation of legal
change, but some attenuation from efficiency would still generally be desirable to relieve riskbearing.55
A second simplifying assumption was that the source of the change in the law was the
state’s learning that an activity was harmful rather than harmless. If the source of the change
was, instead, information about the level of harmfulness of an activity already known to be
harmful, or about the technology or cost of harm reduction, that would not alter the main
conclusions.
A third simplifying assumption was that there was no insurance available against legal
change. If partial insurance were available, risk-averse parties would still bear some risk, so that
attenuation of the legal change might be desirable.
(b) The desirable extent of attenuation depends on the degree of risk aversion and risk.
The optimal level of attenuation of legal change is a function of the degree of risk aversion of
parties and of the magnitude of the risks of losses that they bear. Thus, for individuals subject to
substantial legal risks, such as homeowners with large mortgages confronting the potential
elimination of their interest deductions, significant attenuation would presumably be desirable,
whereas for publicly-held firms facing the possibility of a modest change in a workplace safety
rule, essentially no attenuation would be appropriate.
54

In Proposition 3, this logic did not apply since victims were risk neutral.

55

For example, it should be clear to a reader who reviews Note (b) to Proposition 1 and note 41 that the
proof that the optimal standard xs* is less than the conventionally efficient level x* would be essentially unaltered if
x were chosen before the state learns whether the activity is harmful. (Both xs* and x* would be lower under that
assumption, but xs* < x* would still hold.)

18

(c) Attenuation of legal change in reality. Legal change often appears to be attenuated in
practice, reflecting the hardships that it could cause for the parties to whom it is addressed. If,
for example, a proposed regulation aimed at reduction of pollution would impose a large expense
on small businesses, they might be able to convince regulators to lessen the rigor of the
regulation. Moreover, legal change is frequently delayed or implemented in phases. A 10
percent increase in a tax rate might be achieved through a 5 percent increase in one year and
another 5 percent increase in a second year. Also of relevance is grandfathering, under which
parties who are already engaged in an activity governed by a legal rule are exempted from
having to satisfy a legal change bearing on it. Grandfathering is obviously a form of attenuation,
as it arrests legal change for the parties engaged in an activity, and grandfathering possesses the
beneficial feature that these parties may be least able to bear the risk of change (parties who are
only contemplating entry into the activity have the option to delay doing so or not to enter at all).
In sum, legal change seems to display a broadly attenuated character in reality, which is
consistent with the analysis of this article.56
(d) Attenuation of legal change versus government compensation. Although it was
shown in this article that attenuation of legal change is a desirable policy given the unavailability
of insurance coverage against modifications of the law, other policies were not considered. One
such policy is government compensation for the losses caused by legal change, and I restrict my
remarks here to it.57
Consider the risk of losses due to adoption of a new regulation. Then a policy of
government compensation might allow achievement of an ideal outcome. In particular, full
compensation could be granted for the cost of meeting a new regulation (such as the cost to a
gasoline service station of installing new, mandated holding tanks), so that no risk would be
borne by parties subject to the regulation. Hence, there would be no reason for society to lower
the required level of care from the conventionally efficient level (no reason to lower the required
quality of the holding tanks from the efficient level), and the best possible outcome would
apparently be obtained.58
Next consider the risk of losses due to the use of a legal rule requiring a payment. Here,
a policy of government compensation would be equivalent to attenuation of the payment. For
example, suppose that a pollution tax of $10 per pound of pollutant might be enacted and that, if
it is, the government would provide $3 of compensation per pound of the taxed pollutant. This
program would clearly lead to the same result as a tax of $7 per pound unaccompanied by any
56

That legal change is often observed to be attenuated may also be explained in part by a rationale that is
independent of risk aversion: to avoid wasting resources already committed to comply with the law (if a gasoline
service station recently installed a holding tank that met then-relevant regulations, it could be wasteful to force the
service station to replace that tank with a slightly more efficient one). This point is developed in Shavell (2008).
The attenuation of legal change may also be ascribed to the self-interest and political power of parties who would
be adversely affected by a legal change (whether or not attenuation has an economic rationale).
57

As I noted in the introduction, the economically-oriented literature on legal change focuses on the policy
of government compensation.
58

I say “apparently” because the argument just given elides the following question: Does the cause of
failure of the private market to supply insurance coverage against legal change also bear on the government’s ability
to provide compensation? Notably, if the cause of the failure of the insurance market to supply coverage is the
correlation of losses caused by a legal change, would the correlation of these losses also constitute a problem for a
government compensation program (which must ultimately be financed by taxpayers)?

19

compensation. Hence, since I considered all possible levels of attenuation of a corrective tax, I
implicitly considered the policy of government compensation for losses due to a corrective tax.
A more expansive analysis of legal change and aversion to risk than that of this article
would include government provision of compensation or government provision of insurance
coverage, as an alternative to, or complement of, attenuated legal change.

20

References
Abraham, Kenneth S. 1977. “Medical Malpractice Reform: A Preliminary Analysis,” 36
Maryland Law Review 489-532.
Abraham, Kenneth S. 2010. Insurance Law and Regulation. Fifth edition. New York:
Foundation Press.
Appleman on Insurance, 2d. 1996. Second edition. St. Paul: West.
Baker, Tom. 2004. “Insuring Liability Risks,” 29 The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance
128–149.
Baker, Tom. 2008. Insurance Law and Policy. Second edition. New York: Aspen.
Blume, Lawrence, and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1984. “Compensation for Takings: An Economic
Analysis,” 72 California Law Review 569–628.
Church, George J. 2005. “Sorry, Your Policy Is Canceled,” Time Magazine. Tuesday, June 21,
2005. Available at <http://www.time.com/time/printout/0,8816,1075044,00.html>
Couch on Insurance, 3d. 2009. Revised edition. St. Paul: West.
Froot, Kenneth A. 2001. “The Market for Catastrophe Risk: A Clinical Examination,” 60
Journal of Financial Economics 529–571.
Georgakopoulos, Nicholas L. 1997. “Predictability and Legal Evolution,” 17 International
Review of Law and Economics 475-489.
Graetz, Michael. 1977. “Legal Transitions: The Case of Retroactivity in Income
Tax Revision,” 126 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 47–87.
Harrington, Scott E., and Gregory R. Niehaus. 2004. Risk Management and Insurance.
Second edition. New York: McGraw–Hill/Irwin.
Kaplow, Louis. 1986. “An Economic Analysis of Legal Transitions,” 99 Harvard Law Review
509–617.
Kaplow, Louis. 1992. “Government Relief for Risk Associated with Government Action,” 94
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 525–541.
Landes, William M., and Richard A. Posner. 1987. The Economic Structure of Tort Law.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

21

Levmore, Saul. 1998. Retroactive Taxation. 3:340–44 in The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics and the Law, edited by Peter Newman. New York:
Stockton Press.
Levmore, Saul. 1999. “Changes, Anticipations, and Reparations,” 99 Columbia Law Review
1657–1700.
Logue, Kyle D. 1996. “Tax Transitions, Opportunistic Retroactivity, and the Benefits of
Government Precommitment,” 94 Michigan Law Review 1129–1196.
Logue, Kyle D. 2003. “Legal Transitions, Rational Expectations, and Legal Progress,”
13 Journal of Law and Contemporary Legal Issues 211–260.
Masur, Jonathan S., and Jonathan Remy Nash. 2010. “The Institutional Dynamics of Transition
Relief,” 85 New York University Law Review 391–456.
Nash, Jonathan Remy, and Richard L. Revesz. 2007. “Grandfathering and Environmental
Regulation: The Law and Economics of New Source Review,” 101 Northwestern
University Law Review 1677–1733.
Priest, George L. 1987. “The Current Insurance Crisis and Modern Tort Law,” 96 Yale Law
Journal 1521–1590.
Quinn, John, and Michael J. Trebilcock. 1982. “Compensation, Transition Costs, and
Regulatory Change,” 32 University of Toronto Law Journal 117–175.
Shavell, Steven. 1982. “On Liability and Insurance,” 13 Bell Journal of Economics 120-132.
Shavell, Steven. 1987. Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Shavell, Steven. 2008. “On Optimal Legal Change, Past Behavior, and Grandfathering,” 37
Journal of Legal Studies 37–85.
Shaviro, Daniel. 2000. When Rules Change. An Economic and Political Analysis of Transition
Relief and Retroactivity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vaughan, Emmett J., and Therese Vaughan. 2008. Fundamentals of Risk and Insurance. Tenth
Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1991. “The Dimensions of the Product Liability Crisis,” 20 Journal of Legal
Studies 147-177.

22

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 2. Equation (16) determines t as a function of xs, which we write as t(xs).
Implicit differentiation of (16) with respect to xs gives
(A1) t′(xs) = qp′(xs)hz(xs) < 0,
where
(A2) z(xs) = V′(v + t(xs) – p(xs)h)/[(1 – q)V′(v + t(xs)) + qV′(v + t(xs) – p(xs)h)].
Note that
(A3) z(xs) > 1.
Differentiation of (A1) gives
(A4) t″(xs) = qp″(xs)hz(xs) + qp′(xs)hz′(xs).
Since z′(xs) < 0,59 (A4) implies that
(A5) t″(xs) > 0.
Let us first show that xs* > 0. Now xs* is determined by maximizing
(A6) EU(xs) = (1 – q)U(u – t(xs)) + qU(u – t(xs) – xs)
over xs. We have
(A7) EU′(xs) = –(1 – q)t′(xs)U′(u – t(xs)) – (t′(xs) + 1)qU′(u – t(xs) – xs).
Hence,
(A8) EU′(0) = –(1 – q)t′(0)U′(u – t(0)) – (t′(0) + 1)qU′(u – t(0))
= –(t′(0) + q)U′(u – t(0)).
But
(A9) t′(0) = qp′(0)hz(0) < qp′(0)h < –q,
where the first inequality holds because z(0) > 1 and the second inequality holds because of (3).
Hence, EU′(0) > 0, so that xs* > 0 as claimed.
Let us next prove that xs* < x**. The latter is found by maximizing
(A10) EU(xs) = (1 – q)U(u – t(xs)) + qU(u – t(xs) – xs)
= (1 – q)(u – t(xs)) + q(u – t(xs) – xs) = u – (t(xs) + qxs)
over xs since injurers are risk neutral. Therefore x** is determined by
(A11)
t′(xs) = –q.
Given (A11) and the fact that t″(xs) > 0, we know that if t′(xs*) < –q, it must be that xs*< x**.
Hence, we want to show t′(xs*) < –q. From (A7), we know that xs* is determined by
(A12) –(1 – q)t′(xs)U′(u – t(xs)) – (t′(xs) + 1)qU′(u – t(xs) – xs) = 0,
which implies that at xs*,
(A13) t′(xs) = –qU′(u – t(xs) – xs)/[(1 – q)U′(u – t(xs)) + qU′(u – t(xs) – xs)]
< –qU′(u – t(xs) – xs)/[(1 – q)U′(u – t(xs) – xs) + qU′(u – t(xs) – xs)] = –q,
establishing the claim.
Last, let us show that x* < x**. From (A11) and (A1), we have
(A14) qp′(x**)hz(x**) = –q,
which implies that
(A15) p′(x**)h = –1/z(x**) > –1
since, by (A3), z(x**) > 1. Because p′(x*)h = –1 and p″(x) > 0, (A15) implies
59

It suffices to demonstrate that the numerator of the derivative of z(xs) is negative since the denominator
must be positive. This numerator is readily verified to be (1 – q)(t′(xs) – p′(xs)h)V″(v + t – p(xs)h)V′(v + t) – (1 –
q)V′(v + t – p(xs)h)t′(xs)V″(v + t)]. Since the second term is negative, we need to show that the first term is negative.
The latter will be true if t′(xs) – p′(xs)h > 0. But t′(xs) – p′(xs)h = qp′(xs)hz(xs) – p′(xs)h = p′(xs)h(qz(xs) – 1). Because
it is clear that qz(xs) < 1, it must be that t′(xs) – p′(xs)h > 0 as required.

23

that x** > x*.
Proof of Proposition 4. Equation (34) determines t(d), and differentiating (34) with respect to d
gives
(A16) (1 – q)t′(d)V′(v + t(d))
+ q[t′(d) – p′(x)x′(d)(h – d) + p(x(d))]V′(v + t(d) – p(x(d))(h – d)) = 0.
Hence,
(A17) t′(d) = q[p′(x)x′(d)(h – d) – p(x(d))]
× V′(v + t(d) – p(x(d))(h – d))/[(1 – q)V′(v + t(d)) + qV′(v + t(d) – p(x(d))(h – d))].
The optimal d is determined by maximizing
(A18) EU(d) = (1 – q)U(u – t(d)) + qU(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d),
the derivative of which is
(A19) EU′(d) = –(1 – q)t′(d)U′(u – t(d))
– q[t′(d) + x′(d) + p′(x)x′(d)d + p(x(d))]U′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d).
Since x(d) = 0 for d in [0, –1/p′(0)], x′(d) = 0 in this interval. Hence,
(A20) t′(0) = –qp(0)V′(v + t(0) – p(0)h)/[(1 – q)V′(v + t(0)) + qV′(v + t(0) – p(0)h))]
and
(A21) EU′(0) = –(1 – q)t′(0)U′(u – t(0)) – q[t′(0) + p(0)]U′(u – t(0))
= –[t′(0) + qp(0)]U′(u – t(0)).
But from (A20), we have
(A22) t′(0) + qp(0) = qp(0){1 – V′(v + t(0) – p(0)h)/[(1 – q)V′(v + t(0)) +
qV′(v + t(0) – p(0)h))]} < 1.
Thus, EU′(0) > 0, showing that d* > 0.
To demonstrate that d* < h, it is sufficient to show that EU′(d) < 0 for d ≥ h. We know
that x′(d) + p′(x)x′(d)d = 0, since this must be true for d in [0, –1/p′(0)] as was noted in the
previous paragraph and since for greater d, x(d > 0, so that 1 + p′(x(d))d = 0. Consequently,
(A19) reduces to
(A23) EU′(d) = –(1 – q)t′(d)U′(u – t(d)) – q[t′(d) + p(x(d))]U′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d)
= –t′(d)[(1 – q)U′(u – t(d)) + qU′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d)]
–qp(x(d))U′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d).
To show that (A23) is negative for d ≥ h, let us first verify that t′(d) > –qp(x(d)) for d ≥ h. Using
(A17), the latter inequality is equivalent to
(A24) q[p′(x)x′(d)(h – d) – p(x(d))] × V′(v + t(d) – p(x(d))(h – d))/[(1 – q)V′(v + t(d)) +
qV′(v + t(d) – p(x(d))(h – d))] ≥ –qp(x(d)).
Since p′(x)x′(d)(h – d) ≥ 0 when d ≥ h, (A24) will be true if
(A25) –qp(x(d)) × {V′(v + t(d) – p(x(d))(h – d))/[(1 – q)V′(v + t(d))
+ qV′(v + t(d) – p(x(d))(h – d))]} ≥ –qp(x(d)).
This must hold, for the term in braces is at least 1.
Since t′(d) ≥ –qp(x(d)) or –t′(d) ≤ qp(x(d)) for d ≥ h, we have from (A23) for such d that
(A26) EU′(d) ≤ qp(x(d))[(1 – q)U′(u – t(d)) + qU′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d)]
– qp(x(d))U′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d) = qp(x(d)){[(1 – q)U′(u – t(d))
+ qU′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d)] – U′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d)} < 0.
Hence, d* < h.
The first-order condition determining d* is
(A27) –t′(d)[(1 – q)U′(u – t(d)) + qU′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d)]
= qp(x(d))U′(u – t(d) – x(d) – p(x(d))d).
24

