                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           COAL, SMOKE, AND DEATH:
                  BITUMINOUS COAL AND AMERICAN HOME HEATING

                                            Alan Barreca
                                            Karen Clay
                                             Joel Tarr

                                        Working Paper 19881
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19881


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




We thank Leila Abu-Orf, Paula Levin, and Katherine Rudolph for excellent research assistance. We
are grateful to Antonio Bento, Olivier Deschenes, Stanley Engerman, Price Fishback, Gary Libecap,
Paulina Oliva, Paul Rhode, Mel Stephens, and seminar participants at the AERE 2013 Meeting, ASSA
2013 Cliometrics Session, Cornell University, DC Area Economic History Workshop, Economic History
Association 2011 Meetings, Pittsburgh Economics Medley Conference, Stanford University, University
of California, Santa Barbara, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, and University of Michigan,
and Yale University for helpful comments. The infant birth data was digitized with financial support
from NIA grant P30-AG012810 through the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, and Joel Tarr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bituminous Coal and American Home Heating
Alan Barreca, Karen Clay, and Joel Tarr
NBER Working Paper No. 19881
February 2014
JEL No. I18,N32,N52,Q53

                                             ABSTRACT

Air pollution was severe in many urban areas of the United States in the first half of the twentieth
century,in part due to the burning of bituminous coal for heat. We estimate the effects of this bituminous
coalconsumption on mortality rates in the U.S. during the mid 20th century. Coal consumption varied
considerablyduring the 20th century due to coal-labor strikes, wartime oil and gas restrictions, and
the expansionof gas pipelines, among other reasons. To mitigate the influence of confounding factors,
we use a triple-differencesidentification strategy that relies on variation in coal consumption at the
state-year-season level. Itexploits the fact that coal consumption for heating was highest in the winter
and uses within-state changesin mortality in non-winter months as an additional control group. Our
estimates suggest that reductionsin the use of bituminous coal for heating between 1945 and 1960
decreased winter all-age mortalityby 1.25 percent and winter infant mortality by 3.27 percent, saving
1,923 all age lives per winter monthand 310 infant lives per winter month. Our estimates are likely
to be a lower bound, since they primarilycapture short-run relationships between coal and mortality.


Alan Barreca                                         Joel Tarr
Department of Economics                              Department of History
Tulane University                                    5000 Forbes Avenue
206 Tilton Hall                                      Pittsburgh PA 15213
New Orleans, LA 70118                                jt03@andrew.cmu.edu
and NBER
abarreca@tulane.edu

Karen Clay
Heinz College
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu
1. Introduction

         Today, coal-related pollution is a serious concern in developing countries, especially

China and India (Almond et al 2009, Cohen et al 2004). What has largely been forgotten is that

until recently, coal-related pollution was also a significant public health problem in many

developed countries, including Britain and the United States. Thousands died in London’s most

famous fog in December 1952 (Clay and Troesken 2010). While no single American incident

rivaled the London Fog, the United States experienced severe coal-related air pollution in most

Midwestern and Eastern towns and cities in the 1930s and 1940s (Eisenbud 1978, Tarr 1996,

Tarr and Clay 2012). Examining historical periods when developed countries, like the United

States, had high levels of pollution can offer important insights into the pollution-health

relationship in countries at earlier stages of economic development.

         This paper uses a triple-differences model to estimate the effects of bituminous coal

consumption for home heating on infant and all-age mortality rates in the United States during

the mid-twentieth century. We focus on the effects of bituminous coal for heating for three

reasons.1 First, bituminous coal was widely used for heating and highly polluting compared to

alternative fuels, including anthracite coal. In 1940, approximately 41 percent of United States

households and 48 percent of urban households used bituminous coal for home heating.2 Second,

bituminous coal used for heating was generally more harmful than bituminous coal that was used

1
  In line with the Minerals Yearbook, we use bituminous coal to refer to lignite, sub-bituminous, and bituminous
coal. Data from the Coal Resources of the United States (1950) show that lignite and subbituminous coal were
produced in small quantities in western states. As of January 1, 1950, of all coal produced in the United States to
that point, 97 percent was bituminous, 2 percent was subbituminous, and 1 percent was lignite.
2
  1940 Census of Housing Table 60, p. 101 available at
http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/36911485v2p1ch1.pdf. The census asked whether the
household used coal for heating, but it did not ask whether the household used bituminous or anthracite coal. Fifty-
five percent of households and 64 percent of urban households reported using coal for heating. Estimates in the mid
1920s suggest suggested that 65 percent of anthracite was being used for heating. Department of Commerce (1929),
p. 6. Taken together with data on consumption of bituminous and anthracite, this implies that 75 percent of coal
consumed for heating was bituminous.


                                                                                                                   2
for other purposes. Residential bituminous coal users were primarily located in urban areas,

burned bituminous coal at low temperatures thereby limiting the combustion of the coal, and had

low chimneys, all of which increased population exposure to pollution.3 Conversely, firms that

used bituminous coal in manufacturing and electricity generation tended to be located outside

urban areas, burned the coal at high temperatures thereby facilitating combustion, and had higher

smokestacks that allowed for dispersion of smoke across a much wider area. Third, there was

significant variation in the opportunity cost of bituminous coal during this time period. For

example, the sale and repurposing of war-related oil pipelines for natural gas after World War II

led to a decline in the relative price of natural gas. The percentage of households that used

bituminous coal for home heating fell from 41 percent in 1940 to 9 percent in 1960.

         The paper investigates the effects on both all-age mortality and infant mortality.

Epidemiological evidence suggests that exposure to air pollution poses differential health risks

across the age distribution. Infants are highly sensitive to current environmental conditions, and

their outcomes almost certainly are related to recent exposure in the place in which they are

observed. For infants, pollutants can cause premature delivery, low birth weight, respiratory

disease, and cardiovascular disease.4 For adults, air-borne particulates and associated pollutants

such as carbon monoxide can cause atherosclerosis, heart arrhythmias, and pneumonia.5

         There are several challenges to identifying the causal effects of burning bituminous coal

for heating using simple cross-sectional or time-series correlations. States with greater access to

bituminous coal may have different seasonal mortality patterns due to fixed differences in

climate. (States with bituminous coal deposits tended to be colder.) Coal consumption for

3
  It is difficult to optimize the mix of air and coal in small stoves or boilers, and so combustion is rarely complete.
This leads to greater emissions of particulates. EPA (1995) and WHO (2012).
4
  See Arceo-Gomez et al (2012), Curry and Walker (2011), Lockwood (2012), and Woodruff et al (2008).
5
  See Lockwood (2012), Pope et al (2004), and DelFino et al (2005).


                                                                                                                          3
heating may be related to industrial coal consumption, which might affect health outcomes via

changes in income or employment opportunities. Changes in access to coal over time might be

spuriously correlated with improvements in public health at the national level, or convergence in

health outcomes across states. Also, coal consumption for heating might increase in response to

weather shocks that might influence health outcomes.

       Our triple-differences model addresses these concerns in various ways. The treatment

variable is the state-year bituminous coal consumption for heating interacted with whether the

month of death is a “winter” month (November-March). State-by-month fixed effects account for

the possibility that states with greater access to coal have fixed differences in seasonal mortality.

State-year consumption is included as a main effect, which mitigates potential bias from omitted

factors, like industrialization, that might be correlated with differences in mortality throughout

the year. To address the concern that changes in coal access over time are correlated with

broader changes in public-health conditions or convergence across states, year-by-month fixed

effects and state-specific trends are included. Controls for temperature are included to account

for climate-related changes in health conditions (e.g. cold spells) that might be related to coal

consumption. Finally, controls for other non-heating forms of coal consumption are included,

both as a main effect and interacted with winter months, to demonstrate that heating is the

driving mechanism.

       Our analysis draws on newly digitized historical mortality and coal data. The unit of

observation is at the state-month level. Data on all-age and infant mortality at the state-month

level are taken from the annual Vital Statistics volumes. Using data on annual national coal

consumption and detailed survey and census data, we construct estimates of state-year

bituminous coal consumption by type of use (e.g. heating, industrial, railroad). To the extent our



                                                                                                     4
state-year coal consumption includes classical measurement error, then the effect sizes are likely

to be a lower bound.

         Our estimates suggest that reductions in the use of bituminous coal for heating between

1945 and 1960 decreased winter all-age mortality by 1.25 percent and winter infant mortality by

3.27 percent. This translates into 1,923 fewer total deaths per winter month and 309 fewer infant

deaths per winter month. The reductions in mortality varied considerably by region, because

different regions had higher baseline levels of bituminous coal use. For example in the Midwest,

the estimated effects suggest that the decline in bituminous coal consumption resulted in a 2.75

percent decline in all-age mortality and 7.27 percent decline in infant mortality. Our national and

regional estimates are likely to be lower bounds, since they primarily capture short-run

relationships between coal and mortality.

         Our paper fills an important gap in the pollution-health literature. Most existing studies

have examined contemporary settings where the levels of pollution were relatively low by

historical standards.6 In contrast, our paper examines infant and all-age mortality in a period

when winter pollution levels were high. Urban particulate levels in the U.S. in the 1930s and

1940s were similar to those experienced in developing countries today (Almond et al., 2009,

Cohen et al 2004).7 Specifically, they were roughly eight times the levels in the U.S. in the late

twentieth century (Chay and Greenstone 2003b). Thus, our research can shed new light on the

marginal effects of pollution when levels of pollution are high.



6
  For example, Chay and Greenstone (2003a, 2003b), Currie and Neidell (2005), Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder
(2009), Currie and Walker (2011), Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2012) have examined the effect of pollution on
infant mortality in the U.S. in the late 20th century. Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, Oliva (2012) present results from
Mexico, where particulate levels are roughly twice the levels in the U.S. today. The closely related epidemiology
literature (Pope et al 2002 and Laden 2006) also focuses on more recent data.
7
  This paper also contributes to the small but expanding historical literature on fuel use and fuel transitions (Wright
1964, Herbert 1992, Castaneda 1999).


                                                                                                                          5
2. Coal

        This section highlights the following historical facts about bituminous coal consumption

in the United States: First, bituminous coal consumption was high through the 1940s. Second,

there was considerable variation across states in the level of coal consumption. Third, the

opportunity cost of using coal for home heating increased in the mid 1940s, leading to a decline

in coal consumption. We leverage these facts, along with the fact that coal consumption is higher

during the winter, in our identification strategy.

        Coal, and bituminous coal in particular, was important fuel for home heating from the

late nineteenth century through the end of World War II. Until the 1880s, the primary source of

fuel in the economy was wood.8 Wood was surpassed by coal in the 1880s, the majority of which

was anthracite coal from eastern Pennsylvania. As bituminous deposits west of the Alleghenies

were developed and transportation facilities improved, bituminous coal became the dominant

form of coal by the end of the 19th century. Bituminous coal was the dominant fuel source

through the 1940s. The 1940 Census of Housing reports that 55 percent of households used coal

for heat. Approximately three quarters of these households, 41 percent, were using bituminous

coal. The share for wood was 23 percent, gas was 11 percent, oil was 9 percent oil, and “other or

none” was 2 percent.

        States varied in their level of exposure to bituminous coal. As Figure 1 Panel A

illustrates, states in the Midwest had much higher baseline consumption than other parts of the

country. Two facts appear to be driving this cross-sectional variation.9 First, high-bituminous

consuming states tended to have colder winters. As a simple illustration of this fact, Appendix


8
  Shurr and Netschurt (1977) and Mineral Yearbook (various years) and Mineral Resources of the United States
(various years).
9
  Interestingly, income does not appear to be strongly related to baseline coal consumption. See Figure A1 Panel B.


                                                                                                                      6
Figure A1 (Panel A) correlates the average daily temperature in January, February, and

December of 1933 with the bituminous coal consumption in 1933, the first year for our data.

Second, proximity to coal deposits is a strong predictor of consumption as well. Figure 1B

shows the location of coal deposits, both bituminous and anthracite, in 1920. All of the deposits

except for a small area in eastern Pennsylvania were bituminous. Comparing Figure 1A to Figure

1B, we see that being close to a bituminous coal field was strongly correlated with bituminous

coal consumption for heating in 1933.10

        Figure 2 plots national consumption of bituminous coal (for heating), natural gas, and

heating oil annually for 1933-1960. Coal consumption began flat, fell somewhat in the late

1930s, and then rose rapidly until the mid-1940s. The fall in the late 1930s reflects both warmer

winters and the adoption of oil and natural gas in some urban areas. The restrictions on the

availability of oil and natural gas drove the rise through the mid-1940s. However, there was a

large decline in bituminous coal consumption after 1945. As illustrated in Figure 2, an increase

in natural gas and oil consumption accompanied the decline in bituminous coal consumption.

        Several factors drove the decline in bituminous coal consumption after 1945. Coal strikes

by the United Mine Workers throughout the 1940s raised the specter that a large strike could

cause prices to increase and shortages to emerge. Strikes had occurred in the pre-war period,

notably in 1939 and 1941. Government controls limited strike activity in the WWII period. The

strikes, which occurred in 1946 and during 1949 and 1950, sharply restricted production,

adversely affected coal stocks, and raised prices. In both cases, daily production fell from 2




10
  The data used to construct Figure 1A are described in the Data section. Pennsylvania is one important exception.
Pennsylvania was in the second lowest quartile because anthracite was used instead of bituminous since anthracite
deposits were relatively closer.


                                                                                                                     7
million tons per day to well below 1 million tons per day.11 These strikes idled manufacturing,

prompted restrictions in electricity production (dimouts), and caused restrictions in freight

shipments and travel.12

        In the late 1940s, the price of natural gas fell dramatically. Figure 2B illustrates this fact

using a sample of cities from American Gas Association (1956). Gas manufactured from coal

was widely used for cooking in cities by the early 1940s, but was generally too costly to be used

for heating. Two logistical problems had to be solved before people could switch to natural gas

for heating.13 First, pipelines had to be built to move the gas from the Southwest to the Midwest

and the East.14 As of 1940, there were some pipelines, but the distances and capacity of those

pipelines was quite limited. The federal government built the Big Inch and Little Big Inch

pipelines from Texas to the East Coast during World War II to increase the security of the oil

supply. In 1947, the pipelines were sold to the Texas East Transmission Company and were

converted to natural gas.

        Second, storage capacity had to be developed in order to successfully deliver gas to the

end users. Winter demands for gas were much higher than summer demands, so gas had to be

moved during the summer and fall and stored near population centers for use in the winter. The

development of high-volume long-distance pipelines spurred the development of underground

storage, which rose from 250 billion cubic feet in 1947 to 1,859 billion cubic feet in 1954.15



11
   Bituminous Coal section, Mineral Resources, 1939-1952. See also, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1951,
Table 825: Work stoppages in Anthracite and Bituminous Coal Mining Industries by Major Issues Involved, 1938 to
1950.
12
   Wall Street Journal, September 26, 1946, p. 1. New York Times, November 22, 1946, p. 2.
13
   Hebert (1992) and Castaneda (1993).
14
   The first commercial liquefied natural gas plant was built in Cleveland in 1941. And the first trans-oceanic
transport of LNG did not occur until 1959. LNG did not become common until the 1970s, and it remains a small
share of world gas markets today.
15
   American Gas Association (1956).


                                                                                                                  8
Storage was primarily located in former gas, oil, or mixed oil and gas fields in Pennsylvania,

Michigan, Ohio, and West Virginia.

        Heating oil was primarily available in coastal cities prior to World War II. Supply was

constrained in the early 1940s as shipping and railroad capacity became scarce. Rationing of

heating oil, which began in October 1942, incentivized some oil users to switch to coal, which

was not rationed. The end of the war freed tanker and railroad capacity to be used for movement

of heating oil, restoring supply to residential users.

        Switching heating fuels was not particularly costly. In 1940, 42 percent of households

had central heat, 47 percent had a heating stove, and 12 percent had other or none, which

included households with portable heaters, fireplaces, or kitchen stoves. Although households

could purchase a new heating stove or furnace when they switched fuels, a more affordable

option was a conversion burner, which allowed the existing heating stove or furnace to burn gas

or heating oil. Conversion from heating oil to coal, which occurred during heating oil shortages

in World War II, cost approximately $50. Re-conversion cost roughly the same amount.16 The

total cost of switching from coal to natural gas after World War II was somewhat higher at $163.

In 1950, the closest expenditure survey to the years of interest, average household current

expenditure was $3925 and utility expenditure was $163.17 Natural gas conversion was less than

5 percent of current expenditure and 100 percent of utility expenditure, and oil conversion was

less than 2 percent of current expenditure and about 30 percent of utility expenditure.18

        Given the increased availability and lower prices of oil and gas in the second half of the

1940s, consumers began to switch. Between 1940 and 1950, the share of households using gas


16
   Tarr (1981), p. 341.
17
   Jacobs and Shipp (1990), p. 22.
18
   New York Times, September 12, 1945, p. 22 (continued from page 1).


                                                                                                     9
for heating increased from 11 percent to 29 percent, and the share using oil for heating increased

from 9 percent to 23 percent.19 In contrast, the share using coal fell from 55 percent to 35

percent, and the share using wood fell from 23 percent to 10 percent. As Figure 2A illustrates, oil

consumption doubled between 1945 and 1960, and natural gas consumption went up by over 400

percent.

        Given the confluence of events that occurred over this short time period, we cannot

exploit any one historical event for causal identification. Instead, we rely on variation from year-

to-year the opportunity cost of coal consumption at the national level. Arguably, this variation is

driven by both exogenous factors (e.g. coal strikes) and endogenous factors (e.g. income

shocks).20 For this reason, we employ a triple-differences identification strategy. Specifically, we

exploit variation over time in winter mortality relative to non-winter mortality. The key

identifying assumption is that the omitted factors are not associated with changes over time in

seasonal mortality patterns across states.



3. Background on Coal-Related Emissions and Mortality

Pollution in the United States

        The level of pollution in the first half of 20th century United States was high by modern

standards, something to be considered when relating our estimates to existing studies. Table 1

presents selected estimates of total suspended particulate pollution in the United States and



19
   1940 Census of Housing and 1950 Census of Housing. For 1940, Table 60, p. 101 available at
http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/36911485v2p1ch1.pdf . For 1950, Table 20, pp. 127-130
available at http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/36965082v1p1ch1.pdf .
20
   Appendix Table A1 correlates changes in year-round bituminous coal consumption and log income per capita.
There is no strong statistical relationship between log income per capita and bituminous coal consumption.
However, we cannot rule out modest effect sizes. Nonetheless, any such income effects would have to have
differential effects across seasons to bias our triple-differences estimates.


                                                                                                               10
developing countries.21 While particulate pollution in the United States is currently low and has

been at a relatively low level for a number of decades, it was high in the 1910s and 1930s. By

1920, 175 municipalities had passed smoke control ordinances, suggesting that the problem was

widespread.22 Additional evidence on levels of sootfall from New York and Pittsburgh suggest

that levels remained high into the mid-1940s.23 Notably, pollution levels in American cities in

the 1910s and 1930s were similar to pollution levels in developing countries in the late twentieth

century.

         When burned for heating purposes, bituminous coal has a high particulate burden.

Butcher and Ellenbecker (1982) examined particulates from wood, bituminous coal, and

anthracite coal when burned in heating stoves. They found that “Particulate emission factors for

wood ranged from 1.6 to 6.4 g/kg (fuel) and were found to depend on the fuel load and the firing

rate ... The average particulate emission factors for bituminous and anthracite coal are 10.4 and

0.50 g/kg.”24 The relative ordering for particulate emissions was likely to be bituminous coal,

wood, and anthracite coal. Fuel oil is similar to wood in its particulate emissions. The precise

values depend on the grade of heating oil. Natural gas emits very few particulates when burned.25

         Heating with bituminous coal is problematic in part because of the height at which the

pollution is emitted. In his analysis of pollution in New York City, Eisenbud (1978) writes: “It is

a well-established principle of atmospheric physics that under most conditions the ground-level

concentration from a point source of pollution is directly proportional to the quantity of pollutant

emitted per unit time and inversely proportional to the square of the height above ground.” For


21
   Particulates were not routinely measured in the United States until the late 1960s.
22
   Stern (1982)
23
   See Davidson and Davis (2005) for Pittsburgh and Eisenbud (1978) for New York.
24
   Butcher and Ellenbecker (1982), p. 380.
25
   EPA (1998)


                                                                                                   11
large industrial stacks such as those used by power plants, the "height" of the stack is not only

determined by its physical dimensions but by the temperature of the gases and the effects of

buoyancy. All other things being equal, a power-plant stack with an effective height of 1,000 ft.

will result in ground level concentrations that are 1% of the pollution resulting from a 100 ft.

apartment house stack.”26

           Exposure to pollutants occurred both indoors and outdoors. In the nineteenth century,

households burned fuel in open stoves or fireplaces in homes. By the early twentieth century,

households had largely moved to closed stoves and furnaces. The primary vector of exposure

from cooking and heating came through outdoor air pollution, which then migrated indoors

through the opening and closing of doors and from drafts.27,28 This is in contrast to the situation

in developing countries, where indoor air pollution can be significantly higher than outdoor air

pollution. Particularly in rural areas, cooking often takes place inside the home on open stoves or

fires.29

           Historical and contemporary evidence indicate that coal for heating was major

contributor to winter air pollution. Ives et al (1936), which reported the results of a U.S. Public

Health Service Study of 14 large U.S. cities in the 1930s, concluded based on analysis of time of

day and day of the week pollution levels: “the nonindustrial pollution in the winter, resulting

from the heating of residences, apartment houses, hotels, and other buildings, appears to be a

greater factor than the year-round industrial pollution.” 30 An analysis of hours of winter solar


26
   Eisenbud (1978), p. 1006.
27
   Dockery and Spengler (1981).
28
   Indoor air pollution levels tend to be more stable over time, as increases and decreases in pollutants changed with
a lag. The lag depends on the air change rate, which tended to be high historically and is lower today. Thus, indoor
rates had lower lags historically (were close to outdoor rates) and have higher lags today. Nagada (1986).
29
   See Rylance et al (2010) and Alam et al (2012)
30
   Ives et al (1936), p. 47.) In 1930 the U.S. Public Health Service received an appropriation of $25,000 to study air
pollution in cities. Given their limited resources, the goal of the 1930 study was solely to collect data on air quality


                                                                                                                      12
radiation – an indirect measure of air pollution in the United States – by Husar and Patterson

(1980) shows gains in the 1950s. In Dublin in 1990, following the ban on the sale of coal for

heating, mean winter black smoke concentrations fell by 64 percent and overall concentrations

fell 36 percent.31 A 2005 E.U. study of coal-related pollution in Krakow concluded: “residential

sources were also found to create the lion’s share – beyond any single industrial source – of

airborne PM measured near the ground.”32

         Humans are exposed to particulates from sources other than coal, notably particulates

from transportation and from smoking. Although important for interpretation of our estimates, it

seems unlikely that transportation or smoking is biasing our results. 33 On-road vehicles were a

small share of particulates – 1 percent of PM10 in 1940 and 2 percent in 1960. There does not

appear to have been abrupt changes in the mid-1940s.34 Cigarettes and other burned tobacco

products were a significant source of particulates for smokers and individuals exposed to second

hand smoke. The available evidence suggests, however, that consumption was trending up

smoothly after the Great Depression.35

The Epidemiology of Pollution

         During the period of our study, scientific evidence on the health costs of pollution was

limited. From the 19th century, public health officials and interested observers had hypothesized



in large American cities. The study explored heating’s contribution to pollution by examining pollution by time of
day and by comparing Sundays, when most businesses were shut, to weekdays. Both analyses suggested that heating
with coal was a major cause of pollution.
31
   Clancy et al (2002). Black smoke is a measure of light absorption of PM and is highly correlated with measures of
PM10 and PM2.5
32
   Powell (2009), p. 8474, discussing Junninen et al (2009).
33
   Other particulates could affect the local average treatment effect if the pollution-mortality relationship is non-
linear.
34
   EPA (2000).
35
   During the period 1920-1960, consumption was steadily rising, with the exception of a brief downturn during the
Great Depression. Per capita consumption of tobacco that was consumed in burned form (cigarettes, cigars, pipes,
roll your own) was roughly 6 pounds in 1920 and 12 pounds in 1960.


                                                                                                                  13
that air pollution was linked to mortality. It was not until the 1990s that the epidemiological

literature convincingly documented the link between airborne particulates and mortality.36,37 In

the United States, the main samples have been the Harvard Six Cities Sample (Laden et al 2006)

and the American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention II study (Pope et al 2002). Beginning in the

late 1970s and early 1980s, the studies tracked sample participants, all of whom were adults.

The studies measured all-age mortality and cause of death data. The primary focus was on all-

cause mortality because cause of death coding tends to be unreliable in the absence of an

autopsy. More recent studies using quasi-natural experiments also find strong links between

particulates and mortality. 38

         Research by Pope et al (2004) and DelFino et al (2005) suggest that particulates cause

mortality in the adult population through three mechanisms. The first is that particulates cause

pulmonary and systemic inflammation and accelerated atherosclerosis. The second is that

particulates adversely affect cardiac autonomic function, causing heart arrhythmias. 39 The third,

but less important, mechanism is through pneumonia.40


36
   The studies examine mortality from particulate exposure at different frequencies, daily, monthly, and annually.
One concern with the high frequency studies is that pollution is merely shifting the timing of mortality, but not
affecting all-age mortality. While shifts in the timing, known as ‘harvesting’, are occurring for some individuals, the
studies find that exposure to particulates also increases all-age mortality (Schwartz 2000, Pope et al 2009).
37
   Most of the discussion focuses on particulates, since most of the early measurement of air pollution involved
particulates, and most of the epidemiological work has been done on particulates. Particulates are highly correlated
with other coal-related emissions such as carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide. Some recent studies that use detailed
monitor data are able to separately examine the effects of particulate, carbon monoxide, and sulfur dioxide on
mortality. Monitor data is not widely available before the 1970s, so our analysis examines the effect of coal
consumption on mortality directly.
38
   Chay and Greenstone (2003a, 2003b), Currie and Neidell (2005), and Currie and Walker (2011) exploit permanent
declines in pollution to measure the effects on infant mortality in the U.S. in the late 20th century. Currie, Neidell,
and Schmeider (2009) examine within-mother differences in birth outcomes since they have detailed data on
pollution exposure of pregnant mothers, which varies over time and space. Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2012)
examine the effect of temporal changes in pollution caused by traffic shocks. Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, Oliva (2012)
use a similar strategy to examine the link in Mexico. Clay and Troesken (2010) link variation in weather-related
smogs to all-age mortality in London. See also Pope et al (1992), Clancy et al (2002), Hedley et al (2002), and Pope
et al (2007).
39
   Recent studies such as Pope et al (2011) indicate that the dose-response curve between particulates and mortality
from cardiovascular disease is highly non-linear. At small exposures (less than 1 cigarette per day, which is the


                                                                                                                   14
         For infants, particulates cause mortality population through two primary mechanisms.

The first is prenatal. Curry and Walker (2011) use a natural experiment caused by the

replacement of manual tolling with EZ Pass, which greatly reduced idling and local pollution.

Their results show that higher levels of particulates were associated with greater likelihood of

premature delivery and birth weight. Prenatal impacts are likely to be particularly important for

much of our sample period, because successful interventions to help premature or low birth

weight babies were extremely limited before 1960. The second mechanism is postnatal effects on

respiratory and cardiovascular outcomes. Woodruff et al (2008) used U.S. infant birth and death

records covering 1999-2002, demographic characteristics, and pollution data. They find a link

between particulates and respiratory-related infant mortality. Recent work by Arceo-Gomez et al

(2012) using data from Mexico supports the link between pollution and infant mortality from

respiratory and cardiovascular causes.



4. Data

         Data on all-age and infant mortality at the state-month level are taken from the annual

Vital Statistics volumes. States entered the National Center for Health Statistics sample of

“registration states” slowly over time. Reporting of all-age mortality at the state-month level

began in 1900. The reporting of infant mortality at the state-month level began in 1939.41 As we

discuss in the methodology section, the monthly variation is important since we expect winter

mortality to be disproportionately affected by bituminous coal consumption.


range in which most air pollution occurs) the marginal effects are large, while at high exposures (13+ cigarettes per
day) the marginal effects are lower. Further, the available evidence suggests that increases in air pollution have
positive effects on the mortality of never-smokers, former smokers, and current smokers (Pope et al 2004).
40
   For a thorough and detailed discussion of the mechanisms for adults and children, see Lockwood (2012).
41
   There were 19 registration states (including the District of Columbia) in 1910, 34 registration states in 1920, and
49 registration states in 1933.


                                                                                                                    15
         Mortality rates were constructed using historical population estimates from the Decennial

Censuses. These population estimates were linearly interpolated to construct annual state

population estimates. Infant monthly mortality rates were constructed by dividing the monthly

death counts by annual state-level birth data from 1939-1960.42 Infant mortality rates are

reported per 100,000 live births. Our dependent variables are the log of the all-age and the log of

infant mortality rate, respectively. Our results are robust to using the mortality rate in levels.

         Climatic data are from the United States Historical Climatology Network (USHCN)

Daily Dataset.43 Available weather variables include daily minimum and maximum temperature

and total daily rainfall. Daily mean temperatures are the simple average of the minimum and

maximum temperatures. The daily weather-station data are aggregated to the state-month level

using population-distance weights.44

         We construct state-year coal consumption data from two sources: (i) an annual series of

national coal use by type from Minerals Yearbook for the years 1933 through 1960, and (ii) a

United States Geological Survey (USGS) of state coal use by type conducted in 1917. The

annual series on use by type, which began in 1933, is constructed based on detailed annual

survey reports of production and consumption based on shipment data from railroads and reports

of consumption by railroads, industry, electrical, and wholesale distributors. Unfortunately,

42
   Birth data were collected from Vital Statistics by Amy Finkelstein and Heidi Williams and are available from the
NBER website.
43
   The USHCN data covers the period from the late 19th century to the present. The data set is comprised of
approximately 1,200 weather stations, which were selected by the Department of Energy and the NCDC based on
“length of record, percent of missing data, number of station moves and other station changes that may affect data
homogeneity.” This procedure involves three steps. The distance between each weather station and each county
centroid is calculated for those weather stations that are within 50 miles of the county centroid. The variables are
aggregated to the county-month level using inverse-distance weights. The county-month weather variables are
aggregated to the state-month level using the county populations as weights. The county population data are from
the decennial censuses and are linearly interpolated between census years.
44
   Humidity data are not available for our sample period. Humidity is likely to be an important determinant of
mortality (Barreca 2012). However, humidity and temperature are strongly correlated in nature. So long as
humidity’s independent effect on mortality is uncorrelated with state-year coal consumption then our results will be
unbiased. That is, the temperature main effect includes humidity’s impact.


                                                                                                                  16
state-level data on coal use for heating is only available sporadically. The USGS survey was

done in 1917 in conjunction with the allocation of bituminous coal to states during World War

I.45 The next USGS survey that covered heating was in 1957.46 To construct our state-year

consumption data, we multiply the annual national data by the state shares of national

consumption in 1917. As a robustness check, we use the 1940 state shares of households using

coal for home heating from the decennial census to allocate national consumption to states.47

         Table 2 shows summary statistics for the full sample and by region. All age mortality is

higher in the Northeast and Midwest and somewhat lower in the South and West. Infant deaths

are similar across regions, with the exception of the South, which has higher infant mortality.

Bituminous coal consumption for heating per capita was 0.55 tons, and varied from a high of

1.19 tons in the Midwest to a low of 0.18 tons in the Northeast. The fraction of households using

coal was 0.53, and ranged from 75 percent in the Midwest to 18 percent in the West. Note that

the high share of households using coal in the Northeast and the low per capita consumption of

bituminous occurs because most households that burn coal are burning anthracite. Mean

temperatures were 50 and 51 in the Northeast and Midwest and 62 and 56 in the South and the

West. Per capita income is lowest in the South, as is urbanization.48




45
   The 1917 survey followed an earlier 1915 survey and was considered more accurate. Lesher (1917), p. “Complete
and absolutely accurate reports of distribution are impossible to obtain and any attempt to compile such statistics as
this report contains must include estimates, but it is believed that these, data in all important respects are accurate
and that some of the shortcomings of the statistics for 1915 have been overcome.”
46
   A 1927 USGS survey covered most uses, but used the 1917 survey for heating.
47
   1940 was the first year that the census asked about heating fuel. Similar data is available for 1950 and 1960. The
censuses only asked about the use of coal for heating and not whether it was bituminous or anthracite. Nationally,
three quarters of households were using bituminous coal, but we do not know the shares of the two coals that were
being used in each state.
48
   The data on state annual per capita income are from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and cover the years
from 1929 to present. All income has been converted to 2010 dollars. The urbanization measure is from the
decennial census (Haines 2010).


                                                                                                                    17
5. Identification

       Our hypothesis is that bituminous coal consumption for heating is associated with

increased winter mortality relative to other months. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the

following triple-difference model:

(1) LNMORTsmy = !1 BITCOALsy + !2 BITCOALsy x WINTERm + !sm + "my + #s TIME + !

Xsmy + $smy ,

where LNMORT is the log of the mortality rate (or log of the infant mortality rate) in state s in

month m and year y; BITCOAL is state s’s share of bituminous coal consumption in 1917

multiplied by national consumption in year y. WINTER is a dummy variable for whether the

month of death is between November and March. Month-year fixed effects (") mitigate biases

from secular improvements in health conditions that occurred over time. State-month fixed

effects (!) account for fixed differences in mortality that are related to baseline coal

consumption. State-specific time trends mitigate bias from convergence in mortality rates that

might be correlated with baseline coal consumption. In one specification we add state-by-

calendar-month specific time trends to allow for differential convergence in mortality across

states and seasons. X includes controls for unusually cold or warm temperatures in a given

month that might be related to bituminous coal consumption. We also use lagged coal

consumption in one specification to mitigate the possibility that contemporaneous cold weather

is behind the estimated effects. X also controls for “other” non-heating forms of bituminous coal

consumption, including a both a main effect and an interaction with the winter month dummy.




                                                                                                    18
The error term ($) is clustered at the state-level to account for time series correlation within

states. All observations are weighted by the state-year population.49

           The identifying variation in this model comes from differences over time in winter

months in states with estimated high baseline coal use. In other words, we can use the non-winter

months interacted with our coal consumption measure use as additional controls. We are able to

provide support for our assumption using seasonal consumption data from the Minerals

Yearbook, although such data are only available starting in 1951. As Figure 3 illustrates, January

1951 consumption for heating coal was more than three times the consumption in May 1951.

Figure 3 plots seasonal consumption for 1954 and 1958, illustrating the fact that bituminous coal

consumption fell more during winter months. Note that our empirical model imposes a constant

“winter” effect for the months November through March since Figure 3 suggests that

consumption was greatest during these months. We test the robustness of this modeling choice

by including a series of interactions between BITCOAL and each calendar month, with July as

the omitted month (see Figure 4 and related discussion below). To the extent that bituminous

coal consumption also increases summer mortality, then this approach will underestimate the

mortality effects. However, this model has the advantage of allowing us to control for

idiosyncratic changes in year-round health that may be spuriously correlated with greater coal

consumption.



6. Results

Core estimates




49
     The unweighted estimates are qualitatively similar (results available upon request).


                                                                                                   19
           Table 3 presents the core estimates. The top panel shows the results for all age mortality

and the bottom panel shows the results for infant mortality. Note that due to data limitations, the

infant mortality span the years 1939 through 1960, while the all-age mortality estimates span the

years 1933 through 1960.50 Columns (1)-(3) present results for the log of mortality and (4)-(6)

present the results for mortality rates in levels.

           Table 3 provides four results worth noting. First, there is a positive relationship between

coal consumption and mortality for the average month. Column (1), which does not include the

winter interaction term, indicates that a one-ton increase in per capita bituminous coal

consumption (BITCOAL) is associated with a 6.3 percent increase in all-age mortality and a 4.2

percent increase in infant mortality during the average month.

           Second, as illustrated in columns (2) and (3), the mortality impact of BITCOAL was

relatively greater in winter months. When controlling for year-month fixed effects, state-month

fixed effects, and state-specific trends (column 2), a one-ton increase in BITCOAL leads to a 1.3

percent increase and a 4.5 percent increase in winter mortality relative to other months for all-age

mortality and infant mortality. These estimates are statistically significant at the 10 percent and 1

percent level.

           Third, point estimates are qualitatively similar when we add controls for the temperature

and other uses of bituminous coal (column 3). For example, with all-age mortality as the

outcome, the point estimate on WINTER x BITCOAL increases slightly from 0.013 to 0.017

when we control for the temperature and other uses of bituminous.

           Finally, the estimates are qualitatively similar when the dependent variable is the

mortality rate in levels (columns 4-6). For example, with the full set of controls (column 6), the


50
     Our all-age mortality estimates are robust to restricting them to the 1939-1960 period.


                                                                                                     20
impact of a one-ton increase in BITCOAL increases the winter mortality rate by 1.08 and 11.5

for all-age mortality per 100,000 and infant mortality per 100,000 births, respectively.

         To provide a context for understanding the magnitude of our results, we calculate the

number of winter deaths avoided due to the decline in coal consumption over the 1945-1960

period. This calculation is based on column (3) of Table 3 and the decline in per capita

bituminous coal consumption over this time period. As reported in Table 4, the decline in the use

of bituminous coal for heating accounted for 15 percent of the decline in winter all-age mortality

and 10 percent of the decline in winter infant mortality nationally. The share is smaller for infant

mortality than for all-age mortality because of rapid declines in infant mortality. Infant mortality

fell 32.0 percent, while all age mortality fell 8.6 percent.51 The number of lives saved per winter

month was large:1,923 all-age lives and 310 infant lives.

         The magnitudes of the share of the decline accounted for by coal varied considerably by

region. In particular, the Midwest experienced the greatest improvements in health because of its

high consumption of coal for heating at the baseline. In the Midwest, the decline in bituminous

coal consumption between 1945 and 1960 accounted for 23 percent of the decline in winter all-

age mortality and 22 percent of the decline in winter infant mortality. The number of lives saved

per winter month in the Midwest was large: 1,084 all-age lives and 102 infant lives.

Robustness checks

         To test the robustness of our WINTER dummy, Figure 4 estimates our triple-differences

model with 11 separate interactions for each calendar month (with July being the excluded

month). For all-age mortality, Panel A illustrates that the effects (relative to July) are largest in

December and March, with second largest effects in January, February, and April. The effects

51
  The fall in infant mortality is largely due to improvements in pre-natal care and treatment of low birth-weight
babies.


                                                                                                                    21
appear to be small in November and modest in April, possibly due to a one-month lag in the

effects from pollution. This finding suggesting that our winter designation (i.e. November-

March) may be underestimating impacts on all-age mortality. For infant-mortality, the effects are

monotonically increasing from July through December and from June back through January.

These findings suggest our approach of designating November through March as “winter” is a

sensible simplification.

       Table 5 estimates a series of robustness checks for all-age mortality (Panel A) and infant

mortality (Panel B). We do not report the main effects of the coal variables in the interest of

presentation. Column (1) allows the effects of coal consumption to vary with the share of the

state living in urban areas in 1930. One hypothesis is that the marginal impacts of coal

consumption are increasing in population density. The coefficients on WINTER x BITCOAL are

similar in sign and magnitude to our core specification. The coefficients on URBAN x WINTER

x BITCOAL are actually negative, but statistically insignificant. This finding suggests that urban

areas did not experience greater winter mortality beyond the effects captured in WINTER x

BITCOAL. Given the plausible nonlinearity of the dose-response function and the high baseline

exposure of urban residents, the marginal effects of pollution from home heating on mortality

could well have been similar for urban and non-urban populations. It could also be that other

important determinants of mortality such as nutritional intake may have varied by calendar

month differentially for urban and rural areas. This could have affected the marginal health

impacts of BITCOAL.

       Column (2) in replaces the estimated state shares of bituminous coal consumption for

heating with the 1940 state shares of households using any coal for heating from the census

(COALHH). The results are qualitatively similar to our Table 3 specification. The magnitudes of



                                                                                                  22
the coefficients on COALHH are generally larger because of scaling. The mean for COALHH is

0.42 in 1933 and 0.16 in 1960, and BITCOAL was 0.61 in 1933 and 0.17 in 1960.

       Column (3) correlates lagged coal consumption in year t-1 with current month’s

mortality. This robustness check addresses the possibility we have not adequately controlled for

omitted factors that are correlated with high-frequency changes in coal consumption, like the

weather. Our results are robust to this modification. Column (4) controls for state-by-calendar

month time trends to account for possible convergence in seasonality across states by level of

coal consumption. The all-age mortality estimates are robust to this modification. The infant

mortality estimates diminish in magnitude and are only robust at the 10 percent level. However,

the infant mortality estimates have fewer years of data, so the state-month specific trends

potentially absorb useful variation. The fact that the standard errors have increased in magnitude

(from 0.011 to 0.013) corroborates this hypothesis.

       Columns (5) through (7) test the sensitivity of our results to changes in the sample.

Column (5) drops the Western states, which had lower sulfur coal that was less harmful to

human health. The magnitudes of the coefficients on WINTER x BITCOAL for all-age mortality

are similar to Table 3. The infant mortality estimate diminishes slightly, although it is still

statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Column (6) drops the 10 “warmest” states (see the

Table 5 note for more detail). The coefficients on WINTER x BITCOAL for infant mortality

diminishes slightly, but remains statistically significant. However, the coefficient on WINTER x

BITCOAL for all-age mortality is close to zero and no longer statistically significant. One

possible explanation is that there is non-classical measurement error in the exposure variable, per

capita bituminous coal consumption, and the error was smaller in the least cold states. Though, it

is unclear why this measurement error would affect the all-age mortality estimates, but not the



                                                                                                  23
infant mortality estimates. Column (7) stops the sample at 1955 instead of 1960. Both the all-age

and infant mortality estimates increase in magnitude, suggesting that mortality effects from

declines in coal consumption at low levels of consumption, as in the late 1950s, may have been

small.



Discussion

          The results in this paper raise two related questions. The first is: how do our estimates

compare to modern studies on the pollution-mortality relationship? The second is: could

government intervention have generated net social benefits by forcing households to switch to

cleaner fuels earlier?

          In the absence of monitor data, answering the first question is remarkably difficult. Data

from the 1930s from large cities suggest that an 81 percent decline in bituminous coal

consumption for heating would roughly have yielded a 45 percent decline in particulates.52 In

less densely settled locations, the average decline in particulates may well have been lower. If

one takes 45 percent as roughly of the correct order of magnitude (which is arguably a strong

assumption), the implied elasticities for the U.S. are 0.33 for all age mortality and 0.22for infant

mortality.53 If the actual declines in particulates were smaller, the implied elasticities would be

larger.

          Table 6 shows the elasticities for PM10 and infant mortality in a number of studies. The

range of elasticities is very wide – 0 to 1.8. Compared to the two studies with the next highest

52
   This is calculated by taking the difference between average values of the Owens shade meter at 8am, a time at
which most households are burning fuel, in the five winter months and in the seven non-winter months and
multiplying by 0.81. This assumes that the alternative heating fuel is to a first approximation non-polluting, which
is roughly true of natural gas.
53
   The calculations use the values in row (4) from Table 4 for the United States and the 45 percent decline in
particulates: All age = 0.15/0.45; Infant = 0.10/0.45.


                                                                                                                   24
levels of particulates and infant mortality, Chay and Greenstone (2003a) and Arceo-Gomez,

Hanna and Oliva (2012), our infant mortality elasticity estimates are lower. This may reflect the

high baseline infant mortality rate between 1939 and 1960. Alternatively, reductions in pollution

may carry only modest benefits to health in cases where pollution levels are very high, as was the

case of the mid-20th century.

        For the second question, it is easiest to start with the marginal fuel costs and back out the

threshold VSL for which it would have been socially beneficial to require switching. A

conservative estimate of the marginal fuel cost can be obtained taking the retail cost of

bituminous coal and noting that price per BTU of alternative fuels in the 1940s in Figure 2B was

not more than 2x bituminous per BTU. According to American Gas Association (1956), in 1945

they were less than 1.5x bituminous per BTU. If the marginal fuel costs were 1.0x bituminous –

that is alternative fuels were twice as expensive – the cost would have been 1.37 billion (1945$).

If the marginal fuel costs was 0.5x bituminous – that is alternative fuels were 50 percent more

expensive – the cost would have been 0.69 billion (1945$). Dividing this by 9,615 lives saved

per year gives us a threshold value of $142,486 (1945$) per life at 1.0x bituminous and $71,243

at 0.5x bituminous.54

        Next we need to know what the value of a statistical life was in 1945. We start by taking

a current value of a statistical life of $7,000,000 (2012$), which is at the lower end of the

conventional range.55 We adjust it with a GDP per capita deflator, so $7,000,000 (2012$) is

221,000 (1945$).56 The net benefit per life saved ranges from $78,514 for a marginal cost of fuel


54
   Table 4, Panel A, row (5) calculates 1,923 lives saved per winter month. 1,923 lives/winter month x 5 winter
months = 9,615 lives.
55
   The EPA now uses $7.4 million (2006$), adjusted to the appropriate year, which would be $8.4 million (2012$).
56
  The GDP deflator falls in between the CPI deflator and elasticity adjusted measures. The CPI deflator gives
549,000 (1945$). Costa and Kahn (2004) show that the elasticity of VSL with respect to real GNP per capita was


                                                                                                               25
of 1x bituminous to $149,757 for 0.5x bituminous. By these metrics, it would have been socially

beneficial for the government to intervene.



7. Conclusion

        This paper provided new evidence on historical levels of air pollution in the United States

and on one significant cause of decline in pollution, the rapid switch away from bituminous coal

and towards cleaner fuels for home heating. Our regression results imply that reductions in the

use of bituminous coal between 1945 and 1960 decreased winter all-age mortality by 1.25

percent and winter infant mortality by 3.27 percent. Our estimate is likely a lower bound, since

it primarily reflects a short-run relationship between coal and mortality. For example, pollution

exposure in the winter months may have ultimately resulted in higher mortality rates during the

summer months due to a depleted stock of health capital.

        Our results may be informative for developing countries since our historical setting is one

where baseline pollution levels, changes in pollution levels, and baseline mortality levels were

high relative to contemporary settings. Although we find more modest pollution-mortality

elasticities, our cost-benefit analysis indicates that regulatory intervention in the 1940s would

have generated net benefits. Despite the net benefits, federal intervention did not come about

until the 1960s and 1970s. One explanation for the delay in intervention was that epidemiology

had yet to convincingly show a causal relationship between pollution and mortality. For

example, the 1930s Public Health Service study notes: “No definite relation between smoke and

health has, up to the present time, been shown to exist, and no attempt was made in the present



about 1.5. They offer estimates of VSL for 1940 and 1950 of $996,000 and $1,755,000 in 1990 dollars. In 1945
(CPI adjusted) dollars, these are $137,000 and $242,000. If we take the average, the value is $189,500.


                                                                                                               26
study to investigate this phase of the subject.”57 Lave and Seskin (1970) published compelling

evidence on the link in 1970, and their work was confirmed by large epidemiological studies in

the 1990s.Without greater awareness of the dangers of pollution, intervention would have likely

been politically unpopular, even by today’s standards. Thus, the United States historical

experience suggests that greater understanding about the health costs of pollution, as provided

here, may help facilitate welfare-enhancing legislation in developing countries today.




57
     Ives et al (1936), p. 1.


                                                                                                  27
References

Alam, Dewan S., et al. "Adult Cardiopulmonary Mortality and Indoor Air Pollution: A 10-Year
Retrospective Cohort Study in a Low-Income Rural Setting." Global Heart 7.3 (2012): 215-221.
Almond, Douglas, Yuyu Chen, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2009. "Winter Heating or
Clean Air? Unintended Impacts of China's Huai River Policy." American Economic Review,
99(2): 184–90.
American Gas Association, Bureau of Statistics. Historical Statistics of the Gas Industry. 1956.

Analitis, A. et al. 2008. “Effects of Cold Weather on Mortality: Results from 15 European
Cities Within the PHEWE Project.” American Journal of Epidemiology. 168:1397-1408.

Anderson, Brooke and Michelle Bell. 2009. “How Heat, Cold, and Heat Waves Affect Mortality
in the United States.” Epidemiology 20:205-213.

Arceo-Gomez, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. 2012. “Does the Effect of Pollution on
Infant Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico
City.” NBER Working Paper #18349.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2012. "Personal Income Summary." Accessed May 22, 2012
from:
http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=70&step=1&isuri=1&acrdn=4

Butcher Samuel and Michael Ellenbecker. 1982. “Particulate Emission Factors for Small Wood
and Coal Stoves.” Journal of the Air Pollution Control Association 32:380-384.
Castaneda, Christopher. 1993. Regulated Enterprise: Natural Gas Pipelines and Northeastern
Markets, 1938-1954. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
Castaneda, Christopher. 1999. Invisible fuel: Manufactured and natural gas in America, 1800-
2000. New York: Twayne.
Census of Housing (various years). Washington DC: Government Printing Office.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. 2003a. The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 1121-1167.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. 2003b. Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean
Air Act of 1970. MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 04-08.
Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, Hongbin Li. 2013. Evidence on the
impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from China’s Huai River policy.
PNAS 110:12936–12941

Clancy L, Goodman P, Sinclair H, Dockery DW. 2002. Effect of air-pollution control on death
rates in Dublin, Ireland: an intervention study. Lancet 360:1210–1214.

                                                                                               28
Clay, Karen and Werner Troesken. 2010. “Smoke and the Rise and Fall of the London Fog” in
Climate Change Past and Present. Edited by Gary Libecap and Richard H. Steckel. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2010.

Cohen, Aaron et al. 2004. “Chapter 17: Urban Air Pollution” in Comparative Quantification of
Health Risks, Volume 2. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell. 2005. Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
From California's Recent Experience? Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 1003-1030.

Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidess, Johannes Schmieder. 2009. “Air Pollution and Infant Health:
Lessons from New Jersey.” Journal of Health Economics. 28: 688-703.

Currie, Jarnet and Reed Walker 2011. “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-
ZPass.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3:65-90.

Davidson, C.I., and D.L. Davis, “A Chronology of Airborne Particulate Matter in Pittsburgh,” in
History and Reviews of Aerosol Science, G.J. Sem, D. Boulard, P. Brimblecombe, D.S. Ensor,
J.W. Gentry, J.C.M. Marijnissen, and O. Preining, editors, American Association for Aerosol
Research, 2005, pages 347-370.

Delfino, RJ, S Constantinos, and S Malik. 2005. Potential Role of Ultrafine Particles in
Associations between Airborne Particle Mass and Cardiovascular Health. Environmental Health
Perspectives. 113:934-946.

Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1929. Record Book of Business Statistics. Part
III, Fuels Automobiles, and Rubber. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Dockery, Douglas W., and John D. Spengler. "Indoor-outdoor relationships of respirable sulfates
and particles." Atmospheric Environment (1967) 15.3 (1981): 335-343.

Eisenbud, Merril. 1978. Levels of Exposure to Sulfur Oxides and Particulates in New York City
and their Sources. Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine 1978, 54:991-1011.

EPA. 2000. National Air Pollutant Emission Trends 1900–1998. US Environmental Protection
Agency (2000).

EPA. 1995. Compilation of Air Pollution Emission Factors. Volume 1: Stationary Point and
Area Sources. AP42, Fifth Edition. Research Triangle.

Fourteenth Census of the United States, Volume XI Mines and Quarries, 1919, General Report
and Analytical Tables and Selected Industries. Washington: Government Printing Office.

Greensburgh (PA) Daily Tribune, March 22, 1946, p. 1.



                                                                                              29
Haines, Michael R., and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002.
ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2010-05-21. doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896.v3

Hedley AJ, Wong CM, Thach TQ, Ma S, Lam TH, Anderson HR. 2002. Cardiorespiratory and
all-cause mortality after restrictions on sulphur content of fuel in Hong Kong: an intervention
study. Lancet 360:1646–1652.
Herbert, John H. 1992. Clean Cheap Heat: The Development Of Residential Markets For
Natural Gas In The United States. New York: Greenwood.

Husar, RB and DE Patterson. 1980 Regional Scale Air Pollution: Sources and Effects. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences 338: 399-417.

Ives, James et al. 1936. Atmospheric Pollution of American Cities for the Years 1931 to 1933
with Special Reference to the Solid Constituents of the Pollution. U.S. Treasury Department,
Public Health Bulletin No 224. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Jacobs, Eva and Stephanie Shipp. 1990. How Family Spending Has Changed in the U.S.
Monthly Labor Review, pp. 20-27.
Junninen, Heikki. 2009. “Quantifying the Impact of Residential Heating on the Urban Air
Quality in a Typical European Coal Combustion Regions.” Environmental Science and
Technology 43: 7964-7970.

Knittel, Christopher, Douglas Miller and Nicholas Sanders. 2011. “Caution, Drivers! Children
Present. Traffic, Pollution and Infant Health.” NBER Working Paper #17222.

Laden F, Schwartz J, Speizer FE, Dockery DW. 2006. Reduction in fine particulate air pollution
and mortality: extended follow-up of the Harvard six cities study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
173(6):581–582.
Lave, Lester B., and Eugene P. Seskin. 1970. "Air pollution and human health." Science
169.3947.

Lave, Lester and Eugene Seskin. 1972. “Air Pollution, Climate, and Home Heating: Their
Effects on U.S. Mortality Rates.” American Journal of Public Health 62: 909-916.
Lave, Lester and Eugene Seskin. 1977. Air Pollution and Human Health. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Lesher, C. E. 1917. “Coal in 1917.” U.S. Geological Survey. Part B. Mineral Resources of the
United States. Part II, pp. 1908-1956.
Lockwood, Alan H. 2012. The Silent Epidemic: Coal and the Hidden Threat to Health.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Minerals Yearbook, various years. U.S. Government Printing Office.

                                                                                                  30
Nagda, Niren L. Guidelines for monitoring indoor air quality. Taylor & Francis, 1986.

New York Times, various years.

Parsons, James J. 1950. “The Geography of Natural Gas in the United States” Economic
Geography 26: 162-178.

Pope CA III, Schwartz J, Ransom MR. 1992. Daily mortality and PM10 pollution in the Utah
Valley. Arch Environ Health. 47:211–217.
Pope, C. Arden, III, Burnett RT, Thun MJ, Calle EE, Krewski D, Ito K, et al. 2002, “Lung
cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to fine particulate air pollution.”
Journal of the American Medical Association. 287:1132–1141.
Pope CA III, Burnett RT, Thurston GD, Thun MJ, Calle EE,Krewski D, et al. 2004.
Cardiovascular mortality and longterm exposure to particulate air pollution: epidemiological
evidence of general pathophysiological pathways of disease. Circulation 109:71–77.

Pope , C. Arden III. 2007. “Mortality Effects of Longer Term Exposures to Fine Particulate Air
Pollution: Review of Recent Epidemiological Evidence.” Inhalation Toxicology 19: 33-38.

Pope, C. Arden, III, Douglas L. Rodermund, and Matthew M. Gee. 2007. “Mortality Effects of a
Copper Smelter Strike and Reduced Ambient Sulfate Particulate Matter Air Pollution.”
Environmental Health Perspectives. 115(5): 679–683.
Pope, C. Arden, III, Majid Ezzati, Douglas Dockery. 2009. Fine-Particulate Air Pollution and
Life Expectancy in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine 360:376-386.
Pope III, C. Arden, et al. "Lung cancer and cardiovascular disease mortality associated with
ambient air pollution and cigarette smoke: shape of the exposure–response relationships."
Environmental health perspectives 119.11 (2011): 1616.
Pope, C. Arden, III and Douglas Dockery. 2013. Air pollution and life expectancy in China and
beyond. PNAS, 110 (32): 12861-12862.
Powell, Steven. 2009. “Particulate Matter in the Air and its Origins in Coal-Burning Regions.”
Environmental Science and Technology 43: 8474-8474.
Reid, W. T. (1943). Supplementing anthracite with other fuels for home heating. [Washington,
D.C.]: U.S. Dept. of the Interior, Bureau of Mines.
Rylance, Jamie, et al. "The Global Burden of Air Pollution on Mortality: The Need to Include
Exposure to Household Biomass Fuel–Derived Particulates." Environmental health perspectives
118.10 (2010): A424.
Schwartz, Joel. 2000. Harvesting and Long Term Exposure Effects in the Relations between Air
Pollution and Mortality. American Journal of Epidemiology, 151: 440-448.


                                                                                                 31
Statistical Abstract of the United States. 1951. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Strout, Alan. 1961. Weather and the Demand for Space Heat. Review of Economics and
Statistics. 43: 185-192.
Tarr, Joel and Karen Clay. 2012. “Pittsburgh as an Energy Capital: Perspectives on Coal and
Natural Gas Transitions and the Environment.” Forthcoming in Energy Capitals: Local Impact,
Global Influence Edited by Martin Melosi and Joseph Pratt. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press.
Tarr, Joel. The Search for the Ultimate Sink: Urban Pollution in Historical Perspective. Akron:
University of Akron Press, 1996.
Tryon, F. G. and H. O. Rogers. 1927. “Consumption of bituminous coal”. U.S. Geological
Survey, Mineral Resources of the United States. Part II, pp. 1908-1956.
U. S. Bureau of the Census. 1889. Census of Manufacturing. Washington: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
U. S. Bureau of the Mines. 1957. Distribution of bituminous coal and lignite shipments. U.S.
Depart of the Interior. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U. S. Bureau of Statistics. 1917. Statistics of Railways in the United States. Interstate
Commerce Commission, Washington DC.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare 1958. Air Pollution Measurements of the
National Air Sampling Network: Analyses of Suspended Particulates, 1953-1957. Public Health
Service Publication No 637. Washington: Government Printing Office.

Vital Statistics of the United States, various years. Washington: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Wall Street Journal, various years.
Woodruff, Tracey, Lyndsey Darrow, and Jennifer Parker. 2008. “Air Pollution and Postneonatal
Infant Mortality in the United States, 1999-2002.” Environmental Health Perspectives 116: 110-
115.
World Health Organization, International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2012. Personal
Habits and Indoor Combustions Volume 100e A Review Of Human Carcinogens. Lyons, France
Wright, Lawrence. 1964. Home Fires Burning: The History of Domestic Heating and Cooking.
Routledge and Paul.




                                                                                               32
                             Figure 1: Bituminous coal consumption across states


                Panel A: Bituminous coal consumption for heating (tons per capita), 1933




               0.00 ï 0.25
               0.26 ï 0.50
               0.51 ï 1.00
               1.01 ï 2.15



                                 Panel B: Location of coal deposits (c. 1919)




Notes: Panel A data are constructed using coal consumption shares from 1917 (Lesher 1917) and annual
nation consumption estimates from Minerals Yearbook (various years). Panel B map is from the Fourteenth
Census of the United States, Volume XI Mines and Quarries, 1919, General Report and Analytical Tables
and Selected Industries, p. 254. http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/23010460v11ch4.pdf
.




                                                     33
                                                                     Figure 2: Consumption of fuels for heating, c. 1930-1960


                                                                                             Panel A: Consumption, entire United States




                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                  Natural gas (1000 cubic feet per capita)
                      Bituminous coal (tons per capita)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Heating oil (barrels per caita)
                                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                 1930           1935       1940          1945      1950          1955      1960
                                                                                                                         year

                                                                                                 Bituminous coal                Natural gas               Oil




                                                                                               Panel B: Price per BTU, various cities
                                                                       20        18
                                                           Price per BTU (2010$)
                                                          12      14   10 16




                                                                                      1930       1935          1940         1945          1950          1955                              1960
                                                                                                                            year

                                                                                                       Bituminous coal              Natural gas                 Oil




Notes: Panel A data are from Minerals Yearbook (various years). Data on bituminous coal consumption
are only available for the 1933-1960 period. Panel B data come from American Gas Association, Bureau
of Statistics. Historical Statistics of the Gas Industry. 1956. These data are only available for the 1941-
1954 period. The cities included in the sample include: Atlanta, Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Cincinnati,
Cleveland, Detroit, Houston, Kansas City, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh,
Portland, St. Louis, San Francisco, Scranton, Seattle, and Washington D.C. Bituminous prices are not
available for Boston, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, Scranton, or Washington D.C. Oil
prices are not available for Atlanta, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Houston, Los Angeles, Pittsburgh, St. Louis, San
Francisco, or Scranton. Gas prices are available for all the aforementioned cities.




                                                                                                                          34
                                                                Figure 3: Coal consumption by month of year, 1951, 1954, and 1958
                                                      .08
           Bituminous coal consumption (tons per capita)
           0        .02        .04        .06




                                                            1        2     3      4      5     6     7       8     9     10     11   12
                                                                                                Month

                                                                                      1951           1954              1958



Notes: Data are from Minerals Yearbook (various years). Other coal consumption includes bituminous
coal used for electricity, industry, coke, and railroads. Seasonal bituminous coal consumption data are not
available prior to 1951.




                                                                                               35
                       Figure 4: Triple-diﬀerence model with calendar month interactions


                                                              Panel A: Log all-age mortality



                              .06     .04
                   Parameter estimate
                         .02  0
                              −.02




                                            Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun   Jul   Aug    Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec




                                                              Panel B: Log infant mortality
                              .15
                              .1
                   Parameter estimate
                          .05 0
                              −.05




                                            Jan   Feb   Mar     Apr   May   Jun   Jul   Aug    Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec




Notes: The y-axis scales diﬀer between panel A and panel B. The point estimates are the diamond shape and
the brackets represent two standard errors. The estimates are from one model where we have BITCOAL as
a main eﬀect and interactions BITCOAL with each calendar month where July is the omitted month. Thus,
the coeﬃcients can be interpreted as the mortality diﬀerence between a given calendar month and July in
state-years with higher bituminous coal consumption for heating. All other controls are the same as Column
(3) of Table 3.




                                                                            36
                       Table 1: Estimates of Total Suspended Particulates (TSP)

         Location                         Time          TSP      Source
         Chicago                       1912-1913         760     Eisenbud (1978)
         14 large US cities        1931-1933 (Winter)    510     Ives et al (1936)
         US urban stations             1953-1957         163     U.S. D.H.E.W. (1958)
         US urban stations                1960           118     Lave and Seskin (1972)
         US national average              1990            60     Chay and Greenstone (2003a)
         58 Chinese cities             1980-1993         538     Almond et al (2009)
         18% of cities worldwide          1999          > 240    Cohen et al (2004)

Notes: Notes: The original measurements were in TSP for all of the sources except for Cohen et al (2004).
Cohen et al, Figure 17.3 (World), indicates that 18% of the urban population lived in locations where the
PM10 was greater than 100. We translated the PM10 values to TSP using the following formula: PM10/0.417,
where 0.417 is the empirical ratio of PM10 to TSP in their world data (Table 17.4). The estimate for 1990
is from Chay and Greenstone (2003a), Figure 1.




                                                   37
                            Table 2: Summary of means by region, 1933-1960

                                          Sample:     All states   Northeast   Midwest   South   West

 Monthly deaths per 100,000                                 84.5      91.2      86.1      78.3      82
 Monthly infant deaths per 100,000 births                   272       241        246      327      261
 Bituminous coal consumption (tons per capita)              .553      .176      1.18      .322     .412
 Fraction households using coal for heating (1940)           .53      .698      .749      .317     .179
 Mean temp (F) < 30                                         .108      .149      .173     .0313     .053
 Mean temp (F) 30-40                                        .125      .168      .153     .0785    .0872
 Mean temp (F) 40-50                                        .151      .162       .14      .141     .177
 Mean temp (F) 50-60                                         .17       .16      .144      .165     .268
 Mean temp (F) 60-70                                        .192       .19      .175      .191     .243
 Mean temp (F) 70-80                                        .182       .15      .168      .242     .129
 Mean temp (F) 80-90                                       .0694     .0212      .045      .147    .0359
 Mean temp (F) >= 90                                      .00252   .0000814    .00181    .0035   .00703
 Mean temp (F)                                              54.7      50.2      50.6       62      55.7
 Fraction of population urban (1930)                        .406      .583       .43      .224     .432
 Number of states                                             48        9         12       16       11

Notes: Averages are weighted by state-year populations. Delaware is missing coal consumption data and
dropped from our sample. Infant mortality data are unavailable prior to 1939. Urban places are those with
greater than 25,000 inhabitants.




                                                     38
                                             Table 3: Core estimates

                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)

           Panel outcome:     (A) Log all-age mortality (N=16,128)    (B) Mortality rate per 100,000 (N=16,128)

 BITCOAL                        0.063        0.058         0.039         5.400        5.000            3.360
                              (0.025)**    (0.023)**     (0.021)*      (2.294)**    (2.117)**        (1.956)*
 WINTER x BITCOAL                            0.013         0.017                      0.960            1.080
                                            (0.007)*    (0.006)***                   (0.647)        (0.501)**

           Panel outcome:     (C) Log infant mortality (N=12,672)        (D) Infant mortality rate (N=12,672)

 BITCOAL                         0.042        0.023        0.012        21.176        16.454          11.543
                              (0.014)***    (0.013)*      (0.013)     (7.091)***    (6.800)**        (6.384)*
 WINTER x BITCOAL                             0.045        0.044                      11.335          11.500
                                           (0.010)***   (0.011)***                 (3.331)***       (3.569)***

 Year-month f.e.                 Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
 State-month f.e.                Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
 State-specific trends           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
 Temperature distribution        No           No             Yes         No            No              Yes
 Other bituminous                No           No             Yes         No            No              Yes

Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Regressions estimates
are weighted by the total state-year population. BITCOAL is the estimated state-year bituminous consumption for
heating. WINTER is a dummy for calendar months November through March (inclusive). This variable is constructed
by interacting the states’ 1917 share of national bituminous consumption with the annual measure of coal consumption
for heating. Temperature distribution controls for the fraction of the month in a given 10-degree temperature band,
following Deschenes and Greenstone (2009). We also control for per capita bituminous coal used for electricity,
industry, coke, and railroads, and its interaction with the WINTER dummy variable. The all-age mortality estimates
span the 1933-1960 time period, while the infant mortality estimates are for the 1939-1960 time period.




                                                        39
    Table 4: Fraction of winter mortality decline explained by bituminous coal consumption, 1945-1960

                                                                 US    Northeast   Midwest    South    West

                                                                        Panel A: All-age mortality

    (1)   Percent decline in winter mortality (1945-1960)      8.60     12.43       12.20      -2.22    12.92
    (2)   Decline in coal consumption (1945-1960)             0.73       0.24       1.59       0.41     0.54
    (3)   Percent decline in winter mortality due to (2)       1.25      0.41        2.75       0.70     0.93
    (4)   (3) as a fraction of (1)                            0.15       0.03        0.23      -0.32     0.07
    (5)   Lives saved each winter month in 1960              1923.05    170.05     1230.78    322.71   194.41


                                                                        Panel B: Infant mortality

    (1)   Percent decline in winter mortality (1945-1960)    31.98       32.12      33.10     29.82    33.89
    (2)   Decline in coal consumption (1945-1960)             0.73       0.24        1.59     0.41     0.54
    (3)   Percent decline in winter mortality due to (2)      3.27        1.05       7.27      1.82     2.43
    (4)   (3) as a fraction of (1)                            0.10       0.03        0.22      0.06     0.07
    (5)   Lives saved each winter month in 1960              309.88      20.52      182.66    66.91    33.45


Notes: Based on the coeﬃcient estimates from column (3) of Table 3. Coal consumption is tons per capita.




                                                            40
                                                                         Table 5: Robustness checks
                                                                     Outcome: Log of all-age mortality
                                                                  Years 1933-1960 (unless otherwise noted)

                                                             (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)
                                        Specification:     Urban       Household     Lagged      State-month   Drop Western    Drop warm     1939-1955
                                                         interaction    measure       coal          trends        states         states       sample

                                                                                     Panel A outcome: Log all-age mortality

                    WINTER x BITCOAL                       0.018                                    0.015          0.016          0.004         0.024
                                                         (0.009)**                                (0.006)**      (0.007)**       (0.004)     (0.007)***
                    URBAN x WINTER x BITCOAL               -0.002
                                                          (0.018)
                    WINTER x COALHH                                       0.090
                                                                       (0.019)***
                    WINTER x BITCOAL (Y-1)                                             0.016
                                                                                    (0.005)***


                                                                                      Panel B outcome: Log infant mortality




41
                    WINTER x BITCOAL                        0.061                                   0.025          0.045           0.034        0.065
                                                         (0.017)***                               (0.013)*      (0.013)***      (0.012)***   (0.013)***
                    URBAN x WINTER x BITCOAL                -0.046
                                                           (0.037)
                    WINTER x COALHH                                      0.098
                                                                       (0.043)**
                    WINTER x BITCOAL (Y-1)                                             0.038
                                                                                    (0.009)***

                    Main eﬀect of coal variable             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                    Year-month f.e.                         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                    State-month f.e.                        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                    State-specific trends                   Yes           Yes          Yes          No              Yes            Yes           Yes
                    State-month specific trends             No            No           No           Yes             No             No            No
                    Temperature distribution                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                    Other bituminous                        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes

     Notes: See notes to Table 3. Urban is the fraction of the state population living in a city with over 25 thousand people in 1930. COALHH is the fraction of state
     households with coal stoves in 1940 interacted with the annual variation in bituminous coal consumption for heating (in 100,000 tons). The mean for COALHH is 0.42
     in 1933 and 0.16 in 1960. Column (3) excludes data from 1933 since we do not have (lagged) information on coal for 1932. The Western states, as defined by the U.S.
     Bureau of Census, include: AZ, CA, CO, ID, MT, NM, NV, OR, UT, WA, and WY. The "warm" states were determined by the average heating degree days (base =
     50) over the 1920-1929 time period. The 10 states include: AL, AR, AZ, CA, FL, GA, LA, MS, SC, and TX.
    Table 6: Elasticity of Pollution and Infant Mortality from Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva (2012)

   Study                                      IMR per        Mean Level   Elasticity     Mean     Elasticity
                                            100,000 births     PM10                    level CO

   Barreca, Clay, and Tarr (2013)               3367          100-300       0.22         NA          NA

   Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva (2012)     1987 (overall)      66.9        0.415        2.71       0.227
   Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva (2012)    1899 (internal)      66.9        0.325        2.71       0.178
   Chay and Greenstone (2003a)                  1179            35.3        0.284        NA          NA
   Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder (2005)         688            29.6        0.008        1.58       0.040
   Currie and Neidell (2005)                     391            39.5        0.001        2.00       0.084
   Knittel, Miller, and Sanders (2011)           280            28.9        1.827        1.01       0.146

Notes: Based on Table 8 of Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva (2012). NA = not available.




                                                       42
                   Figure A1: Correlation between coal consumption in 1933 and other factors


             Panel A: Average daily temperature in January, February, and December of 1933
                                                                                MT
                                                                                                  UT
                                                  2
               Bituminous coal consumption (1933)




                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                          IL
                                                                                                 IA
                                      1.5




                                                                                                WY             INNV
                                                                                                   NE
                                                           ND              MN                                     KS

                                                                                SD        WI
                                                                                                                     MO
                             1




                                                                                                               OH
                                                                                                                          KY
                                                                                                  MI ID

                                                                                                                     DC
                                                                                                                                     TN
                                                                                                                    WA
                                                                                                                    NM VA
                   .5




                                                                                                                                OK
                                                                                                    WV                               NC        SC GA
                                                                                                       OR                                          AL
                                                                                     MEVTNH MARI
                                                                                              CT PA MD
                                                                                                                                AZ        AR        MS        LA
                                                                                                         NY                                         TX
                                                                                                                                      CA                           FL
                                                                                                           NJ
                                  0




                                                      10              20            30            40                                 50                  60
                                                                                Average daily temperature (F)



                                                                           Panel B: Income per capita in 1933
                                                                                                  MT
                                                                                                  UT
                                                  2
               Bituminous coal consumption (1933)




                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                     IL
                                                                                           IA
                                      1.5




                                                                                                  IN           WY
                                                                                                NE                         NV
                                                                      ND                  KS        MN

                                                                 SD                                     WI
                                                                                                        MO
                             1




                                                                                                                OH
                                                                                KY
                                                                                     ID                   MI

                                                                                                                                                        DC
                                                                                TN
                                                                                 NM                WA
                   .5




                                                                                          VA
                                                                                GA OK
                                                                         SC     NC     WV
                                                                        AL                      VTOR
                                                                                                   ME NH
                                                                                                      PA MD                     MA
                                                                                                                                RI
                                                                                                                                 CT
                                                                MS    AR            LA       AZ
                                                                                       TX                                             NY
                                                                                          FL                                    CA
                                                                                                                               NJ
                                  0




                                                      .5               1              1.5            2                                    2.5                  3
                                                                                Log income per capita (1933)




Notes: Line represents a linear prediction from an unweighted regression. Coal consumption is in tons per
capita. Average daily temperature is constructed from daily weather station records from the USHCN. The
1933 The income estimate comes from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2012).




                                                                                                        43
                         Table A1: Estimated eﬀect on income per capita, 1933-1960

                                                              (1)        (2)
                                             Outcome:       Log income per capita

                                   BITCOAL                   -0.025      0.054
                                                            (0.025)     (0.040)

                                   Year f.e.                    Yes      Yes
                                   State f.e.                   Yes      Yes
                                   State-specific trends        No       Yes

                                   Observations                 1,344   1,344

Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Regressions estimates are
weighted by the total state-year population. Unit of observation is state-year. Income per capita is in 2010$. The
data come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2012).




                                                           44
