NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHORT-RUN EFFECTS OF JOB LOSS ON HEALTH CONDITIONS, HEALTH INSURANCE,
AND HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION
Jessamyn Schaller
Ann Huff Stevens
Working Paper 19884
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19884
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19884.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jessamyn Schaller and Ann Huff Stevens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Short-run Effects of Job Loss on Health Conditions, Health Insurance, and Health Care Utilization
Jessamyn Schaller and Ann Huff Stevens
NBER Working Paper No. 19884
February 2014
JEL No. I1,J63
ABSTRACT
Job loss in the United States is associated with long-term reductions in income and long-term increases
in mortality rates. This paper examines the short- to medium-term changes in health, health care access,
and health care utilization after job loss that lead to these long-term effects. Using a sample with more
than 9800 individual job losses and longitudinal data on a wide variety of health-related measures
and outcomes, we show that job loss results in worse self-reported health, including mental health,
but is not associated with statistically significant increases in a variety of specific chronic conditions.
Among the full sample of workers, we see reductions in insurance coverage, but little evidence of
reductions in health care utilization after job loss. Among the subset of displaced workers for whom
the lost job was their primary source of insurance we do see reductions in doctor’s visits and prescription
drug usage. These results suggest that access to health insurance and care may be an important part of
the health effects of job loss for some workers. The pattern of results is also consistent with a significant
role for stress in generating long-term health consequences after job loss.
Jessamyn Schaller
Department of Economics
Eller College of Management
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall, Suite 401
1130 E Helen St., Tucson, AZ 85721
jschaller@email.arizona.edu
Ann Huff Stevens
Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
annstevens@ucdavis.edu

Over the course of the Great Recession more than 8 million Americans lost their jobs. A growing
body of research in economics points to adverse and long-lasting consequences of worker displacement.
These include significant decreases in lifetime earnings, reduced job stability, increased likelihood of
divorce, lower fertility, and negative impacts on health, education, and labor market outcomes for the
children of the displaced.1 A particularly grim addition to this literature is the finding that job loss
results in sharply increased mortality for US workers. Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) estimate that
displacement is associated with a 10-15% increase in a worker’s annual death hazard – an implied loss in
life expectancy of 1-1.5 years for an individual displaced at age 40.
Despite the dramatic magnitude of the mortality effects of job loss, little is known about why job
loss leads to increased mortality. Many potential pathways exist, including reduced income and access
to health insurance, reductions in continuity of care due to changes in insurance coverage or geographic
mobility, increased prices of health care as a result of insurance loss or changes, and the substantial
stress associated with reduced and variable earnings following job displacement. Persuasively
identifying how job loss leads to reduced health is made difficult by the fact that poor health may lead
to selection for displacement, or to difficulty becoming re-employed, both of which can raise doubts
about causality in cross-sectional comparisons, even with large sample sizes and many controls. These
factors make it critical to utilize methods—often based on longitudinal data—that can more clearly
establish the direction of causality between job loss and health outcomes. The multiple potential

1

See, among others, Ruhm (1991), Jacobson, Lalonde and Sullivan (1993), Stevens (1997), Charles and Stephens
(2004), Lindo (2009), Lindo (2011), Stevens and Schaller (2011), Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens (2008).

1

pathways by which job loss may affect health also make it important to consider a variety of outcomes,
including health conditions, utilization of medical care, and insurance coverage, in the same study and
estimation framework.
This paper combines short panels from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) covering
the years 1996 through 2011 to study the effects of job loss on health conditions, health insurance
coverage, and health care utilization and expenditures. The MEPS is uniquely suited for analysis of the
health effects of displacement and allows us to improve on existing research in two ways. First, by
combining many panels of the MEPS data we generate larger sample sizes of displaced workers than are
typically available from non-administrative data, with almost 10,000 involuntary job losses. At the same
time, the MEPS contains detailed longitudinal information on a wide set of health outcomes, health
insurance coverage and its source, and detailed (self-) reports of expenditures on and utilization of
health care. This allows us to push the literature on job loss and health forward by presenting estimates
that more convincingly isolate the causal impact of job loss on health outcomes, comparing how these
estimates are affected by specification and treatment of the control group, and comparing effects on
conditions, insurance, and utilization for a common sample.
Using models that include both individual fixed effects and baseline health measures interacted
with trends, we find that involuntary job loss is associated with increased likelihood of self-reported fair
or poor health in the short-run, as well as significant declines in self-reported mental health, depression,
and anxiety. We see no robust, significant effects on the incidence of specific chronic physical conditions
(diabetes, arthritis, hypertension or high cholesterol) within the first two years following job loss.
Turning to estimates of the effects of displacement on insurance status and health care
utilization, we find that job loss is associated with a 9.9 percentage point decrease in the probability of
being covered by any health insurance and a 12.8 percentage point increase in the probability of
2

experiencing a spell of non-insurance in the current interview round. While we find that job loss has no
statistically significant effect on health care utilization and expenditures for the sample as a whole, we
do find that job loss negatively impacts utilization among the sample of workers who held insurance
through their employer prior to the job loss. Among this sample with larger insurance and utilization
effects, as in the full sample, we again find significant negative effects of job loss on self-reported health
status and mental health outcomes, but no significant effects on the likelihood of reporting any specific
chronic conditions. There is no evidence that greater incidence of uninsurance in this subsample leads to
larger effects on health outcomes.
Taken as a whole, our results suggest that job loss has significant negative effects on the health
of displaced workers in the short run, with the largest effects on mental health and self-reported health
status, and no measurable effects on the incidence of specific chronic conditions like arthritis, diabetes,
cholesterol, and hypertension. Loss of insurance seems to drive reductions in health care utilization, but
does not seem to result in more pronounced negative effects on self-reported health or mental health
problems.

I.

Related Literature
The background for this study and many other recent studies comes from early work that

establishes the large and permanent effects of job loss on earnings (Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan
(1993), Couch and Placzek (2010)) and, more recently, the large effects of job loss on mortality.
Specifically, Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) show that displaced workers are 10-15% more likely to die
in the two decades following job loss.2 These results are concentrated among workers losing jobs before

2

Smaller mortality effects have been found using European administrative data (Rege, Telle, and Votruba (2009),
Eliason and Storrie (2009), Browning and Heinesen (2012)).

3

age 50, with older displaced workers facing much smaller mortality effects in the aftermath of job loss.
Sullivan and von Wachter also show that the extent of the mortality effects seem to be correlated with
the size of earnings losses and the volatility of earnings after job loss. Unfortunately, the administrative
data utilized by Sullivan and von Wachter do not contain any information on the cause of death, or the
types of underlying health changes that could lead to increased mortality.
These findings have sparked several recent investigations into short- and medium-run health
changes that result from displacement. Findings using data from the United States (where evidence on
negative earnings and mortality effects from job loss is strongest) produce mixed results. Salm (2009)
uses the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and a sample of workers ages 50 and over and finds little
evidence of negative effects of job loss on mental or physical health outcomes. This lack of effect for
older workers (average age in Salm’s sample is 55 years) is consistent with earlier work by Sullivan and
von Wachter (2009) who argue that older workers may be close enough to eligibility for retirement
benefits that the earnings losses and uncertainty that follow displacement are mitigated and with them,
many of the negative health effects. Salm also has a relatively small sample (around 370) of displaced
workers (defined as those losing jobs due to firm closings) and includes only two observations per
worker—one pre- and one post-displacement. Other work using the HRS (Gallo, et al. (2000), for
example) faces similar sample size and age limitations.
Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Strully (2009) finds that job loss is
associated with a higher likelihood of self-reported fair or poor health and increased onset of new
health conditions. Her sample includes a broader set of ages, but includes only 200 workers losing jobs
due to a firm closing. She finds some evidence of negative effects on self-reported health and increases
in the onset of new conditions after job loss. These results include controls for baseline health reports,
but look only at a single point in time after the job loss.

4

Several studies have utilized large administrative data sets from European countries that contain
large numbers of displaced workers, but typically lack repeated, longitudinal measures of health
outcomes or other health measures. Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2012), for example, have
longitudinal data on earnings and employment for all of Norway, but observe health outcomes for
individuals only at a single point in time. They use a rich set of individual characteristics to control for
differences between displaced and not-displaced individuals, but are unable to control for individual
fixed-effects in health measures or use longitudinal data on health. Black, Devereux, and Salvanes find
that job loss results in small increases in smoking and reductions in an index of cardiac health. They also
show, consistent with previous work on job loss in Norway, that the earnings effects of job loss are
much smaller in Norway and that Norwegian workers have access to generous, long-term
unemployment insurance. Thus it is unclear whether we would expect very large associated health
effects in this setting. They do not have information on health insurance coverage or healthcare
utilization. Other papers have also pointed to relatively modest health effects after job loss using
European data (see Browning et al. (2006), Browning and Heinesen (2012)).3
The findings of relatively small health effects in Europe could reflect that job loss may be less of
an economic shock in Europe than in the United States, given more generous social insurance and
employment stability policies. It could also reflect broader availability of health insurance not tied to
employment. Overall, the limitations of existing studies leave open the question of how, in the United
States at least, the economic shock associated with job loss is translated into increased mortality over
several decades.

3

An exception to the pattern of limited health effects using European data comes from Bergemann,
Gronqvist, and Gudbjornsdottir (2011) who use data from Sweden and find increased rates of diabetes
after job loss among certain groups.
5

Another limitation of the existing literature is that alternative health-related outcomes have
been analyzed in isolation. The above studies focus on health conditions or self-reported health, while
separate studies have looked at effects on insurance coverage (Gruber and Madrian (1997), Lin (2005)).
Job loss generates reductions in insurance coverage, and may change access and costs of care for many,
and these could be related to short- and long-term changes in health. Only by analyzing health
conditions, insurance, and health care utilization in a unified study are we likely to make progress on
understanding the full health effects of job loss.
Given this backdrop, our paper makes an important contribution by combining U.S. data on job
losses, which we know are associated with both large earnings losses and large mortality effects, with a
variety of health-related outcome measures. In addition, because we have longitudinal data and
repeated observations (up to five observations per worker) of our health measures, we can use more
robust models to control for unobserved characteristics that may be correlated with job loss. Specifically
we include individual fixed-effects and baseline health measures interacted with trends to isolate the
effects of job loss on several key health outcomes. We can also compare results across displaced
workers with different baseline insurance sources and status, to gain clues about the likely drivers of the
health effects of job loss.

II.

Statistical models of the health effects of job loss
Our approach to understanding the health effects of job loss is motivated by the well-

established empirical models of job loss and earnings, but also informed by a standard health
production function. Specifically, many previous authors (Jacobson, Lalonde, Sullivan 2003, Stevens
1997, Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender, 2012) model earnings effects of job loss using specifications
such as:
6

∑

(1a)

∑

(1b)

The log of earnings (Eit) for person i in year t is modeled as a function of individual fixed-effects (αi) and a
vector of dummy variables indicating years before and after the job loss (Dkit). In some specifications, an
individual-specific trend is also included, as shown in equation (1b). Additional control variables (Xit) may
be included, such as higher order terms in age or experience, along with a set of calendar year dummies
(Yt). The individual fixed effects and trends are necessary to isolate the effects of displacement from preexisting levels or trends in earnings that may be correlated with job loss. Such specifications use
observed earnings prior to job loss to establish the counterfactual pattern of earnings if the job loss had
not occurred. A control group of never-displaced workers helps to estimate the common (to displaced
and non-displaced workers) age and calendar year terms and identify the counterfactual pattern of
earnings.
Using this framework to estimate the effects of job loss on health requires consideration of a
simple health production function, as originally suggested by Grossman (1972). Specifically, let an
individual’s health stock in some period be expressed as a function of their lagged health, investment in
health this period (I), and depreciation (at rate θ) of health this period.
(2)
(3)

, E)

Investment in health is in itself a function of market-based health care inputs (M), an individual’s time
devoted to improving health (T), and an individual’s human capital (E), which may affect the efficiency
with which purchases of medical care or time investments produce next period’s stock of good health.

7

Considering these inputs into health production jointly with the direct effects of job loss on
employment, earnings, and health insurance coverage, it is easy to see how job loss can alter health.
Earnings losses and employment changes may reduce spending on health care inputs (M). Loss of
insurance may increase the price of health care inputs and so further reduce the quantity of health
inputs. Time allocation towards health (T) may change after displacement, although the direction of this
change is not clear. Less time may be spent in market work initially, but job changes, stress and
uncertainty may result in less time being allocated toward health after displacement. Combining these
factors and replacing earnings with health on the left-hand-side of equation (1a) or (1b), a dummy
variable indicating displacement is likely be associated with reduced health as the result of
displacement’s effects on health expenditures and (possibly) time investments.
An important element of previous studies of displacement that we extend to our estimates of
the health production function is the use of a fixed-effects specification, or similar methods, to control
for unobservable individual characteristics. A primary concern in this case is that human capital (E),
which is a key determinant of health in our production function, is likely to have both observed and
unobserved components that are correlated with job loss probabilities. Thus, in order to control for
individual characteristics that might be correlated with earnings, human capital and ability, it is
important to include individual fixed effects, or otherwise utilize pre-displacement values of health
outcomes. Given this, our main specifications used in the analysis are given by:
(4a)
(4b)
(4c)

8

Equation (4a) is a standard fixed-effects specification. Note that, because we have only five observations
per person, we collapse all post-displacement indicators into a single indicator for the post-displacement
periods (PDit). In addition, in most specifications we do not include a dummy for the period prior to
displacement. In specification testing we show that including the pre-displacement controls in this case
do not substantially change our results. Equation (4b) adds the individual-specific trend, allowing for the
possibility that underlying health may have a trend that is correlated with displacement. In practice,
with a relatively small number of time periods per person, we may not have sufficient power in the
longitudinal data to identify the person-specific trend. As an alternative, we estimate models in which
we specify the individual effect,

, as a linear function of baseline (round 1) self-reported health (Hi0), so

that the individual-specific trend in (4b) is replaced with a summary measure of an individual’s health
status (baseline health) prior to any displacements. This specification, summarized by (4c) suggests that
health outcomes should have an individual-specific average and trend, and that the effects of job
displacement will be measured as deviations from that trend.

III.

Data
The data for this analysis are from the Household Component of the Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey (MEPS), maintained by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The MEPS collects data
from a nationally representative subsample of households that participated in the prior year’s National
Health Interview Survey (conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics). The MEPS interviews
respondents five times over a period covering two calendar years, collecting data on demographic
characteristics, health status, health care utilization and expenditures, health insurance coverage,
income, and employment status. Our data include fifteen waves of the MEPS, covering the period 1996-

9

2011. We limit our analysis to individuals between the ages of 21 and 65 that are employed in the first
round of the survey.4
The MEPS is ideally suited to this analysis for a few reasons. First, the set of medical conditions
identified in the MEPS is far broader than those used in previous studies, allowing us to study not only
general self-reported health and mental health, but also a variety of specific conditions including
depression and anxiety, diabetes, arthritis, hypertension, high cholesterol, and cancer, among others.
Second, the MEPS allows us to go beyond the health consequences of displacement and study the
mechanisms behind this relationship – changes in insurance coverage, the frequency of medical care,
and total expenditures on care. Finally, we are not limited by small sample sizes, as previous panel data
studies have been. By combining MEPS data from 1996 through 2011 we have over 460,000 personround observations and observe over 9800 job losses.
Our indicator for job displacement is constructed from a survey question asking the respondent
to identify the main reason why he or she changed jobs since the last round of interviews. We define
involuntary job loss to include three responses: (1) job ended; (2) business dissolved or sold; and (3) laid
off. By this definition, we identify 9,892 individuals that experience involuntary job displacement after
round 1 of the survey, and 91,459 individuals that are never displaced.
Our outcome variables fall into three categories: (1) health outcomes; (2) health insurance
status; and (3) health care utilization. Data on health outcomes are compiled from the main MEPS
household survey file and the Medical Conditions file. In the household survey, the respondent was
asked to rate the health and mental health status of each person in the family according to the following
categories: excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor. From these variables, we create indicators equal

4

Additional analysis, available upon request, shows that our results are very similar if we instead restrict the
sample to include only individuals that worked full time in the first round of the survey, or to individuals with one
or more years of job tenure in round 1.

10

to one if health and mental health were recorded to be fair or poor. The Medical Conditions file includes
specific medical conditions that were reported directly from the respondent, recorded verbatim by the
interviewer, and then coded by professional coders to fully-specified ICD-9-CM codes. Medical
conditions can appear in a given round in one of several ways. First, conditions categorized as “priority
conditions” are asked about in a condition enumeration section of the main survey and coded as
present for a specific round if they are described as “current” in the survey for that round. Second,
health conditions associated with specific events occurring in each round, such as hospital stays, doctor
visits, disability days, and prescription drug purchases, are added to the file. Finally, respondents may
report that a specific condition is “bothering them during a survey round. To preserve confidentiality,
condition codes are collapsed to 3-digit code categories. We use these 3-digit codes to identify a set of
six specific conditions: arthritis, diabetes, high cholesterol, hypertension, cancer (potentially a placebo
test for direct health effects of displacement), and anxiety or depression.5
Health insurance indicators are constructed from variables identifying whether a survey
respondent was covered by a particular type of insurance at any time during each month of the panel.
The variables are equal to one if the respondent was insured at any point during the month of the
interview. In order to capture spells of uninsurance, we also generate a variable equal to one if the
respondent was without insurance for any month of the round.
Finally, data on health expenditures and health care utilization come from three separate event
file components of the MEPS – the Prescribed Medicines file, the Emergency Room Visits file, and the
Office-Based Medical Providers file. These files contain data on the number of office-based visits to a

5

As each of the conditions that we consider is considered a priority condition, the reporting of the conditions
should not be mechanically dependent on the utilization of care (i.e. the number of health “events” in a specific
round). However, to the extent that individuals are more likely to describe as “current” a condition for which they
have recently seen the doctor or filled a prescription, utilization of medical care and likelihood of reporting medical
conditions may be correlated. It is also possible that frequent care makes it more likely that individuals will be
diagnosed and thus become aware that they have a specific medical condition.

11

doctor and number of visits to the emergency room, as well as the amount paid by family, insurance,
and other sources for each medical event that occurred in the round, including the purchase of
prescription drugs. We collapse the data to the person-round level to generate total number of visits
and expenditures by category for each individual.
IV. RESULTS
Sample means, presented in Table 1, make clear the importance of controlling for observable
and unobservable characteristics that may be correlated both with the likelihood of involuntary job
displacement and with health-related outcomes. We compare characteristics for two groups: workers
that experience an involuntary displacement sometime after the first round of data collection and
workers that are never displaced.6 Displaced workers are more likely to be male, more likely to be black
or Hispanic, and slightly younger than their continually-employed counterparts. They are also lesseducated: 16% of the displaced sample has less than a high school degree, compared with 10% of the
non-displaced group, and only half have attended any college, compared with 59% of the non-displaced
group.
Differences between the displaced and non-displaced groups are also apparent when
considering health-related outcomes. Notably, while displaced workers are more likely to have their
general health categorized as “Fair” or “Poor” and are more likely to experience poor mental health,
they are less likely to report several of the specific health conditions, including diabetes, high cholesterol
and hypertension. While this discrepancy may be due to differences in the prevalence of these
conditions between these two groups, it also may be due to the reduced rate of health insurance
coverage among workers that will eventually be displaced: only 68.9 percent of the displaced sample is

6

Observation numbers in Table 1 show that there is sample attrition between Rounds 1 and 5. We have also
conducted analysis on a balanced panel – a sample in which every observation has complete data in each round of
the panel – and find that our results are robust to this sample change.

12

covered by any insurance in the initial round of the sample, while 84.2 percent of the never-displaced
sample is covered. The gap in health insurance coverage may also explain differences in health care
utilization between the two groups even prior to any displacements: displaced workers are less likely to
visit the doctor’s office and less likely to use prescription drugs, and more likely to visit the emergency
room, where treatment can often be obtained without health insurance.
These large pre-existing differences in insurance status suggest that it may be critical to check
sensitivity of these results to controlling for pre-existing differences in insurance coverage between
displaced and not displaced workers. If less financially stable firms, for example, are less likely to offer
health insurance policies for their workers, there could be substantial selection of workers into firms
that are most likely to close or lay off their workers, leading to bias in estimates of the effects of job loss
that cannot control for insurance status. This could mean that those who are displaced would have
been less healthy even in the absence of the job loss, given their lower levels of access to health
coverage. In contrast, if healthier workers disproportionately select into firms that do not offer health
insurance as part of their compensation package, the resulting bias could go in the other direction. Our
inclusion of both fixed-effects and trends interacted with baseline health, which has not often been
done in previous work, reduces the likelihood that results are driven by pre-displacement differences
across workers. We also conduct some of our analysis on the subset of workers who have insurance
through their employers as of round 1, and prior to any of the displacements. This results in a better
balance of displaced and non-displaced workers and allows us to draw some suggestive conclusions
about the role of insurance in driving effects on health outcomes and utilization for this subset of
workers.
Table 2 shows results from our baseline set of health regressions. We begin by looking at the
effects of job displacement on health outcomes, defining displacement broadly to include those who

13

report that they were laid off, their job ended, or their business was dissolved or closed. To account for
both observable and unobservable differences between displaced and non-displaced workers, our
starting point is a standard specification, described in equation (4a) above that includes individual fixed
effects; these results are summarized in column (3) of Table 2. For comparison, column (1) of that Table
shows mean levels of each health outcome as of round 1 and column (2) shows a specification without
individual fixed-effects that instead includes controls for baseline self-reported health and mental health
and dummies for gender, race, and educational attainment categories in addition to age and calendar
year fixed effects – an approach that has been common in the previous literature. Finally, in column (4)
we show our preferred specification (based on equation (4c)) that includes both individual fixed-effects
and an interaction between round 1 self-reported health and a trend term, meant to proxy for
individual-specific trends that are correlated with underlying health status.7 The results in column 4 of
Table 2 show that displacement increases the probability of having a self-reported physical health status
of fair or poor by approximately 1.5 percentage points, or roughly 18 percent of the baseline probability,
with the effect statistically different than zero at the 1 percent level. The effect is slightly larger than
effects shown in column 2, without fixed effects, and significantly larger than effects shown in column 3
that do not control for a time trend. For virtually all outcomes examined (see later rows of Table 2) we
find somewhat smaller effects of displacement in the specifications that use fixed-effects specifications.
Thus, to be conservative in quantifying the causal portion of negative health outcomes following job
loss, we rely on the specification from column 4 for the remaining results.
The next rows of Table 2 show the effects of displacement on a variety of other health
conditions. We include a number of specific chronic conditions that may be plausibly linked to job loss
via direct or indirect mechanisms. First, we consider the incidence of arthritis and diabetes, as much
7

We have also estimated a slightly less restricted model in which trends are interacted with five dummies for the
value of self-reported health (rather than just the continuous measure of self-reported health) and obtained very
similar results.

14

evidence suggests that episodes of acute stress (and more chronic stress) can be associated with onset
and increased symptoms of both diseases (Hasset and Clauw (2010), deBrouwer et al. (2010), Surweit,
Schneider and Feinglos (1991)). We also include cholesterol and hypertension – two conditions that
have not been linked directly to stress, but may reflect changes in health behaviors after displacement.
Specifically, if job loss and the associated stress leads to changes in smoking, drinking, nutrition, or
exercise, conditions likely to be affected by such behaviors may be affected as well, and we include
cholesterol and hypertension to check for this mechanism. Finally, as a placebo test for direct health
effects of displacement, we include cancer since it seems unlikely that any behavioral change (or
changes to health care) from job loss would be associated with cancer in the short (approximately two
years on average) time frame after job loss considered here.
As shown in the next two rows of Table 2, we find positive and significant increases of
approximately 7 to 8 percent in the incidence of both arthritis and diabetes following displacement but
these effects are not robust to inclusion of baseline health interacted with a trend. We find no evidence
of increases in either high cholesterol or hypertension. Finally, as expected, we find no significant
increase in the onset of cancer, which suggests that we are not picking up spurious negative changes in
health that are simply correlated with the likelihood of job loss. We do, however, find a marginally
significant reduction in reported cancer following job loss. While this is only suggestive, one possibility is
that reductions in health care utilization delay diagnosis of some conditions, like cancer, leading to the
appearance of reduced incidence when we rely on self-reports of conditions.
We also study the effects of displacement on two mental health outcomes: a self-reported
measure of mental health that is fair or poor, and a report of experiencing depression or anxiety. Mental
health effects of displacement may play an important role in mediating the effects of job loss not only
on physical health, but also on a number of other outcomes that have been examined in the literature

15

including marital dissolution and children’s wellbeing. These results are presented in the lower panel of
Table 2. Not surprisingly, we find that job loss leads to substantial increases in both of these measures of
mental health. The probability of self-reporting fair or poor mental health rises by 38 percent after job
loss, and reports of depression or anxiety rise by about 22 percent.
The fact that we find significant increases in the number of workers reporting poor or fair
health, but no increase in specific physical conditions is somewhat surprising. Of course, the increase in
anxiety and depression could lead workers to report worse health. It may also be that other conditions
and minor illnesses are occurring that lead to these reports. Finally, reporting a specific condition
requires that individual have been diagnosed (or at least that they have self-diagnosed) and this may
depend on access to and utilization of health care, which we explore below. Previous work shows that
specific conditions are frequently misreported by individuals (see Baker et al. (2002)), and so selfreported summaries of health may be more reliable. It is also true that summary measures of selfreported health have been linked to mortality (Idler and Benyamini (1997)), and so may be particularly
important here, given our interest in understanding the connections between short-term health effects
of displacement and mortality.
We next consider the extent to which displacement alters access to health insurance and health
care utilization, again using specification (4c). In Panel A of Table 3 we show the effects of displacement
on several measures of insurance, including the probability of having any insurance coverage at the
round-specific survey date, the probability of having private or public insurance coverage, and the
probability of having any period (between interviews) uninsured. The first column shows that
individuals who are displaced are approximately 10 percentage points less likely to have any source of
health insurance following job loss. Recall that the “post-displacement” period here ranges from a few
months (for those displaced between rounds 4 and 5) to just under 2 years for those displaced soon

16

after the round 1 interview. This effect consists of a slightly larger reduction in access to private
insurance (which shows a reduction of approximately 11 percentage points) and a statistically significant
increase of 1.3 percentage points in access to public insurance. Finally, roughly 13 percent of those
displaced experience some period without insurance in the period after displacement. These effects are
consistent with, though somewhat smaller than, previous estimates by Gruber and Madrian (1997) on
the effects of job loss on insurance status. Gruber and Madrian report a reduction in the likelihood of
having insurance after a job separation of approximately 20 percentage points. The fact that they
include only men and consider both voluntary and involuntary changes job changes in their study may
explain much of this difference.
The lower panel of Table 3 shows results summarizing the response of health care utilization
and total expenditures. Specifically, the outcomes we consider having any office-based medical visits
since the last survey round, any ER visits, or receiving any prescription medications, along with total
expenditures on office visits, ER visits and prescription drugs. This shows no evidence of changes in
either utilization or expenditures. Given that only 1 in 10 displaced workers face lasting changes in
insurance status following their job losses, it is perhaps not surprising that we see little evidence of
changes in utilization.
We next consider a subset of workers who are likely to face larger changes in insurance
coverage, and examine whether this group also has larger effects on health outcomes or utilization.
Specifically, we limit our analysis sample to the group of individuals who, as of round 1, are holding
health insurance through their own employer (“round 1 insurance holders”). If the loss of insurance
coverage drives other outcomes, such as health conditions or utilization, we would expect results for
this subsample to differ from those in Tables 2 and 3. This restriction eliminates from both our
treatment and control groups those who are uninsured at round 1, as well as those who are insured, but

17

whose coverage is through either a spouse’s employer or an individual policy. A potential advantage of
this approach is that it forces both treatment and control groups to be more similar in terms of
observables (such as insurance status) at round 1. While fixed-effects and baseline health trends are
meant to correct for potential baseline differences between treatments and controls, this sample
restriction may make the sample more similar in unobservable ways as well. Of course, the disadvantage
is that the effects of displacement here apply to only a subset of job losers, and that subset, given their
access to employer-based insurance in round 1, may be relatively advantaged.8
Table 4 shows the effects of displacement in the sample that conditions on having ownemployer-based insurance in round 1. As expected, there are much larger effects on access to health
insurance, with a 26 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of having any insurance following job
loss. Echoing results in Table 2, the reduction in private insurance coverage from job loss is offset only
very slightly by increased access to public insurance. There is a 1.8 percentage point increase in the
probability of having public insurance as the result of displacement. This likely reflects limited eligibility
for public insurance (Medicaid) for most able-bodied adults under current law, something that could
change substantially as the Affordable Care Act is implemented in the coming years.
Consistent with the much larger reductions in insurance coverage for this subset of our sample,
we find evidence of larger changes in utilization for this group. Panel B of Table 4 shows a reduction of
3.6 percentage points (relative to a baseline mean of 48.6 percent) in the likelihood of having an office
visit since the last round. The probability of visiting the ER is reduced by approximately 1 percentage
point, relative to a mean of 4.0 percent, and the likelihood of using prescription medications during the
round is similarly reduced by 3.3 percentage points, relative to a mean of 49.2 percent. Meanwhile,

8

Summary statistics by displacement status for the set of Round 1 insurance holders, presented in Appendix Table
A2, show that the restricted sample is less likely to be Hispanic and more likely to be college-educated than that
sample as a whole.

18

there is evidence that job displacement also results in decreased expenditures on ER visits and
prescription drugs, though some of these effects are only marginally significant.
Taken together, the larger effects on insurance coverage for this sub-sample, and the
emergence of statistically significant reductions in health care utilization provide a rough guide to how
disruptions in insurance status from displacement might affect the probability of receiving medical care.
Suppose that all of the effect of displacement on health care utilization in this sample comes as the
result of reductions in insurance coverage. In particular, this assumes (contrary to the findings in Table
2) that there is no direct effect of job loss on health. Then, the results in Panels A & B of Table 4 suggest
that loss of insurance coverage reduces office visits and use of prescription medications by
approximately 15 percentage points per round. This magnitude is similar to the estimates in Currie and
Gruber (1996), for children, that suggest becoming Medicaid eligible increased the probability of an
office visit by approximately 9 percentage points per year. Of course, if displacement also produces
independent, negative effects on health (perhaps due to stress or lifestyle changes), that would tend to
increase the likelihood of medical visits and so this estimate may be a lower bound of the direct
reduction in utilization from loss of insurance.
In the final panel of Table 4 we show the effects of displacement on health conditions for the
sub-sample of round 1 employer-based insurance holders. For the self-reported health measure, this
sample shows slightly smaller increases in the probability of reporting fair or poor health, and similar
effects (as in the full sample) on fair or poor mental health, anxiety and depression. Also similar to the
full sample, there is no evidence of significant changes in the incidence of the specific chronic physical
conditions. This suggests that, at least in the short-run, it is not access to insurance and health care
utilization that drives observed changes in health conditions immediately after job loss. It may be that
reduced utilization, or reductions in continuity of care over a longer period, contribute to long-term

19

effects on mortality, but we do not see evidence of specific physical conditions emerging in the years
immediately after job loss.
While the relatively short panels we have available in this data limit the extent to which we can
examine the timing of health changes around displacement, we can distinguish the immediate effects of
displacement from those that occur in the next few months. In addition, we can look at health,
insurance, and utilization effects in the period just prior to job loss, to examine whether there is
evidence of effects that begin before the actual displacement. Much of the literature on earnings losses
from displacement, for example, show that some of the effects appear prior to the displacement event,
as firms begin to struggle and may reduce pay and hours. There may be similar clues to the process that
appear from looking at the timing of these health-related effects.
In Table 5 we repeat our basic analyses, but instead of a single, post-displacement indicator, we
include three variables: one for the round immediately prior to job loss, one for the round of job loss,
and one for the rounds after job loss. In Panel A, we see small reductions (of around 2 percentage
points) in insurance coverage in the round just prior to job loss, but much larger effects at the time of
job loss and after. Focusing on the availability of private insurance, for example, coverage falls by 14
percentage points in the round of the job loss, but recovers slightly to an 11 percentage-point reduction
in later rounds. Importantly, the much larger effects at and following job loss provide additional
evidence that these are direct effects of job loss, and not pre-existing characteristics of those workers
who are most likely to lose jobs.
Panel B of Table 5 examines the timing of changes in health care utilization. Once again, it is
reassuring to see no evidence of effects emerging in the period prior to the displacement. Interestingly,
for these measures, there are some small but statistically significant increases in utilization (measured
by having any office visit or any prescription drug coverage) in the round of the job loss. This may reflect
20

increased utilization among those who anticipate losing coverage upon displacement. These effects
turn negative, as expected, in the period after displacement.
Finally, when we look at health reports and conditions, we again see little evidence of changes in
health that begin prior to displacement. Effects on being in poor health and on reported anxiety or
depression grow very slightly from the period of displacement to later rounds, but are generally fairly
similar across the two “post-displacement” periods.
We have also estimated models that add an interaction between the displacement variable and
the reason for displacement (firm closing versus layoffs or job endings). This could be important in light
of concerns that layoffs may disproportionately affect workers with low productivity, possibly linked to
poor health. Thus, firm closings may provide a more exogenous employment shock than the full set of
displacements. If this concern is important, we might expect to see smaller effects of displacement on
health-related outcomes among those losing jobs in business closings. As summarized in Appendix
Table 1, we see little evidence that this is the case. In short, we see evidence of slightly larger effects on
self-reported and mental health indicators, and smaller effects on insurance coverage. The effects on
insurance coverage, however, seem mainly to reflect differences in the source of insurance coverage by
those whose firms close relative to those who are laid off. Displacements due to business closings may
also capture workers who lose jobs in particularly difficult local economic environments so are not
perfectly comparable to the broader set of displacements. Our findings, however, do not suggest that
laid off workers (for whom there is a greater possibility of negative, health related selection for layoff)
drive the significant negative effects we report here.

V.

CONCLUSION

21

In this paper, we use data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey to examine the shortterm effects of job displacement on health outcomes, and to examine the role of health insurance
shocks and changes medical care utilization in mediating these effects. By combining 16 panels of MEPS
data, we generate a sample that includes almost 10,000 individuals that were involuntarily displaced
from their main jobs between 1996 and 2011 – a much larger sample than other non-administrative
datasets that have been used previously in the literature.
Using an empirical specification that includes both individual fixed effects and baseline health
interacted with a linear time trend to account for unobservable individual characteristics that may be
correlated with both health and the probability of job loss, we find that job displacement is associated
with significant declines in self-rated physical and mental health and increased reports of anxiety or
depression. There is no evidence of increases in specific chronic physical conditions including diabetes,
arthritis, high cholesterol or hypertension. Focusing on a restricted sample that includes only individuals
that held insurance through their employer in Round 1, we find that these individuals are more likely to
lose their insurance as a result of job loss (30.5 percent of the restricted sample experience a spell
without insurance after job loss compared with 12.8 percent of the full sample), and to reduce their
health care utilization (round-1 insurance holders experience a 7.4-percent decrease in the probability
of a doctor’s visit after displacement). However, we do not find larger health effects for the restricted
sample of Round 1 holders, which suggests that the negative health effects for the full sample are not
driven by reductions in medical care in the short-term.
The lack of immediate increases in physical health problems among those likely to lose
insurance after job loss does not rule out the possibility that these reductions in insurance and
utilization of health care over a longer time frame could have negative consequences for the longerterm health of affected workers. Previous work, for example, has shown that access to Medicaid and

22

Medicare lowers health care utilization and mortality among children and the elderly (Currie and Gruber
(1996), Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2008, 2009)). For displaced workers, however, only a minority faces
a prolonged period without access to healthcare. The fact that we do see substantial reductions in
health care utilization among the subset of displaced workers most likely to lose health insurance
suggests that access to insurance, or perhaps continuity of care, could play an important role in
generating long-term effects on mortality. Given the changes in coverage in the U.S. likely to come
about as the Affordable Care Act is implemented, this suggests that an important area for study is the
relationship between insurance status and utilization in the aftermath of job loss.
This brings us to our second main finding. Perhaps the most robust effects of job loss found
here involve effects on mental health. A large literature establishes a strong association between stress
and mortality, though a causal link from stress to long-term mortality has not been established (See, for
example, Russ, et al. (2012) and citations therein). This is also consistent with arguments made by
Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) who document a relationship between the extent of post-displacement
income volatility (which may indicate prolonged uncertainty and stress) and mortality effects. While we
do not see short-term increases in physical conditions that may be influenced by stress (such as diabetes
or arthritis), prolonged mental health effects could lead to longer-term deterioration in physical health.
Job loss in the U.S. brings with it long-lasting reductions in earnings power, highly variable
earnings, and a host of related effects on the health and well-being of individuals and their families.
While the causal nature of this association has been well-established in the literature focusing on
earnings effects of job loss, prior work on job loss and health outcomes has often lacked the longitudinal
data and methods to establish causality. By controlling for individual fixed effects and health related
trends, we show that job loss also results in decreased self-reported health, small increases in some
chronic physical conditions, and marked declines in mental health. Future work should further explore

23

the long-term effects of the stress of job loss on mental and physical health of workers, following up on
the short-term indications found here that this could be an important link in the relationship between
job loss and long-term health.

24

References
Baker, M., Stabile, M. & Deri, C. (2004). What do Self-Reported, Objective Measures of Health Measure?
The Journal of Human Resources, 39(4): 1067-1093.
Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., & Salvanes, K. G. (2012). Losing heart? The effect of job displacement on
health. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. w18660.
Bergemann, A., Grönqvist, E., & Gudbjörnsdottir, S. (2011) The effects of job displacement on the onset
and progression of diabetes. Netspar Discussion Paper 03/2011-025.
Browning, M., Moller Dano, A., & Heinesen, E. (2006) Job displacement and stress‐related health
outcomes. Health Economics, 15(10), 1061-1075.
Browning, M., & Heinesen, E. (2012). Effect of job loss due to plant closure on mortality and
hospitalization. Journal of Health Economics.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas (2008). The impact of nearly universal insurance
coverage on health care utilization and health: evidence from Medicare. American Economic Review,
98(5): 2242-2258.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas (2009). Does Medicare save lives?" The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 124, no. 2 (2009): 597-636.
Charles, K. K., & Stephens Jr, M. (2004). Disability, Job Displacement and Divorce. Journal of Labor
Economics, 22(2): 489-522.
Couch, K. A., & Placzek, D. W. (2010). Earnings losses of displaced workers revisited. The American
Economic Review, 100(1), 572-589.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996) "Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical care, and
child health." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 431-466.
Eliason, M., & Storrie, D. (2009). “Does job loss shorten life?” Journal of Human Resources, 44(2), 277302.
Gallo, W. T., Bradley, E. H., Siegel, M., & Kasl, S. V. (2000). Health effects of involuntary job loss among
older workers: Findings from the health and retirement survey. The Journals of Gerontology Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 55(3), S131-S140.
Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. The Journal of
Political Economy, 80(2), 223-255.
Gruber, J., & Madrian, B. C. (1997). Employment separation and health insurance coverage. Journal of
Public Economics, 66(3), 349-382.

25

Idler, E.L., & Benyamini, Y. (1997). Self-Rated Health and Mortality: A Review of Twenty-Seven
Community Studies, Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 38(1): 21-37.
Jacobson, L. S., LaLonde, R. J., & Sullivan, D. G. (1993). Earnings losses of displaced workers. The
American Economic Review, 685-709.
Lin, E. Y. (2005). Health insurance coverage and reemployment outcomes among older displaced
workers. Contemporary Economic Policy, 23(4), 529-544.
Lindo, J. M. (2010). Are Children Really Inferior Goods? Evidence from Displacement-driven Income
Shocks. Journal of Human Resources, 45(2), 301-327.
Lindo, J. M. (2011). Parental job loss and infant health. Journal of Health Economics, 30(5), 869-879.
Oreopoulos, P., Page, M. E., & Stevens, A. H. (2006). The intergenerational effects of compulsory
schooling. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(4), 729-760.
Rege, M., Telle, K., & Votruba, M. (2009). The effect of plant downsizing on disability pension utilization.
Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(4), 754-785.
Ruhm, C. J. (1991). Are workers permanently scarred by job displacements?. The American Economic
Review, 81(1), 319-324.
Russ, Tom, Emmanuel Stamatakis, Mark Hammer, John M. Starr, Mika Kivimaki, and David Batty (2012).
Association between psychological distress and mortality: individual participant pooled analysis of
10 prospective cohort studies. BMJ 342:1-14.
Salm, M. (2009). Does job loss cause ill health?. Health Economics, 18(9), 1075-1089.
Schmieder, J. F., Von Wachter, T., & Bender, S. (2010). The long-term impact of job displacement in
Germany during the 1982 recession o n earnings, income, and employment. IAB discussion paper No
2010, 1.
Stevens, A. H. (1997). Persistent effects of job displacement: The importance of multiple job losses.
Journal of Labor Economics, 165-188.
Stevens, A. H., & Schaller, J. (2011). Short-run effects of parental job loss on children's academic
achievement. Economics of Education Review, 30(2), 289-299.
Strully, K. W. (2009). Job loss and health in the US labor market. Demography, 46(2), 221-246.
Sullivan, D., & Von Wachter, T. (2009). Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using administrative
data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1265-1306.

26

Table 1
Summary Statistics By Displacement Status
Never Displaced
Demographic Characteristics
Male
Age
Black, Non-Hispanic
Other Race, Non-Hispanic
Hispanic
High School Dropout
High School Graduate
Any College

0.53
41.0
0.11
0.06
0.12
0.10
0.30
0.59

Displaced
0.58
38.3
0.13
0.05
0.17
0.16
0.33
0.50

Round
1

Round 5

Round 1

Round 5

8.2
8.3
3.6
7.3
11.3
1.7

7.0
14.8
4.7
10.6
15.2
4.1

10.7
8.2
3.7
5.9
9.9
1.2

9.9
15.4
5.1
9.0
13.6
2.9

Mental Health
Mental Health Fair/Poor
Depression/Anxiety

3.2
7.1

3.7
15.1

5.1
8.5

6.4
19.1

Insurance Coverage
Any Insurance
Private Insurance
Public Insurance
Ever Uninsured

84.2
80.7
5.6
18.5

83.8
80.3
5.2
16.9

68.9
62.4
8.0
34.8

59.8
52.0
9.2
42.5

Health Care Utilization
Any Office-Based Visit
Expenditures on Office-Based Visits
Any ER Visit
Expenditures on ER Visits
Any Prescription Drug
Expenditures on Prescription Drugs

45.3
189.6
3.9
31.2
46.1
142.1

37.2
200.8
3.0
29.1
40.9
167.9

40.5
158.6
5.1
32.9
40.6
120.0

32.5
170.9
4.2
44.6
34.8
157.2

Observations

91459

78184

9892

8927

Physical Health
Health Fair/Poor
Arthritis
Diabetes
High Cholesterol
Hypertension
Cancer

Notes: The data are from the 1996 through 2011 waves of the Household Component of the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey. The sample includes individuals aged 21 to 65 that are employed in the
first round of the survey. Observations are weighted using MEPS person-level sampling weights.

27

Table 2
Effects of Job Displacement on Physical and Mental Health Outcomes

Round 1
Mean

Regression Specification
OLS with
Fixed Effects
Baseline
With Baseline
Controls
Fixed Effects
Health*Trend

Physical Health
Health Fair/Poor

0.084

0.011***
(0.003)

0.004
(0.003)

0.015***
(0.003)

Arthritis

0.083

0.020***
(0.004)

0.006**
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

Diabetes

0.036

0.005
(0.003)

0.003**
(0.001)

0.002
(0.001)

High Cholesterol

0.071

0.001
(0.004)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

Hypertension

0.112

0.003
(0.004)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

Cancer

0.016

0.000
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.001)

-0.003*
(0.001)

Mental Health
Mental Health Fair/Poor

0.034

0.018***
(0.002)

0.008**
(0.003)

0.013***
(0.003)

Depression or Anxiety

0.073

0.053***
(0.005)

0.024***
(0.003)

0.016***
(0.003)

Notes: N=463,243. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. * p<.1 ** p<.05
*** p<.01. Estimates are weighted using MEPS person-level sampling weight. OLS regressions (column
(2)) include dummies for Round 1 health and mental health (1 = excellent, 2=very good, 3 = good, 4 =
fair, 5 = poor), race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic black, non-Hispanic other race, Hispanic), and educational
attainment (high school graduate, college graduate). All regressions include age and calendar year fixed
effects.

28

Table 3
Job Displacement, Insurance Status, and Health Care Utilization
Panel A: Insurance Status
(1)
Any
Insurance
Displaced

-0.099***
(0.005)

(2)
Private
Insurance

(3)
Public
Insurance

Ever Uninsured

-0.113***
(0.005)

0.013***
(0.002)

0.128***
(0.005)

(3)
Any ER Visit

(4)
ER
Expenditures

Any Rx

(6)
Rx
Expenditures

0.000
(0.003)

1.506
(5.153)

-0.008
(0.005)

-9.899
(6.797)

Panel B: Health Care Utilization
(1)
(2)
Any Office
Office
Visit
Expenditures
Displaced

-0.005
(0.006)

13.780
(19.296)

(4)

(5)

Notes: N=463,243. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. * p<.1 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
Estimates are weighted using MEPS person-level sampling weight. All regressions include age and calendar year fixed
effects and baseline health and mental health interacted with trends. The dependent variables in columns (1) –(3) of
Panel A are equal to 1 if an individual is insured in the month of the current interview. The dependent variable in
column (4) of Panel A is equal to 1 if an individual experienced a spell with no insurance coverage between the last
interview and the current interview.

29

Table 4
Job Displacement, Insurance Status, Utilization, and Health: Round 1 Insurance Holders Only
Panel A: Insurance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Status
Any
Private
Public
Ever
Insurance Insurance Insurance Uninsure
Displaced -0.260*** -0.283*** 0.018*** 0.305***
d
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.009)
Panel B: Health Care
(1)
(2)
(3)
Utilization
Any
Office
Any ER
Office
Expenditu
Visit
Displaced -0.036*** -1.044
-0.010*
Visit
res
(0.009)
(42.441)
(0.005)

(4)
(5)
(6)
ER
Any Rx
Rx
Expenditu
Expenditu
-17.785* -0.033*** -23.510*
res
res
(7.536)
(0.008)
(10.011)

Panel C: Health
(1)
Outcomes
Health
Fair/Poor
Displaced 0.011*
(0.005)

(4)
Cholester
ol
-0.001
(0.003)

(2)
Arthritis
-0.001
(0.003)

(3)
Diabetes
0.001
(0.002)

(5)
Hyperten
sion
-0.003
(0.002)

(6)
Cancer
-0.002
(0.002)

(7)
Mental
Fair/Poor
0.016***
(0.004)

(8)
Depr/Anx
0.017***
(0.005)

Notes: N=242,814. The sample includes only individuals that were covered by health insurance through their current
main job in Round 1 of the panel. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. * p<.1 ** p<.05
*** p<.01. Estimates are weighted using MEPS person-level sampling weight. All regressions include age and calendar
year fixed effects and baseline health and mental health interacted with trends.

30

Table 5
Job Displacement, Insurance Status, Utilization, and Health - Lags and Leads
Panel A: Insurance Status
(1)
(2)
Any
Private
Insurance Insurance
Displaced:
-0.022*** -0.022***
Next round (0.005)
(0.005)

(3)
Public
Insurance

(4)
Ever Unins

0.000
(0.003)

0.023***
(0.005)

This round

-0.129***
(0.007)

-0.143***
(0.007)

0.013***
(0.003)

0.167***
(0.007)

Prior round

-0.095***
(0.008)

-0.111***
(0.007)

0.014***
(0.004)

0.117***
(0.008)

Panel B: Health Care Utilization
(1)
(2)
Office
Any Office
Expend.

(3)
Any ER
Visit

(4)
ER
Expend.

Displaced: 0.011
Next round (0.008)

(5)

(6)

Any Rx

Rx Expend.

7.489
(16.768)

0.006
(0.004)

0.547
(6.534)

0.012
(0.007)

1.756
(9.388)

This round

0.028***
(0.008)

17.102
(18.562)

0.007
(0.004)

1.085
(6.698)

0.019**
(0.007)

14.855
(10.698)

Prior round

-0.023**
(0.008)

-33.527
(34.564)

0.001
(0.004)

2.503
(8.520)

-0.020**
(0.007)

-30.496**
(9.311)

(4)
Cholestero
l

(5)
Hypertensi
on

Panel C: Health Outcomes
(1)
(2)
Health
Fair/Poor
Arthritis

(3)
Diabetes

(6)
Cancer

(7)
Mental
Fair/Poor

(8)
Depr/Anx

Displaced:
Next round

-0.000
(0.004)

0.005
(0.003)

0.000
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.001)

0.000
(0.003)

0.006
(0.003)

This round

0.012**
(0.004)

0.005
(0.003)

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.003*
(0.002)

0.014***
(0.004)

0.016***
(0.004)

Prior round

0.016***
(0.004)

0.006
(0.004)

0.002
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.005*
(0.002)

0.012***
(0.004)

0.022***
(0.005)

Notes: N = 463,243. DispN1 is an indicator for one period prior to displacement, Disp0 is an indicator for the period of displacement, and Disp1M is an indicator for 1
or more periods after displacement. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. * p<.1 ** p<.05 *** p<.01. Estimates are weighted using
MEPS person-level sampling weight. All regressions include age and calendar year fixed effects and baseline health and mental health interacted with trends.

31

APPENDIX
Table A1
Job Displacement, Insurance Status, Utilization, and Health by Type of Displacement
Panel A: Insurance Status
(1)
(2)
Any
Private
Insurance Insurance
Laid off or
-0.113*** -0.128***
Job Ended
(0.007)
(0.006)
Business
Closed

-0.055***
(0.009)

-0.068***
(0.009)

Panel B: Health Care Utilization
(1)
(2)
Any Office
Office
Visit
Expend.

(3)
Public
Insurance
0.013***
(0.003)
0.013**
(0.004)

(3)
Any ER
Visit

(4)
Ever
Uninsured
0.145***
(0.006)
0.078***
(0.009)

(4)

(5)

(6)

ER Expend.

Any Rx

Rx Expend.

Laid off or
Job Ended

-0.007
-0.006

0.234
-23.691

0.001
-0.003

0.626
-5.206

-0.01
-0.006

1.831
-8.038

Business
Closed

0.015
-0.012

-7.927
-22.813

0.002
-0.005

11.11
-13.314

0.004
-0.01

3.693
-9.223

Panel C: Health Outcomes
(1)
(2)
Health
Fair/Poor
Arthritis
Laid off or 0.007
0.004
Job Ended (0.004)
(0.002)

(3)

(4)

Diabetes
0.002
(0.001)

Business
Closed

0.003
(0.002)

0.008
(0.006)

0.009
(0.005)

Cholesterol
0.002
(0.002)

(5)
Hyperten
sion
0.001
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.003)

(6)
Cancer
-0.003
(0.001)

(7)
Mental
Fair/Poor
0.010***
(0.003)

(8)
Depr/Anx
0.021***
(0.003)

-0.000
(0.003)

0.007
(0.004)

0.023***
(0.006)

Notes: N=463,243. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. * p<.1 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
Estimates are weighted using MEPS person-level sampling weight. All regressions include age and calendar year fixed
effects and baseline health and mental health interacted with trends.

32

Table A2
Summary Statistics By Displacement Status: Round 1 Holders
Never Displaced
Demographic Characteristics
Male
Age
Black, Non-Hispanic
Other Race, Non-Hispanic
Hispanic
High School Dropout
High School Graduate
Any College

0.56
41.5
0.11
0.06
0.09
0.07
0.29
0.64

Displaced
0.60
39.5
0.13
0.06
0.11
0.09
0.32
0.58

Round
1

Round
5

Round
1

Round
5

7.4
8.3
3.9
8.0
12.4
1.7

6.4
15.2
5.0
11.8
16.5
4.3

9.1
8.0
3.3
6.7
11.6
1.3

8.9
15.2
4.7
10.4
15.6
3.4

2.7
7.3

3.3
15.1

4.0
9.4

5.5
20.4

Insurance Coverage
Any Insurance
Private Insurance
Public Insurance
Ever Uninsured

100.0
100.0
2.0
1.7

95.1
94.3
2.4
5.3

100.0
100.0
1.9
3.5

68.7
65.1
4.8
34.1

Health Care Utilization
Any Office-Based Visit
Expenditures on Office-Based Visits
Any ER Visit
Expenditures on ER Visits
Any Prescription Drug
Expenditures on Prescription Drugs

48.7
214.3
3.9
34.0
49.3
141.0

39.4
217.4
2.8
29.1
43.7
183.7

48.1
206.2
5.5
44.2
47.3
140.2

37.0
222.7
3.4
46.6
39.1
161.9

Observations

49150

42576

3589

3314

Physical Health
Health Fair/Poor
Arthritis
Diabetes
High Cholesterol
Hypertension
Cancer
Mental Health
Mental Health Fair/Poor
Depression/Anxiety

Notes: The data are from the 1996 through 2010 waves of the Household Component of the
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. The sample includes individuals aged 21 to 65 that are
employed and are covered by health insurance through their employer in the first round of the
survey. Observations are weighted using MEPS person-level sampling weights.

33

