                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               IS INCREASED PRICE FLEXIBILITY STABILIZING? REDUX

                                          Saroj Bhattarai
                                         Gauti Eggertsson
                                         Raphael Schoenle

                                       Working Paper 19886
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19886


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




For helpful comments and suggestions, the authors thank Marco Del Negro, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde,
Marc Giannoni, Giorgio Primiceri, Ricardo Reis, Frank Schorfheide, Felipe Schwartzman, Jon Steinsson,
Ivan Werning, Raf Wouters, seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal
Reserve Board, the Banque de France, and MIT, and conference participants at the European Economic
Association/Econometric Society European meetings (EEA/ESEM), Annual meeting of the Society
for Economic Dynamics, NBER Summer Institute, the Third Conference on Recent Developments
in Macroeconomics, the Royal Economic Society Meetings, and the Ghent Workshop in Empirical
Macroeconomics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Saroj Bhattarai, Gauti Eggertsson, and Raphael Schoenle. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Increased Price Flexibility Stabilizing? Redux
Saroj Bhattarai, Gauti Eggertsson, and Raphael Schoenle
NBER Working Paper No. 19886
February 2014
JEL No. E31,E32,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the implications of increased price flexibility on output volatility. In a simple DSGE model,
we show analytically that more flexible prices always amplify output volatility for supply shocks and
also amplify output volatility for demand shocks if monetary policy does not respond strongly to inflation.
More flexible prices often reduce welfare, even under optimal monetary policy if full efficiency cannot
be attained. We estimate a medium-scale DSGE model using post-WWII U.S. data. In a counterfactual
experiment we find that if prices and wages are fully flexible, the standard deviation of annualized
output growth more than doubles.


Saroj Bhattarai                                      Raphael Schoenle
Pennsylvania State University                        Brandeis University
615 Kern Building                                    Department of Economics
University Park, PA 16802                            Mail Stop 021
sub31@psu.edu                                        415 South Street
                                                     Waltham, MA 02454
Gauti Eggertsson                                     http://people.brandeis.edu/~schoenle/
Department of Economics                              schoenle@brandeis.edu
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19886
1         Introduction
How sticky are nominal prices? In recent years we have seen an explosion in empirical
research addressing this question using micro-data (see for example, Bils and Klenow (2004),
Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), and Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008)). Answers have ranged from prices adjusting once every ﬁve months on average to
more than one year.1 From a theoretical perspective, the primary motivation behind such
work, either implicitly or explicitly, appears to be to settle the following question: Can
monetary policy actions lead to large and persistent movements in output? Researchers
seem to have in mind that modeling sticky prices is important if prices adjust infrequently
in the data, while not if they adjust all the time. The ﬁrst case corresponds to a “Keynesian
economy” in which prices adjust only infrequently, and thus monetary policy and nominal
frictions matter for real outcomes. The second case corresponds to a perfectly “classical
economy” in which prices adjust at all times, and thus monetary policy and pricing frictions
play little or no role in stabilizing or destabilizing the business cycle. The degree to which
one view is correct, then, is presumably determined by the degree to which a “ﬂexible” or
“ﬁxed” pricing strategy of ﬁrms is closer to reality.
    For a casual reader of this recent empirical literature, then, the question posed by this
paper may strike as odd: Can increasing price ﬂexibility be destabilizing for output? It might
seem obvious that more ﬂexible prices make monetary frictions as given by rigid prices – and
more speciﬁcally monetary policy – play little or no role in stabilizing or destabilizing the
business cycle. We will argue however, that not only is that conclusion not obvious, but in
fact, one can easily make the opposite case, both in theory and in an estimated model.
    Moreover, the question – whose answer is sometimes taken as being self-evident – is in
fact an old and classic question in macroeconomics and one that we argue remains unset-
tled. To make this clear we have stolen the title from De Long and Summers (1986), a
paper published 25 years ago. They use a dynamic IS-LM model with rational expectations
and Taylor-type wage contracts to show that an increase in ﬂexibility can increase output
volatility for reasons we make clear shortly. But this argument goes even farther back as
these authors point out. A similar observation is made, for example, by Tobin (1975) using a
more old-style Keynesian model. Similarly, Keynes (1936) declared that “it would be much
better that wages should be rigidly ﬁxed and deemed incapable of material changes, than
the depression should be accompanied by a gradual downward tendency of money-wages”
    1
        For a survey of this literature, see Klenow and Malin (2010).



                                                         1
using more informal arguments. In fact, the question about the relationship between price
ﬂexibility and output volatility even pre-dates Keynes. As early as 1923, Fisher (1923, 1925)
saw the business cycle as “largely a dance of the dollar:” According to Fisher, expected
deﬂation leads to high anticipated real interest rates that suppresses investment and output.
    In this paper we address this classic question in macroeconomics in a modern micro-
founded DSGE model with infrequent price adjustment. Our analysis proceeds in two steps.
We ﬁrst analyze a simpliﬁed model, basically the prototypical three-equation New Keynesian
model, where we can show several key results in closed form and are able to characterize
explicitly the conditions under which higher price ﬂexibility, given by an increase in the
frequency of price adjustment by ﬁrms, can be destabilizing and vice versa. We consider
several extensions to this exercise, such as analyzing eﬀects not just on output volatility but
also on welfare, exploring several variants of the interest rate reaction function, studying
the role of wage rigidities, and considering optimal monetary policy. We then move on to a
quantitative medium scale model with a rich set of nominal and real rigidities popularized
by Smets and Wouters (2007), building on Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and Christiano
et al. (2005). We estimate this model using Bayesian methods and then ask the following
question: Taking the various structural shocks and other structural and policy parameters
from the estimated model as given, would a counterfactual history in which prices and wages
had been more ﬂexible in the post-WWII U.S. lead to more or less output growth volatility?
    To summarize our analytical results, we ﬁnd that there are several circumstances under
which a higher degree of price (and/or wage) ﬂexibility is destabilizing. Generally, the results
depend upon two factors: (i) the source of shocks and (ii) the policy reaction function of the
central bank. We ﬁnd it useful to classify disturbances into two broad classes: “demand” and
“supply” shocks. Examples of demand shocks include monetary policy shocks and preference
shocks, i.e., shocks that mainly aﬀect the natural rate of interest without having any eﬀect on
the natural level of output. Examples of supply shocks include technology shocks, variations
in monopoly power in product and labor markets, and variations in distortionary taxes, i.e.,
shocks that mainly aﬀect the natural level of output without having much eﬀect on the
natural rate of interest.2
   First, consider demand shocks. For an increase in price ﬂexibility to be destabilizing we
ﬁnd that the key condition is that the central bank does not raise/cut the nominal interest
aggressively enough in response to movements in inﬂation. Intuitively, higher price ﬂexibility
   2
     The natural level of output is the output that would prevail if prices were ﬂexible while the natural rate
of interest is the real interest rate that would prevail if prices were ﬂexible.



                                                      2
can trigger unstable inﬂation expectations if monetary policy does not act aggressively to
counteract this by raising/cutting interest rates.3 If the interest rate response is weak, the
result is precisely of the form analyzed by De Long and Summers (1986) and Tobin (1975) and
anticipated by Keynes (1936) and Fisher (1923, 1925): Higher price ﬂexibility will destabilize
the real interest rate – the diﬀerence between the short term nominal interest rate (the policy
rate) and expected inﬂation. Since aggregate demand depends upon the real interest rate,
this destabilizes output as well.
    In contrast to this earlier literature, however, we ﬁnd that the condition under which this
destabilization occurs is quite special. In particular, one needs to assume an interest rate
reaction function for the central bank that does not correspond well to the one estimated on
U.S. post-WWII data since it would require an interest rate response to inﬂation that is less
than one-to-one. However, we ﬁnd that this particular condition – that is, a small reaction of
the policy rate in response to inﬂation – is satisﬁed if the demand shocks are large enough for
the zero bound on the short-term nominal interest rate (ZLB) to be binding. This situation,
of course, is faced by large parts of the world today. Interestingly, it was also the state of
aﬀairs at the time Keynes conjectured that increased price ﬂexibility would be destabilizing.
These results thus relate to a similar ﬁnding in the literature on the zero bound on the short-
term nominal interest rate, see for example Eggertsson (2010), Christiano et al. (2011) and
Werning (2011). In a distinct contribution to the literature, we show that our results can
hold even at positive interest rates and away from the zero bound if the central bank cares
excessively about output stabilization at the expense of inﬂation. While this may not apply
to U.S. in the post-war data (with the possible exception of the 1970’s), one can plausibly
argue that examples of this may include developing countries where a heavily politicized
central bank engages in output stabilization at the expense of inﬂation stabilization.
    Second, consider supply shocks. Here we ﬁnd that an increase in price ﬂexibility is
always destabilizing, in contrast to the result for demand shocks where it can go either
way depending on policy. The reason is somewhat subtle. If monetary policy responds
strongly to inﬂation then positive supply shocks increase output and more so the more
ﬂexible are prices. If monetary policy is unresponsive, however, then output decreases in
response to positive supply shocks, and this decline is larger the more ﬂexible are prices.
Accordingly, the variance of output goes up with higher price ﬂexibility regardless of the
monetary policy reaction function. This latter eﬀect of price ﬂexibility, in the case where
  3
    To be clear, we maintain the assumption on the parameters of the model so that equilibrium is always
unique and determinate so that comparative statics are thus well deﬁned.



                                                   3
monetary policy is unresponsive, is a generalization of the so called “paradox of toil” proposed
in Eggertsson (2010) at the ZLB. Here we see that it can arise more generally as long as policy
is unresponsive, with the implication that increased price ﬂexibility is always destabilizing
in face of supply shocks.
    We ﬁnd similar results in terms of economic welfare which we derive from the utility
function of the representative household. For a typical monetary policy reaction function
(for example, a Taylor rule) the result are even a bit stronger in that price higher ﬂexibility
can be counterproductive, since we ﬁnd that there are many examples in which economic
welfare goes down with more ﬂexible prices, even when the output gap volatility goes down.
The reason for this is that economic welfare does not only depend on output gap volatility
but also the welfare weighted volatility of inﬂation. This term in social welfare typically goes
up with higher price ﬂexibility.
    An explicitly derived social welfare function also allows us to analyze optimal monetary
policy. Our results for optimal monetary policy are largely analogous to those in which
policy follows a monetary policy reaction function that is consistent with postwar US data.
In particular, higher ﬂexibility will generally reduce output volatility (and improve welfare)
for demand shocks (unless at the ZLB) and vice versa for supply shocks. An important
consideration is that we need to make assumptions so that the ﬁrst best cannot always be
achieved with monetary policy alone, which is particularly relevant when considering supply
shocks or demand shocks that are strong enough so that the ZLB is binding.
    It is not of principal importance in our analytical model if only prices are made more
ﬂexible, or if wages and prices become more ﬂexible at the same time (if wages are also
rigid in the model), at least when we consider the Taylor rule for monetary policy. We
show this explicitly in the model with both wage and price rigidities. Wage rigidities are an
important addition to the model, however, when considering optimal policy. The reason for
this is that in the model with price rigidities only, optimal policy can sometimes perfectly
replicate the ﬁrst best allocation (which is independent of price rigidities), while when both
wages and prices are rigid, this is not possible. Thus, while assuming only price rigidities
is quite innocuous when analyzing the main questions in the model with standard policy
rules, it becomes more important to incorporate both nominal frictions in studying optimal
policy. For some supply shocks, for example, technology shocks, we thus need to assume both
price and wage rigidities to obtain the result that output volatility increases (and welfare
decreases) with higher nominal ﬂexibility. Those set of results are complementary to those
in Galı́ (2012), who also reports similar numerical results in a model with both sticky prices


                                               4
and wages.
    We ﬁnd that our key analytical results for individual shocks also apply in the estimated
model. Moreover, crucially, for the estimated model, we ﬁnd that output growth would have
been less stable if prices/wages had counterfactually been more ﬂexible than the historical
estimates.4 Given our estimated policy rule – and since the zero bound was never binding in
our sample (which runs from 1966 to 2004) – this reﬂects that “supply shocks” were a quite
important driving force of the business cycle during this period. In particular, ineﬃcient
supply shocks driven by price/wage markup variations are non-negligible according to the
estimation. Moreover, under the estimated parameter values, for supply shocks, the variance
of output is quite sensitive to changes in the level of price/wage stickiness. Let us empha-
size, however, that we also estimate other variants of the baseline Smets-Wouters medium
scale DSGE model that provide alternate identiﬁcation strategies and reinterpretation of the
price/wage markup shocks (since those shocks have by some been argued to be “incredible”
due to their size) and show that our quantitative results continue to hold or even strengthen
(even if in those variations the size of markup shocks is greatly reduced – in some cases by
a factor of a 100 — or even eliminated).
    Quantitatively, the increased output growth volatility that results from higher nominal
ﬂexibility is far from trivial. In our baseline estimated model, the average annualized growth
rate is 1.7 percentage points per year with a standard deviation of 2.2 percentage points. If
we counterfactually assume that all prices are perfectly ﬂexible, then the standard deviation
of annualized output growth increases from 2.2 percentage points to 2.9 percentage points.
If we assume that all prices and wages were perfectly ﬂexible, then the standard deviation
of annualized output growth increases from 2.2 percentage points to 4.4 percentage points,
that is, it more than doubles. Thus, output growth – a traditional metric for the business
cycle – would have been signiﬁcantly more volatile.
    The result from our estimated model is the same as in the numerical experiment reported
in De Long and Summers (1986). The reason however, is diﬀerent. Under their speciﬁcation,
price ﬂexibility is destabilizing when demand shocks are perturbing the economy – but
stabilizing when the driving force is supply shocks. Our estimated model implies the opposite.
Nominal ﬂexibility becomes destabilizing when supply shocks are mainly perturbing the
economy, which account for a non-trivial fraction of total output volatility in our estimated
model.
  4
    We compute unconditional second moments of output growth in our estimated model since output is
non-stationary in the model due to deterministic growth.



                                                5
2     A Simple New Keynesian Model
We start by showing our key results in the standard three-equation New Keynesian model
with price stickiness. Since this model has become standard by now, we do not write up
the micro-foundations, which can be found in textbooks such as Woodford (2003). To ﬁx
notation we brieﬂy summarize the main elements of model in the next paragraph.
   Thus, consider the standard New Keynesian model with time-dependent pricing as in
Calvo (1983). From the optimization problem of the ﬁrm, which chooses its price anticipating
that it only gets to revisit this choice with an exogenous probability 1 − α every period, we
can derive the optimal pricing equation. We can do a log-linear approximation of the model
and the ﬁrms’ pricing decisions that implies the New Keynesian Phillips curve, or the “AS”
equation
                                   πt = κŶt − κŶtn + βEt πt+1                            (1)

where πt is inﬂation, Ŷt is output in log-deviation from steady state, and Ŷtn is a disturbance
term, often called the “natural level” of output, that has the following interpretation: It
corresponds to the output that would be produced in case prices were ﬂexible.
                                     φ+σ −1
    The parameter κ ≡ (1−α)(1−αβ)
                               α      1+φθ
                                            > 0 measures the slope of the Phillips curve, where
                            −1
β is the discount rate, φ is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, σ is the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, and θ is the elasticity of substitution among diﬀerent varieties of
goods. We are primarily interested in what happens as we increase “price ﬂexibility.” We
interpret this as increasing the exogenous probability of adjusting prices, that is 1 − α, which
results in a higher κ.
    More speciﬁcally, the composite term Ŷtn is given by

                                   1+φ                1               1
                         Ŷtn =            Â t −          μ̂ t +         τ̂ w               (2)
                                  σ −1 + φ        σ −1 + φ        σ −1 + φ t

where At is productivity shocks, μt markup shocks of ﬁrms, and τ̂tw is time-varying labor
taxes. Observe that at this stage, these shocks appear in the AS equation in exactly the
same way, hence we will for now simply refer to shock to the natural level of output as
productivity shocks, At , or supply shocks. The distinction between these diﬀerent sources
of variation in the natural level of output will become relevant once we consider welfare, at
which point we will revisit this notation.
    Let us start with the exercise which has become relatively standard in the empirical and




                                                   6
theoretical literature on price rigidities. Consider an exogenous path for nominal spending

                                                     Dt ≡ Pt Yt                             (3)

given by
                                                ΔD̂t = ρΔD̂t−1 +     d
                                                                     t                      (4)

where ΔD̂t is growth rate of Dt , 0 < ρ < 1, and dt is an exogenous i.i.d. disturbance. The
deﬁnition of nominal spending given by eqn.(3) implies that

                                               ΔD̂t = πt + Ŷt − Ŷt−1 .                    (5)

   What does eqn.(5) say? It says that an increase in nominal spending must, by deﬁnition,
result in one of two things: Either an increase in the growth rate of prices (inﬂation), or
an increase in the growth rate of output. Given that we take the path of demand as an
exogenous process, it is then not altogether surprising that the higher the degree of price
ﬂexibility, that is the higher the κ, the “easier” it is to meet an increase in nominal spending
by inﬂation without changing output much. Indeed, by using the method of undetermined
coeﬃcients and solving eqns.(1), (4), and (5), the solution for output can be expressed as

                                                 (1 − ρβ)
                                 Ŷt =                              ΔD̂t + Yy Ŷt−1
                                         (1 + κ − ρβ + β (1 − Yy ))

where Yy ∈ (0, 1) is a function of the structural parameters of the model. Assuming ρ = 0
we get an analytical solution

                                            V AR(Ŷt ) = Γ ∗ V AR(ΔD̂t )
                                2
                     1
               (1+κ+β (1−Yy ))
where Γ =        [1−Yy 2 ]
                            and V AR(Xt ) represents variance of variable Xt .
    It can now be shown that Γ is decreasing in κ, that is, the higher is the degree of
price ﬂexibility, the lower is the the variance in output (see Appendix A, this also holds for
0 < ρ < 1). The intuition is straight-forward. As price ﬂexibility increases, the instability in
nominal demand is reﬂected in inﬂation rather than in output. Assuming a cash-in-advance
constraint, it is common to interpret Dt as the nominal stock of money. On the basis of this,
then, it would be tempting to conclude that the degree of “instability” in the real economy
due to “monetary instability” is a simple function of the duration of price rigidities. Indeed,


                                                          7
this is often implicitly or explicitly what the literature does. As we show now, however, this
conclusion is not warranted once we model monetary policy more explicitly and subject the
economy to other shocks.
    Instead of treating nominal demand as exogenous, let us now model it explicitly from the
households maximization problem. In the standard New Keynesian framework this leads to
an “IS” relationship given by

                             Ŷt = Et Ŷt+1 − σ(ı̂t − Et πt+1 ) + ψ̂t − Et ψ̂t+1                           (6)

where ı̂t is the nominal interest rate and ψt is an exogenous disturbance term that perturbs
the preferences of the representative household. We will refer to this as “demand shock”
since it only aﬀects the IS equation.5
    Meanwhile, we assume that monetary policy is given by a policy reaction function, that
is the standard “Taylor rule” augmented by the zero bound

                                   ı̂t = max(β − 1, φπ πt + φy Ŷt + ηt )                                  (7)

where φπ, φy > 0 and ηt is a monetary policy shock. Since we deﬁne each variable in terms
of deviation from steady state, the zero bound is now ı̂t ≥ β − 1. This closes the model.
    To ensure a determinate equilibrium, see Woodford (2003), we assume that the following
condition is satisﬁed6
                                           1−β
                                     φπ +       φy > 1.                                   (8)
                                            κ
Finally, we assume that each of the exogenous processes At , ψt , and ηt follow a ﬁrst order
AR process with persistence ρi and i.i.d. component it where i indexes A, ψ, or η.
    What is important here, is that this system of equations implies that nominal demand,
ΔD̂t , is endogenous. It is determined by a host of factors, and in particular the monetary
policy reaction function and the IS speciﬁcation. Recall that before, the question was posed
as: How does an exogenous shock to nominal demand inﬂuence output and prices? Since
   5
      This speciﬁcation cleanly separates the main eﬀects we are interested in – that is, exogenous forces that
perturb the IS equation on the one hand – “demand shocks” and exogenous forces that perturb the AS
equation on the other – “supply shocks”. The preference shock and productivity shock are clear examples
of shocks that aﬀect only one of these margins, but there are other shocks that may aﬀect both, such as
exogenous variations in government spending (which both has a direct demand eﬀect and a “wealth eﬀect”
via labor supply which changes the natural rate of output).
    6
      Determinacy is required for the comparative static we study to be well deﬁned. If there is indeterminacy
it is not clear which equilibria to pick so whether increasing ﬂexibility is stabilizing or not may depend on
equilibrium selection in an arbitrary way.


                                                      8
nominal demand is by deﬁnition ΔD̂t = πt + Ŷt − Ŷt−1 , it has to show up in either prices
and output. In the model above, where nominal demand is endogenous, we see that there
is no particular reason for any “shock”, be it monetary disturbance or any other kind, to
show up in either inﬂation or output. In particular, it could just as well change the path for
ΔD̂t which was exogenous before. Hence, we cannot conclusively state how the variance of
output will change with an increase in κ. In fact, increasing price ﬂexibility can now even
increase volatility in nominal demand endogenously depending on how we specify monetary
policy.
    Consider ﬁrst the demand shock ψ̂t . Proposition 1 shows how the variance of output
depends on κ when the shock perturbing the economy is the demand shock ψt . Let the
variance of output that can be attributed to a shock xt be given by V AR(Ŷt /xt ).

Proposition 1 Suppose ψt follows an AR(1) process with persistence ρψ . Then, the variance
of output that can be attributed to ψt is given by
                                                                            2
                                            (1 − βρψ )(1 − ρψ )
           V AR(Ŷt /ψt ) =                                                       V AR(ψt )
                                  (1 − ρψ + σφy )(1 − βρψ ) + σκ[φπ − ρψ ]

Proof. In Appendix A.
    The proof of this proposition is a straight-forward application of the method of undeter-
mined coeﬃcients. Taking the partial derivative of this expression with respect to κ then
allows us immediately to state the following result in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2 The eﬀect of higher price ﬂexibility on output variance is given by the fol-
lowing:
                                            ∂V AR(Ŷt /ψt )
                      If φπ − ρψ > 0, then                  <0
                                                   ∂κ
                                                      ∂V AR(Ŷt /ψt )
                          If φπ − ρψ < 0, then                        > 0.
                                                          ∂κ
Proof. In Appendix A.
    Thus, when the underlying shock is ψt , Proposition 2 shows that if monetary policy is
responsive enough, as given by φπ − ρψ > 0, output volatility decreases with price ﬂexibility.
If monetary policy is not responsive enough, as given by φπ − ρψ < 0, then output volatility
instead increases with price ﬂexibility.
    To provide intuition, it is useful to write out explicitly the solution and graph it up,
assuming that ψt is the only source of economic ﬂuctuations. Under this assumption, since

                                                  9
the model is linear and ψt is the only state variable, eqn.(8) guarantees a unique bounded
solution which takes the form

                        Ŷt = Yψ ψt , πt = ψr ψt , and ψt = ρψ ψt−1 +   t


where Yψ and πψ are coeﬃcients to be determined. This implies that

                                      Et Ŷt+j = ρjψ Yψ ψt
                                      Et πt+j = ρjψ πψ ψt .

    Consider now the solution in period t, which we subscript with S (for short run): ŶS =
Ŷt = Yψ ψt once the economy has been perturbed by a shock ψt = ψS = 0. The IS equation
can be combined with the policy rule to yield an aggregate demand, “AD” equation of the
following form
                      (1 − ρψ + φy σ)ŶS = −σ(φπ − ρψ )πS + (1 − ρψ )ψS                  (9)

where we have substituted Et Ŷt+1 = ρψ ŶS and Et πt+1 = ρψ πS . The AS equation is similarly

                                     (1 − ρψ β)πS = κŶS .                                (10)

For later purposes, note here that the slope of the AD equation given by eqn.(9) depends
on whether (φπ − ρψ ) ≷ 0 while the slope of the AS equation given by eqn.(10) is always
positive since κ > 0.
    The two relationships are plotted in Figure 1 Panel (a) for the case in which φπ > ρψ . The
ﬁgure shows the eﬀect of a negative demand shock, from AD1 to AD2 under two assumptions,
that is, when prices are rigid or more ﬂexible (shown via a steeper AS curve). We see that
under rigid prices, a given drop in demand results in a steeper contraction (point A) compared
to the case when prices are more ﬂexible (point B). The reason for this is relatively simple:
Consider ﬁrst the AD equation which pins down the number of goods purchased by the
consumers. In this economy, production is demand determined, that is, the ﬁrms produce
as many goods as are demanded by the customers that show up in front of their doors. This
demand, however, depends not on any measure of price rigidity, but instead (as we see in IS)
only on expectations about future output and the diﬀerence between the real interest rate
and the demand shock (ψt − Et ψt+1 ).
    To clarify things further, let us for a moment assume that ρψ = 0. Then the expectation
terms drop out since the economy is in steady state the next period. The central bank

                                               10
responds to a negative demand shock in the short run by cutting the nominal interest rate
(since φπ > 0). This cut, however, will be bigger the greater is the drop in inﬂation associated
with the demand shock. As prices become more ﬂexible, then, the central bank cuts the
nominal interest rate by more, and thus has a bigger eﬀect on demand. That is essentially
the logic that underlies Figure 1 Panel (a).
    Consider now the case when ρψ > 0, in which case the shock becomes more persistent.
The logic described above still applies: the central bank will try to oﬀset the demand shock by
interest rate cuts and thus stimulate demand. But now some additional eﬀects come into play
due to the persistence of the shock. A persistent shock inﬂuences aggregate demand in two
ways, as can be seen in IS eqn.(6): a more persistent shock changes both expected inﬂation
and expected output. In particular, we see from eqn.(9) that once we have substituted out
for the policy rule, then a persistent negative shock can potentially reduce future inﬂation
expectations to such an extent that it actually destabilizes demand. To see this, consider an
increase in ρψ for a given φπ . As we see from eqn.(9), this means that the AD curve becomes
steeper, suggesting that a given nominal interest rate cut (in response to a reduction in πS )
now leads to a smaller increase in demand because once the shock is persistent, it not only
triggers a reduction in current nominal interest rate today, it also triggers expectations of
lower inﬂation in the future. The lower expected inﬂation in the future, in turn, increases
the real interest rate, thus oﬀsetting some of the expansionary eﬀect of the decline in the
nominal interest rate today. If the shock is persistent enough, and the interest response
(given by φπ ) weak enough, the eﬀect given by lower expected inﬂation can be so strong that
it dominates and the aggregate demand become upward sloping in output and inﬂation. We
turn to this case next.
    Figure 1 Panel (b) shows the eﬀect of a demand shock in the short run when φπ − ρψ < 0.
We see that in this case an increase in price ﬂexibility leads to a bigger output contraction,
from point A to point B. The reason for this has already been hinted at above: the more
ﬂexible are prices, the more inﬂation expectations drop, thus leading to an increase in the
real interest rate. Because φπ − ρψ < 0, this drop in inﬂation expectations is not met by an
aggressive enough reduction in the central bank nominal interest rate at time t. This is an
example, then, of price ﬂexibility being destabilizing in the face of demand shocks.
    What is the interpretation of φπ − ρψ < 0? Because ρψ has to be between zero and one
for the model to be stationary, this condition implies that φπ < 1. Recall our condition for




                                              11
determinacy, eqn.(8), which implies that for a determinate equilibrium we require that

                                            κ
                                    φy >       (1 − φπ ) > 0.
                                           1−β

Intuitively, the condition implies that if the central bank puts little weight on inﬂation φπ ,
and thus correspondingly larger weight on output φy (which is required for determinacy),
then this leads to instability in aggregate demand in response to more price ﬂexibility. In
particular, greater price ﬂexibility will trigger instability in inﬂation expectations, which in
turn leads to more unstable demand.
    Is this a realistic description of central bank behavior? As we will see once we estimate
the model, this condition is not satisﬁed in the U.S. post-war data. It may, however, be
satisﬁed in some countries where the central bank does not react suﬃciently to inﬂation, but
excessively to output volatility. But an even more important point, perhaps, (at least from
a U.S. standpoint) is that the basic logic of the proposition does carry over to an empirical
speciﬁcation of U.S. policy if we take one additional property of the policy reaction function
into account.
    The key mechanism behind Proposition 2 is that the central bank does not respond
suﬃciently strongly to a deviation of inﬂation from target. In the proposition this occurs
due to a low φπ. As we can see in the policy rule given by eqn.(7) however, monetary policy
can be unresponsive to inﬂation for two reasons: either because φπ is small, or alternatively,
if there are shocks so that the zero bound is binding and the central bank cannot respond to
reduction in inﬂation. We analyze this case next, which also helps us connect to the recent
literature on the zero bound.
    We consider next the case when ψt becomes negative enough so that the zero bound
on the nominal interest rate binds. To be more speciﬁc, let us consider the case in which
ψt − Et ψt+1 < 0 and let us put a slightly diﬀerent structure on the shock for tractability. In
particular, consider a shock as in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) in which ψt = ψS < 0 in
period 0 and which reverts back to steady state ψt = ψ̄ with a ﬁxed probability 1 − μ every
period thereafter. Call the period in which it reverts back to steady state τ. Then it is easy
to conﬁrm (see for example, Eggertsson (2010)) that the solution for inﬂation and output is

                                          κ(1 − ρψ )
                             πS =                         ψS < 0                           (11)
                                    (1 − μ)(1 − βμ) − μσκ




                                                12
                                           (1 − ρψ )(1 − βμ)
                                ŶS =                         ψS < 0.                                (12)
                                        (1 − μ)(1 − βμ) − μσκ
   The next proposition follows.

Proposition 3 Conditional on ψt − Et ψt+1 < 0, and the shock process outlined above so
that the zero bound is binding, output drops the more, the more ﬂexible are prices (higher κ).
Proof. In Appendix A.

    Hence, if the shock to ψt is large enough so that the zero bound is binding, an increase
in price ﬂexibility is no longer stabilizing, it instead is destabilizing regardless of the value of
φπ and φy . The logic of this proposition is in fact the same as we showed in Figure 1 Panel
(b). The intuition for this relies heavily on the fact that the nominal interest rate does not
respond strongly to the drop in inﬂation and output since it is stuck at zero. Consider now
what an increase in price ﬂexibility does. Not only does it lead to a drop in the price level
today but because the shock is persistent, it also leads to expectation of future deﬂation.
Because the real interest rate is the diﬀerence between the nominal interest rate and expected
deﬂation, higher price ﬂexibility thus leads to expectation of more deﬂation in the future,
thus even increasing the real interest rate by more, creating a vicious deﬂationary spiral. As
discussed in Eggertsson (2010), this spiral may not even converge.
    We now move on to other shocks that we have introduced above. Proposition 4 sum-
marizes how the variance of output depends on κ under diﬀerent assumptions about shocks
perturbing the economy. It does so for the exogenous shocks At and ηt and without consid-
ering the zero lower bound, as we believe the zero bound consideration is most interesting
when triggered by demand shocks.

Proposition 4 Suppose each of the following shocks are independent of one another (At , ηt ),
and follow an AR(1) with persistence ρi , i = η, A. Then the variance of output that can be
attributed to each shock is given by
                                                                                   2
                                              κσ[φπ − ρA ]
         V AR(Ŷt /At ) =                                                  γA            V AR(At )
                                [(1 − ρA + σφy )(1 − βρA ) + κσ[φπ − ρA ]]
                                                                              2
                                                 σ (1 − βρη )
             V AR(Ŷt /ηt ) =                                                       V AR(ηt ).
                                    (1 − ρη + σφy )(1 − βρη ) + σκ[φπ − ρη ]
               1+φ
where γA =   σ −1 +φ
                     .


                                                    13
Proof. In Appendix A.
    The proof of this proposition is a straight-forward application of the method of undeter-
mined coeﬃcients. We can see from this proposition right away that the partial derivative
of the variance of output with respect to κ depends fundamentally on what is the source of
the variation in output and the responsiveness of monetary policy.
    We summarize these signs in the next proposition.

Proposition 5 The eﬀect of higher price ﬂexibility on output variance is given by the fol-
lowing:
                                  ∂V AR(Ŷt /At )
                                                  >0
                                       ∂κ
      and
                                              ∂V AR(Ŷt /ηt )
                     If (φπ − ρη ) > 0, then                  <0
                                                    ∂κ
                                                     ∂V AR(Ŷt /ηt )
                           If (φπ − ρη ) < 0, then                   > 0.
                                                         ∂κ
Proof. In Appendix A.
    The proof of this proposition is obtained by taking a partial derivative of the expressions
in Proposition 4 with respect to κ. Note that this proposition can be written for μ̂t and τ̂tw
instead of At by replacing γA with γ ≡ σ−11+φ and ρA with ρμ or ρτ w . In other words, the
result for productivity shocks holds more generally for any shocks that change the natural
rate of output (but do not directly aﬀect the IS equation).
    Let us now comment upon the intuition for the result. First, for the case of ηt , the
intuition is exactly the same as for ψt . To see this, just note that if we substituted for the
monetary policy reaction function given by eqn.(7) (assuming positive interest rates) into
the IS equation given by eqn.(6), then the shock ηt appears exactly in the same way as
ψt − Et ψt+1 . Thus a monetary disturbance – deﬁned in this way – works in the same way as
a “demand shock.”
    Let us now turn to the supply shock. For the supply shock, we ﬁnd that regardless of the
monetary policy reaction function, the variance of output always increases with higher price
ﬂexibility. The reason for this is a bit subtle, and relies on the fact that while output increases
in response to a positive technology shock when policy reacts strongly to inﬂation it decreases
when the interest rate does not respond strongly enough (this is a generalization of the so-
called paradox of toil, see Eggertsson (2010)). And both these reactions get exaggerated,
as we will now see, the higher is the degree of price ﬂexibility. This then increases output
variance unambiguously.

                                                14
    Figure 1 Panel (c) shows the eﬀect of a productivity shock when φπ > ρA and policy
responds strongly to inﬂation. A positive technology shocks shifts out the aggregate supply
curve as it reduces the marginal costs of ﬁrms so that they can now produce more output
for the same level of inputs. For this to show up in more aggregate output, however, the
consumers will need to be induced to buy more. Under the assumption that φπ > ρA we
have already seen in the case of demand shocks that the AD curve is downward sloping
because the central bank will cut the nominal interest rate in response to a drop in inﬂation.
Consider ﬁrst the case when the supply shock is i.i.d. so that ρA = 0. The increase in output
then happens via cuts in the nominal interest rate, and the greater the drop in the price
level, the bigger is the drop in the nominal interest rates. This then leads to a more robust
expansion.
    Consider now ρA > 0. The ﬁgure is unchanged for low enough value for ρA but there
are now additional forces at work because the supply shock not only triggers a drop in
the nominal interest rate, the fact that it is persistent may also aﬀect expected inﬂation
Et πt+1 = ρA πA At (using the same argument as in the case of demand shocks). Note that
this eﬀect is contractionary, because it leads to lower future expected inﬂation which increases
the real interest rate, thus contracting demand. Graphically, this means that the AD curve
in Figure 1 Panel ( c) is now steeper and the expansionary eﬀect of the supply shock is
smaller (but again more price ﬂexibility leads to a bigger expansion as before).
    If ρA is large enough, or alternatively φπ low enough, so that ρA < φπ , then the contrac-
tionary eﬀect of lower expected inﬂation is dominating and the AD curve becomes upward-
slowing in the (YS , πS ) space as shown in Figure 1 Panel (d). As we can see here then
technology shocks are contractionary. The reason has already been outlined. Now, improve-
ment in technology shocks triggers deﬂationary expectations that increase the real interest
rate. This force is not oﬀset via cuts in the nominal interest rate to a suﬃcient extent so
that demand contracts rather than expanding in response to technology improvements. The
net result is a reduction in output. Once again the eﬀect of price ﬂexibility is important.
In particular this eﬀect is stronger the more prices are ﬂexible because then the increase
in expected deﬂation increases. Accordingly, as shown in Figure 1 Panel (d), the drop in
output is bigger. Hence, more ﬂexible prices lead to more extreme output movements and
higher variance of output under both policy speciﬁcations.




                                              15
3     Extensions
We now consider several extensions to our analysis above.


3.1    Welfare
Our focus so far has been on output volatility, partly because this has been a focus of the
previous literature cited in the introduction. In the context of our model, however, another
natural criterion is the welfare of the representative household. This criterion is closely
related to output volatility because welfare can be written under certain conditions as the
sum of output and inﬂation volatility.
    As shown in Woodford (2003), the welfare of the representative household can be ap-
proximated via second order approximation to yield
                                                                                
                                                    θ 2             2
                                   ∞
                          Wt ∝ −         β   t
                                                       πt + Ŷt − Ŷte + t.i.p                (13)
                                   t=0
                                                     κ

where t.i.p. denotes “terms independent of policy.” We have done this approximation around
the eﬃcient steady state, that is, the steady state that would be consistent with the ﬁrst-best
allocation. The term Ŷte corresponds to

                                                        1+φ
                                         Ŷte =                 Ât                           (14)
                                                       σ −1 + φ

and denotes variations in the eﬃcient rate of output. Observe the diﬀerence between the
eﬃcient rate of output Ŷte and the natural rate of output Ŷtn given by eqn.(2) (again, the latter
is the output that would be produced if prices were perfectly ﬂexible). We see that while
the natural rate of output is aﬀected by variations in markups, labor taxes and productivity
shocks, the eﬃcient output is only aﬀected by productivity shocks. Thus, while productivity
shocks are examples of eﬃcient variations in the natural level of output, variations in labor
taxes and markup are examples of ineﬃcient output movement. This suggests that there
may be an important diﬀerence between the source of the supply shocks from a welfare point
of view. The immediate implication of the derivation above is that from a welfare perspective
the government does not want output to change in response to supply shocks such as τ̂tw ,
and μ̂t while it will in general want output to vary with changes in productivity At . Hence,
while we did not need to make a distinction between diﬀerent sources of supply shocks for
our previous propositions, this distinction is relevant if we use the representative household


                                                        16
welfare as the criterion.
   For an easier comparison with our earlier results, we can simplify (13) by considering the
special case in which β → 1.7 Then, if we take unconditional expectations and the limit
above, we can express welfare as
                                                                 
                                θ
                          W ∝ − V AR (πt ) + V AR Ŷt − Ŷt + t.i.p. .
                                                           e
                                                                                                           (15)
                                κ

We can now use eqn.(15) to evaluate welfare implications of increased price ﬂexibility.8
    The welfare function has a relatively standard interpretation: welfare is reduced in the
model if output deviates from the eﬃcient level and if inﬂation deviates from zero. The
weight on inﬂation depends inversely on the extent of price stickiness. We see that there are
two important diﬀerences relative to the output variability criterion we studied before. First,
output volatility is socially optimal to the extent that it reﬂects variations in the eﬃcient
level of output. Second, the government now not only cares about output (gap) volatility but
also about inﬂation volatility. The reason why inﬂation matters for welfare is that it leads to
price dispersion across the ﬁrms in the economy. That implies sectorial misallocation, ﬁrms
are producing diﬀerent amounts of output (since they are charging diﬀerent prices) while it
would be socially optimal for them all to be producing the same. This generates a welfare
loss that is independent of the cost of output volatility. This distortion, however, becomes
less and less important, the more ﬂexible prices are, that is, as κ increases.
    This suggests that the role of the inﬂation distortion as price ﬂexibility increases is not
obvious. The eﬀect of inﬂation volatility on welfare as prices become more ﬂexible is given
by the derivative
                       ∂ κθ V AR (πt )      1                1 ∂V AR (πt )
                                       = −θ 2 V AR (πt ) + θ               .
                              ∂κ           κ                 κ     ∂κ
On the one hand, more ﬂexible prices makes the weight on inﬂation volatility smaller, which
lowers the weight on inﬂation variance in social welfare (this is the ﬁrst term). On the
other hand, an increase in price ﬂexibility aﬀects inﬂation volatility itself (this is the second
term).9 Finally, note that the level of V AR (πt ) , which in turn depends on κ, also matters.
   7
      Let us note here that we are not aware of anything in what follows that depends on this simpliﬁcation.
This is especially true since β is not a function of price ﬂexibility κ so that none of our derivatives w.r.t. κ
are aﬀected and that the model is compeletely forward-looking. We make this assumption merely to simplify
the exposition of the paper and link the welfare function to the last section.
    8
      Note here that we are only considering the welfare eﬀect of the element of the loss function that interacts
with policy decisions, we do not consider how an increase in price ﬂexibility may aﬀect the term t.i.p, that
is, the “terms independent of policy.”
    9
      Note that in the appendix, it is clear that this derivative is positive: that is as prices become more


                                                       17
The net eﬀect depends on what happens in general equilibrium, which in turn, depends on
the assumed policy rule. The next proposition shows the sign of this derivative in our model
given the assumed Taylor rule.

Proposition 6 The eﬀect of higher price ﬂexibility on the welfare-weighted inﬂation volatil-
ity is given by

                     ∂ κθ V AR (πt /jt )
                                         > 0 if φπ − ρj < Γj for j = A, ψ and μt
                             ∂κ
                     ∂ κθ V AR(πt /jt )
                                         < 0 if φπ − ρj > Γj for j = A, ψ and μt
                             ∂κ
              (1−ρj +σφy )(1−βρj )
where Γj ≡            κσ
                                   .

Proof. In Appendix A.
    This proposition shows that if the coeﬃcient φπ in the Taylor rule is suﬃciently high, then
an increase in price ﬂexibility will reduce the welfare-weighted inﬂation volatility term, and
this applies to either demand or supply shocks. Moreover, when the level of price stickiness is
high, then for a given φπ , it is more likely that the welfare-weighted inﬂation volatility term
increases with higher price ﬂexibility. We are now in a position to do welfare evaluation.
    Let us start with demand shocks. This proposition is very similar to what we obtained in
Proposition 2 for output volatility in the case of demand shocks. A key diﬀerence, however,
is that in that proposition, φπ − ρψ only had to be greater than zero for price ﬂexibility to
reduce output volatility, a condition that is satisﬁed in most estimates of the policy reaction
function in the United States. Here, however, the critical value is determined by a coeﬃcient
Γψ . This coeﬃcient can easily be diﬀerent from zero. In particular, if we substitute values
common in the literature (see for example, Table 1) we ﬁnd that this number is quite large,
for example, 1.23 based on the parameters from Table 1. This implies a bound of 2.13 for
φπ , which is higher than for example, the estimated value of 1.5 found by Taylor (1993)
that we use throughout this section as a benchmark. Thus, according to this benchmark –
at least in this simple model – welfare (from the part corresponding to inﬂation) is reduced
as prices become more ﬂexible due to the fact that inﬂation volatility increases enough to
compensate the lower weight it gets in the welfare function.
    Which eﬀect is stronger for demand shocks? The reduction in welfare due to the increase
in inﬂation volatility or the increase in welfare due to lower output volatility? The next
proposition answers that question.
ﬂexible, variance of inﬂation increases.


                                                 18
Proposition 7 The total eﬀect of higher price ﬂexibility on welfare losses generated by de-
mand shocks as measured by eqn.(15) is given by

                                  ∂W (.\ψt )
                                             < 0 if (φπ − ρψ ) < Λψ
                                    ∂κ
                                  ∂W (.\ψt )
                                             > 0 if (φπ − ρψ ) > Λψ
                                    ∂κ
             θ(1−βρψ )(1−ρψ +σφY )
where Λψ ≡     σ(2(1−βρψ )2 +κθ)
                                   .

Proof. In Appendix A.
    This proposition shows that for φπ low enough, welfare is decreasing as price ﬂexibility
increases. Observe that this may be the case even when (φπ − ρψ ) > 0, where output
volatility goes down as prices become more ﬂexible. This is because the weight on relative
price distortions is strong enough to compensate for the positive eﬀect on welfare that is
triggered by the decline in output volatility. Also note that for a given φπ , welfare is more
likely to decline with increased price ﬂexibility when we start at a level of high price rigidity.
Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, the critical value of φπ needed to have welfare improvement
is higher than many empirical estimates of this coeﬃcient. Using the numerical example in
Table 1, we see that the condition in the proposition applies as long as φπ < 2.00. Thus,
conditional on demand shocks driving the business cycle, even if higher price ﬂexibility
reduces output volatility, it reduces aggregate welfare due to the relative price distortions it
creates, as long as φπ < ρψ + Λψ , a condition that is satisﬁed in our benchmark of 1.5.
    Let us now turn to supply shocks. To start with, consider ineﬃcient supply shocks (for
example, μt ), in which case Ŷte = 0. As we have already documented in Proposition 5, output
volatility increases with more ﬂexible prices for these shocks. Proposition 6 illustrates that the
weighted inﬂation volatility term is also decreasing in price ﬂexibility as long as φπ −ρμ < Γμ ,
which as we have already seen is generally satisﬁed. It follows that a suﬃcient condition
for welfare to be decreasing in price ﬂexibility is that 0 < φπ − ρμ < Γμ . Note that this
condition is in general not necessary. The necessary condition is a bit more complex. Since
the suﬃcient condition is typically satisﬁed for the most empirically relevant parameters, we
only report the necessary condition in the appendix.

Proposition 8 A suﬃcient condition for higher price ﬂexibility to have a negative eﬀect on
welfare losses due to ineﬃcient supply shocks, μt and τtw , is given by

                                         0 < φ π − ρμ < Γ μ

                                                 19
Proof. In Appendix A.
    Finally, consider the eﬀect on welfare of eﬃcient supply shocks, such as productivity
shocks. A key diﬀerence relative to the ineﬃcient supply shocks is that now some of the
variations in output due to the shocks are in fact desirable since they trigger variation in the
eﬃcient level of output Yte and so while we can still use Proposition 6 to ﬁnd the eﬀect of
the supply shocks on inﬂation variability, now Proposition 5 is no longer suﬃcient.
    As a step towards the overall eﬀects on
                                           welfare, we ﬁrst show the eﬀect on the variance
of the welfare-relevant output gap, V AR Ŷt − Ŷte , when the shock is At .

Proposition 9 The eﬀect of higher price ﬂexibility on the welfare relevant output gap for
eﬃcient supply shocks, At , is given by

                                                 ∂V AR(Ŷt − Ŷte /At )
                       If (φπ − ρA ) > 0, then                          <0
                                                        ∂κ

                                                 ∂V AR(Ŷt − Ŷte /At )
                      If (φπ − ρA ) < 0, then                           > 0.
                                                        ∂κ
Proof. In Appendix A.
    We thus see that the variance of the welfare-relevant output gap increases with higher
price ﬂexibility if monetary policy is not responsive enough (as given by (φπ − ρA ) < 0),
while it decreases with higher price ﬂexibility if monetary policy is responsive enough (as
given by (φπ − ρA ) < 0).
    Now we have both the pieces required to evaluate the eﬀects on welfare of increased price
ﬂexibility, with Proposition 6 showing the eﬀects on the welfare-weighted inﬂation term and
Proposition 9 on the welfare-relevant output gap term. Note that it is immediately clear
that for (φπ − ρA ) < 0, welfare is decreasing unambiguously as both the terms increase with
κ. We can however establish a more precise condition analytically that shows which of the
eﬀects dominate when 0 < (φπ −ρA ) < ΓA as then, while the output gap variability increases,
the welfare-weighted inﬂation variability increases. The next proposition presents our main
welfare result regarding technology shocks.

Proposition 10 The total eﬀect of higher price ﬂexibility on welfare losses generated by
eﬃcient supply shocks, At , as measured by eqn.(15) is given by

                              ∂W (.\At )
                                         < 0 if (φπ − ρA ) < ΛA
                                ∂κ
                              ∂W (.\At )
                                         > 0 if (φπ − ρA ) > ΛA
                                ∂κ

                                                 20
             θ(1−βρA )(1−ρA +σφY )
where ΛA ≡      σ(2(1−βρA )2 +κθ)
                                     < ΓA .

Proof. In Appendix A.
    We see that the condition for eﬃcient supply shocks to have a negative welfare eﬀect is
essentially the same as for demand shocks. In particular, the value of φπ − ρA has to be
less than ΛA , which in the context of our numerical example suggests that φπ has to be less
than 2.00. This may seem somewhat puzzling as we know that at full ﬂexibility, productivity
shocks are completely eﬃcient and we get to the ﬁrst-best allocation in this simple model
(thus, welfare with full price ﬂexibility must be higher than with full rigidity). The resolution
of the puzzle is that similar to demand shocks, for a given φπ , as prices move from perfectly
rigid to more ﬂexible, while welfare losses increase at ﬁrst, after a critical point they will
ultimately decline, as made further clear in the next section with numerical examples (see
Figure 2).
    Observe also that this condition for eﬃcient shocks is a bit tighter than the suﬃcient
condition in Proposition 8 for ineﬃcient shocks, where φπ only needed to be less than 2.13.
This is not surprising, as the variability of the output gap Yt − Yte is decreasing for eﬃcient
supply shocks as prices become more ﬂexible when (φπ − ρA ) > 0 (while it is increasing
for ineﬃcient shocks for all φπ ) so that the negative welfare eﬀect of higher price ﬂexibility
comes once again about due to the fact that welfare weighted inﬂation volatility is increasing
and suﬃciently high, thus triggering welfare-reducing price dispersion that outweighs the
decrease in output gap variability. Finally, comparing the condition for welfare-weighted
inﬂation volatility with overall welfare, as expected, ΛA < ΓA , as the decreased output
gap variability eﬀects makes the bound on (φπ − ρA ) required to have lower welfare with
increased price ﬂexibility smaller.


3.2    Alternative Policy Rules
So far, we have considered a simple Taylor-type rule, as given by eqn.(7), as a description of
monetary policy. We now consider several variants of such rules that are popular in applied
work, allowing for a welfare-relevant output gap, interest rate smoothing, and a response to
the growth rate of the output gap (this is motivated by our quantitative model’s interest-rate
rule speciﬁcation). Overall, we do not ﬁnd that these extensions have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on




                                               21
the results qualitatively. The rules we consider are
                                               
                ı̂t = φπ πt + φy Ŷt −   Ŷte
                                                                
                ı̂t = ρi ı̂t−1 + (1 − ρi ) φπ πt + φy Ŷt − Ŷte
                                                                                 
                ı̂t = ρi ı̂t−1 + (1 − ρi ) φπ πt + φy Ŷt − Ŷte + φd,y Δ Ŷt − Ŷte .

We show in Figure 2 results for both the variance of output and welfare for both demand
and supply (markup and technology) shocks as a function of 1/(1-α), which is the expected
duration of the price contract. For this exercise, we use the same parameters as in Table 1
as well as φπ = 1.5, φy = 0.125, ρi = 0.9, φd,y = 0.125, θ = 10, and φ = 2.10
    Note that this parametrization implies that monetary policy is “responsive.” In line
with our analytical results, Figure 2 shows that for all of the Taylor rule speciﬁcations, for
demand shocks, the variance of output decreases with increased price ﬂexibility while for
supply shocks, it increases. Thus, the same result applies across all the policy rules. In the
case of the unresponsive we ﬁnd the opposite result for demand shocks (as in the analytical
section) while the sign remains the same for supply shocks.11
    Moving to welfare, we can also conﬁrm our theoretical results across all policy rules.
The ﬁgure shows clearly that for all the Taylor rule speciﬁcations and for all the shocks,
welfare decreases with increased price ﬂexibility for a high enough level of price stickiness.
Once prices are ﬂexible enough, however, then welfare improves with further increases in
price ﬂexibility, much as our theoretical results suggested. Interestingly, this reﬂection point
occurs later for the alternative policy rules, suggesting that our result that increasing price
ﬂexibility can be welfare-reducing applies to an even broader parameter range for these
alternative policy rules.12


3.3     Optimal Monetary Policy
So far, we have discussed the eﬀects on output volatility and welfare of increased price
ﬂexibility while modeling monetary policy as following an interest-rate rule. Thus, the
  10
     Our baseline parameterization in Table 1 of κ = 0.02 corresponds to duration of 3.2 quarters. We only
provide numerical results here since analytical results are tedious with interest rate smoothing.
  11
     Since it is not empirically the most relevant (except at the ZLB), we do not report the unresponsive case
here to save on space.
  12
     Notice that for preference and markup shocks, the results in the Figure are identical whether we have
output or the welfare-relevant output gap in the Taylor rule since these shocks do not perturb the eﬃcient
level of output.


                                                     22
increase in price ﬂexibility does not change the policy reaction function of the government at
the same time. How sensitive is our conclusion to allowing for the feature that an increase
in κ may simultaneously change government behavior, for example, φπ or φy ? In order to
address this question we need to have some theory of how the government behaves in response
to changes in the level of stickiness in price setting.
    One approach is to assume that policy is determined to maximize social welfare, so
that policy may then endogenously react if there is a change in κ. Hence the government
maximizes eqn.(15) subject to eqns.(1), (6), and the zero bound on the short term nominal
interest rate.13 Consider ﬁrst optimal policy under discretion (Markov Perfect equilibrium),
that is, the government maximizes welfare but is unable to commit to future policy. Then
the ﬁrst-order conditions of the government maximization problem can be combined to yield
the following relationship between output and inﬂation

                                            θπt + (Ŷt − Ŷte ) = 0.                      (16)

We see that this relationship, the so-called “targeting rule,” is independent of the degree of
price ﬂexibility. In particular, observe that if the only shocks in the economy are At and
ψt (and the zero bound is not binding) this relationship implies an equilibrium in which
πt = Ŷt − Ŷte = 0 at all times. This means that neither output nor inﬂation volatility depend
upon the degree of price rigidity. Compared to our previous policy rule in eqn.(7), discretion
thus corresponds to the special case when φπ → ∞, that is, the central bank completely
oﬀsets any eﬀect of preference and technology shocks on inﬂation. It is easy to see that in
this case, also, changes in price rigidities have no eﬀect on welfare since the central bank is
fully replicating the ﬂexible price, and thereby, eﬃcient allocation. Or, to summarize:

Proposition 11 Output and inﬂation volatility, as well as welfare, is independent of price
ﬂexibility if policy obtains the ﬁrst-best allocation.

Proof. In Appendix A.
    This result, however, is relatively special and relies heavily on the “divine coincidence”
feature demonstrated by Blanchard and Galı́ (2007) in the most simple variation of the New
Keynesian model. It says there is no trade-oﬀ between inﬂation and output gap in response
to technology and preference shocks. Accordingly, the ﬁrst best can be achieved. This divine
coincidence is absent in a more general setting (with wage frictions), as we shall shortly see.
 13
      All the details of the derivation are contained in the appendix.


                                                       23
Moreover, for a more general speciﬁcation of the shocks, and when the ﬁrst best is no longer
obtained, our previous results are unchanged as we now demonstrate.
    Let us ﬁrst consider an example where the ﬁrst-best is not achieved due to the zero
bound. Recall that under the Taylor rule, demand shocks were destabilizing if the policy
did not respond aggressively enough to inﬂation (this is Proposition 2). This result is absent
in the discussion above, since optimal discretion is equivalent to φπ → ∞. The zero bound
on the nominal interest rate, however, brings this key result back, even if the government
is maximizing welfare under discretion. In particular, Eggertsson (2008) shows that one
obtains exactly the same equilibrium under optimal monetary policy under discretion as we
have already analyzed in eqns.(11) and (12). It follows that Proposition 3 also applies if the
government conducts policy under discretion. Hence, at the zero bound, the more ﬂexible
the prices, the greater the drop in output. Moreover, we show in Appendix A that welfare
also declines with increased price ﬂexibility in this case.
    Let us now consider a case when the ﬁrst best is not achieved for a more general spec-
iﬁcation of supply shocks. Consider an ineﬃcient supply shock μt (or alternatively τtw ). In
this case, Ŷte = 0, and there is a trade-oﬀ between inﬂation and output. In this case we can
prove the following proposition:

Proposition 12 Suppose policy is set optimally under discretion and μt follows an AR(1)
process. Then the variance of output is given by
                                                                2
                                          2            κ
                          V AR(Yt ) = θ                               V AR(μt )
                                                  1 + κθ − βρu

which is always increasing in price ﬂexibility so that

                          ∂var(Yt )    θ2 (1 − βρu )2κ
                                    =                  V AR(μt ) > 0.
                            ∂κ        (1 + κθ − βρu )3

Similarly, welfare is decreasing in price ﬂexibility

                                                  ∂W
                                                     <0
                                                  ∂κ
     1+κθ
if   1+2κθ
             > βρμ .

Proof. In Appendix A.
    This is a close analogue to Propositions 5 which showed that output variability always
increases under a Taylor rule (and the complementary Proposition 8 for welfare). Thus,

                                                     24
with an ineﬃcient shock μt and under optimal monetary policy, not only does the variance
of output increase, but welfare can also be reduced with increased price ﬂexibility as long
    1+κθ
as 1+2κθ  > βρμ . In particular, with i.i.d. shocks (ρμ = 0), welfare always declines when
ineﬃcient supply shocks hit the economy and monetary policy is conducted optimally under
discretion. Moreover, as before with a Taylor rule, the condition for welfare to decline with
additional increased price ﬂexibility becomes harder to fulﬁll as prices become more ﬂexible.14
Let us also point out that the policy under the optimal commitment has a similar ﬂavor as
outlined above.15
    The divine coincidence that allows monetary policy to achieve the ﬁrst best in response
to technology and preference shocks is not a general feature of New Keynesian models.
As soon as we introduce more realistic nominal frictions, a trade-oﬀ between inﬂation and
output appears. We make this clear in the next section when we extend the model to
incorporate rigid wages. In particular, one can show that output volatility is increasing in
price ﬂexibility for shocks that imply a trade-oﬀ between inﬂation and output gap (such as
technology shocks) and that welfare is also decreasing in some of our numerical experiments.


3.4     Price and Wage Stickiness
So far, we have been using the basic New Keynesian model featuring only price stickiness.
However, estimated models in the literature (including the one in the next section) typically
feature both price and wage stickiness. It is worthwhile to consider how our results are
aﬀected if we allow for both price and wage stickiness. We undertake this exercise next.
    Generally speaking, our main results continue to apply in the extended model: increased
price ﬂexibility (now measured as an increase in both prices and wage ﬂexibility) can desta-
bilize both output and welfare, depending on the policy. The conditions under which this
applies are largely parallel to our previous discussion although in some cases we can only
show this via numerical examples. Perhaps the main new element is that in the model with
wage rigidities, the divine coincidence no longer applies. As we will see, this implies that
technology shocks now create a trade-oﬀ between inﬂation and output gap unlike in the
basic New Keynesian model. This will imply that under optimal policy (under discretion,
for simplicity), an increase in price ﬂexibility typically destabilizes both output and welfare
even for technology shocks. Thus, we show that the distinction between eﬃcient and ineﬃ-
  14
      In the appendix, we also show that the persistence of the shock matters for our condition in the propo-
sition as it aﬀects strongly the variance of the welfare-weighted inﬂation term.
   15
      One simply needs to modify eqn.(16) to include (Ŷt − Ŷte ) − (Ŷt−1 − Ŷt−1
                                                                                 e
                                                                                    ) instead of (Ŷt − Ŷte ).



                                                      25
cient supply shocks is not as stark from a normative perspective once we allow for additional
frictions in the baseline sticky price model.
    We use a standard model of price and wage stickiness as described in Woodford (2003).
The private sector equilibrium conditions are given by

                                                          p
                              Ŷt = Et Ŷt+1 − σ(it − Et πt+1 − ψ̂t + Et ψ̂t+1 )                         (17)

                               πtp = κp (Yt − Ytn ) + ξp (ŵt − ŵtn ) + βEt πt+1
                                                                              p
                                                                                                         (18)

                              πtw = κw (Yt − Ytn ) − ξw (wt − ŵtn ) + βEt πt+1
                                                                            w
                                                                                                         (19)

                                             ŵt = ŵt−1 + πtw − πtp                                     (20)

where πtp now stands for price inﬂation, πtw for wage inﬂation, and ŵt for the real wage.
Moreover, the expressions for the natural level of output Ŷtn and the natural level of real
wages ŵtn are now given by

                                         1+ν                 (1 + ωp )σ −1 + ν − ωp
                        Ŷtn = Ŷte =            At ; ŵ n
                                                           =                        At .
                                        σ −1 + ν         t
                                                                   σ −1 + ν
                                                                    f (h)
In terms of parameters, we have ν ≡                vhh
                                                   hvh
                                                       ,   φh ≡    hf  (h)
                                                                            ,   ωw = νφh , ωp = ν − ωw , ξw =
(1−αw )(1−αw β)           (1−αp )(1−αp β)                         −1
  αw (1+νθw )
                ,
                ξp =                      , κw
                                      = ξw (ωw + σ ) , and κp = ξp ωp , where f (h) is the
                            αp (1+ωp θp )
production function and ν is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.16 For details on this
notation, please see Appendix B.
    Note that compared to the model with simply sticky prices, in the price Phillips curve
(18) there is now an additional term, the real wage gap, that is the gap between real wages
and its natural counterpart. Moreover, because of sticky wages, there is now also a wage
Phillips curve given by eqn.(19). Finally, eqn.(20) closes the model by specifying a law
of motion for real wages. When we consider a Taylor rule speciﬁcation, we use the same
formulation as in the previous section.
    In terms of welfare, as shown in Woodford (2003), the utility of the representative house-
hold can be approximated via second order approximation around the eﬃcient steady-state
to yield, after taking the β → 1 approximation and unconditional expectations

                  W ∝ − λp V AR (πtp ) + λw V AR (πtw ) + λx V AR(Ŷt − Ŷte ) + t.i.p.                  (21)
  16
       We will use f (h) = hγ in our numerical experiments.




                                                           26
                       θ ξ −1                 θ φ−1 ξ −1                     σ +ω       −1
where λp = θ ξ−1 +θ
                  p p
                        −1 −1 , λw =
                                           w h    w
                                     θp ξp−1 +θw φ−1 −1 > 0, and λx =
                                                                      θp ξp−1 +θw φ−1 −1 > 0. We will
              p p   w φ h ξw                      h ξw                             h ξw
use eqn.(21) to evaluate the welfare implications of increased price and/or wage ﬂexibility
for demand and technology shocks.
    We are able to show some analytical results, as well as provide a sharp characterization
overall, by making an additional assumption that the slope of the two Phillips curves is
equal, that is, κp = κw = κ. Earlier we have interpreted the increase in ﬂexibility as the
thought experiment that prices become more ﬂexible. A natural analog here is that both
prices and wage ﬂexibility increase, which once again can be characterized via an increase in
κ = κp = κw . That is the approach we take in the reminder of the section. This assumption
is one element that distinguishes our results from those in Galı́ (2011).
    Using this parameter restriction, eqns.(17)-(20) can be simpliﬁed to yield

                                                                     1
                                πtp = κ(Ŷt − Ŷtn ) + βEt πt+1
                                                            p
                                                                +κ      (ŵt − ŵtn )           (22)
                                                                     ωp

                                                                 p
                                     Ŷt = Et Ŷt+1 − σ(it − Et πt+1 − rte )                    (23)

                                 Δŵt = −(ξw + ξp )(ŵt − ŵtn ) + βEt Δŵt+1                   (24)

where a key observation is that eqn.(24) yields a unique bounded solution for ŵt only as a
function of the exogenous shock ŵtn .17 This means that eqns.(22) and (23) reduce to exactly
the same equations as before except for the important diﬀerence that now supply shocks will
in general also have an eﬀect on eqn.(22) through ŵt − ŵtn , that is independent of movement
in the eﬃcient rate of output. Eﬃcient supply shocks will thus trigger a trade-oﬀ between
the output gap and inﬂation and thus violate the divine coincidence, in a manner similar to
markup shocks in the baseline model with only price stickiness. We are now in a position
to see how our previous results generalize to this environment. Let us start with the case in
which the government follows a Taylor rule and then move on to optimal policy.
    For demand shocks, the results are particularly clear under the Taylor rule when wages
are sticky. It follows directly from eqns.(22)-(24) that we can generalize our proposition for
the aggregate demand shock ψt to the model with both price and wage stickiness since in
this case ŵt = ŵtn = 0 and the two models are actually identical (hence Propositions 1, 2,
3, 6 and 7 all generalize to this environment). Things are a little bit trickier when we study
  17
       To see this subtract eqn.(18) from eqn.(19) and use Δŵt = πtw − πtp to obtain

                        Δwt = −(ξw + ξp )(wt − wtn ) + (κw − κp )(Yt − Ytn ) + βEt Δwt+1 .
  When κw = κp , we obtain eqn.(24). The exact solution for ŵt is provided in Appendix B.


                                                           27
technology shocks, however, since now there will be an eﬀect via the wage gap ŵt − ŵtn in
eqn.(22).
    The results for supply shocks when we assume the Taylor rule, while not identical as in
the case of demand shock, generally apply in the numerical experiments we have done. In
particular, we ﬁnd that an increase in price ﬂexibility in general increases output volatility
and reduces aggregate welfare when the response of interest rates to inﬂation is not very high
and vice-versa. We report our calibration of the model with price and wage rigidities in Table
1 and report a simple example below in Figure 3 where we consider both the responsive and
non-responsive cases. Note that for both cases, the variance of output increases and welfare
decreases as we increase nominal ﬂexibility.18 These constitute numerical counterparts to
our Proposition 5 and 10.
    Let us now move to optimal policy. We have already seen that if only demand shocks are
perturbing the economy, then the sticky wage and price economy is isomorphic to the sticky
price one. Accordingly, optimal policy in response to demand shocks is the same across the
two models. What is of more interest is how the two models diﬀer in response to eﬃcient
supply shocks. There we see a substantive diﬀerence. The reason for this is that the model
with wage and price frictions has the realistic feature that the government cannot achieve
the ﬁrst best in response to supply shocks. Instead, they create a trade-oﬀ between inﬂation
and output gap so that it is no longer the case that policy will fully oﬀset these shocks.
Appendix B shows that now the targeting rule eqn.(16) is replaced by

                                         πtp + χw Δŵt + χx (Ŷt − Ŷte ) = 0                             (25)

                θw φ−1
                    h (ωw +σ
                             −1
                                )                            σ −1 +ω
where χw = θ             −1              and χx =                                 . Thus now, a new term, wage
               p ωp +θw φh (ωw +σ
                                  −1 )
                                                    (θp ωp +θw φ−1
                                                                h (ωw +σ
                                                                         −1 )
                                                                              )
growth, appears in the targeting rule.
    As before, in the targeting rule eqn.(25), the degree of price/wage stickiness does not
appear directly. The key point though is that it is no longer the case that if productivity
shocks are perturbing the economy, then there is an equilibrium in which πt = Ŷt − Ŷte = 0
at all times as in the baseline model. Instead, the policymaker will trade oﬀ inﬂation and the
output gap in response to a technology shock and this trade-oﬀ will in general depend upon
price rigidities. This in turn will lead to a greater degree of output volatility and a reduction
in welfare for a reasonable parameterization of the model, as we illustrate in Figure 4.
    To summarize, we have shown that in a model with both wage and price rigidities and
  18
     Thus, even for the responsive case, the response of interest rates to inﬂation is not high enough for
welfare to increase with increased price ﬂexibility.


                                                          28
under a Taylor rule, for demand shocks, the same analytical results apply as with price
rigidities only while for supply shocks, the same results hold in our numerical example.
Moreover, now the ﬁrst best is no longer achieved so that under optimal policy, eﬃcient
technology shocks trigger a trade-oﬀ between inﬂation and output gap stabilization. We
show numerically that under optimal policy with technology shocks, output volatility is
increasing in price/wage ﬂexibility and welfare can be decreasing.19
    So far, we have shown in several model variants the eﬀects on output volatility of increased
price/wage ﬂexibility. Our propositions show that the source of shocks and the endogenous
response of monetary policy are the most important determinants. In other words, the
answer to the question in the title of the paper “depends,” for example, on the relative size
of the demand and supply shocks and on the monetary policy reaction function. Accordingly,
it remains to determine what channel is most empirically relevant. This is what we now turn
to using an estimated medium-scale DSGE model.


4       Quantitative Experiment
In this section, we conduct a quantitative evaluation of the eﬀects of greater price/wage
ﬂexibility on output volatility. As we have emphasized, this eﬀect depends crucially on the
underlying shocks driving the economy and the endogenous response of monetary policy.
To explore which results are of most empirical relevance for the U.S., we ﬁt the well-known
Smets and Wouters (2007) model to U.S. data, and estimate the structural parameters and
the underlying shocks. Conditional on the estimated values for all other parameters of the
model, we then ask the following counterfactual question: Does increasing the frequency of
price/wage adjustment lead to higher output growth volatility in the model? We particularly
focus on the counterfactual case where prices/wages are completely ﬂexible and ﬁnd that
the answer is yes.
    Which shocks drive this result? We ﬁnd that the main driving forces are supply shocks
such as technology shocks and shocks that trigger variations in price and wage markups.
Shocks to markups have been criticized in the literature (see for example, Chari et al. (2009))
for being implausible and poorly identiﬁed. To address this criticism, we estimate two ad-
ditional models: we consider the model of Gali et al. (2011) and a model in the spirit of
de Walque et al. (2006). In the model of Gali et al. (2011), the role of wage markup shocks
is drastically reduced as the model enables a separate identiﬁcation of labor supply shocks
 19
      Clearly, the same applies for markup variations as with price rigidities only.


                                                       29
and the estimation features measurement errors on wages. The model of de Walque et al.
(2006) completely shuts down price markup shocks by introducing sector-speciﬁc productiv-
ity shocks in a ﬂexible price sector. In these extensions, we ﬁnd once again that an increase in
price/wage ﬂexibility would increase overall output volatility. In fact, this holds true under
certain conditions even if we completely shut down variations in wage and price markups.


4.1    A Medium-Scale DSGE Model: The Smets-Wouters model
We refer the reader to the Smets and Wouters (2007) paper for a detailed description of the
model. Here we only lay out the basic model features and introduce relevant notation while
presenting the log-linear equations in Appendix C. Households in the model face an inﬁnite-
horizon problem and maximize expected discounted utility over consumption and leisure,
with the discount factor given by β. The utility function is non-separable over consumption
and labor eﬀort. There is a time-varying external habit formation in consumption. The
intertemporal elasticity of substitution is given by σc , the elasticity of labor supply by
σl , and the habit parameter by h.
     Households supply labor to a labor union, which diﬀerentiates the homogenous labor
input. The elasticity of substitution over the diﬀerentiated labor services is time-varying
and modeled as in Kimball (1995), where εw represents the curvature of the aggregator
function. The union enjoys some monopoly power over setting wages, which are sticky in
nominal terms. Wage stickiness is modeled following Calvo (1983). The constant probability
of not adjusting wages is given by ξw , with wages that do not adjust partially indexed to
past inﬂation, with the extent of indexation given by ιw . The steady-state mark-up in the
labor market is given by λw . Households also rent capital services to ﬁrms and in deciding
how much capital to accumulate, take into account capital adjustment costs which enter as a
function of change in investment. The steady-state elasticity of the capital adjustment cost
function is given by ϕ. Moreover, the model features variable capital utilization rate, with
the dependence of the degree of capital utilization on the rental rate of capital a function of
the parameter ψ. Capital depreciates at the rate δ.
     Firms produce diﬀerentiated goods using labor and capital as inputs, with α denoting the
share of capital in production. The share of ﬁxed cost in production is given by 1−Φ. Like for
labor, the elasticity of substitution over the diﬀerentiated goods is time-varying and modeled
as in Kimball (1995), where εp represents the curvature of the aggregator function. Firms
have some degree of monopoly power over setting prices, which are sticky in nominal terms.
Price stickiness is modeled following Calvo (1983). The constant probability of not adjusting

                                              30
prices is given by ξp , with prices that do not adjust partially indexed to past inﬂation, with
the extent of indexation given by ιp .
     Government behavior is speciﬁed in terms of ﬁscal and monetary policies. The govern-
ment levies lump-sum taxes and government spending follows an exogenous path, with some
response to the productivity process. In particular, government spending responds by ρga to
an innovation to total factor productivity. Monetary policy is modeled using an empirical
endogenous interest-rate rule which features interest rate smoothing, given by ρ, feedback
from inﬂation, given by rπ , and feedback from output gap, given by ry . Moreover, there is
also some short-run feedback from the change in the output gap, given by rΔy . It is impor-
tant to note here that the output gap is the diﬀerence between actual output and potential
output, where potential output is deﬁned as the output that would prevail under ﬂexible
prices and in the absence of the price and wage markup shocks.
     The economy is driven by seven fundamental aggregate shocks. The total factor produc-
tivity, investment-speciﬁc technology, risk premium, exogenous government spending, and
monetary policy shocks follow AR(1) processes. The persistence parameters of the shocks
are given by ρa , ρI , ρb , ρg , and ρr and the standard deviations of the innovations by σa , σI ,
σb , σg , and σr respectively. The price and wage markup shocks are assumed to follow ARMA
(1,1) processes, with ρp and ρw representing the corresponding AR parameters and μp and
μw the corresponding MA parameters. The standard deviations of the innovations are given
by σp and σw . Finally, the model features deterministic growth driven by labor-augmenting
productivity with the quarterly trend growth rate in real GDP given by γ. Similarly, the
quarterly steady-state inﬂation rate is given by π, the steady-state hours worked by l, and
the steady-state government spending to GDP ratio by gy .

4.1.1    Estimation

We directly follow Smets and Wouters (2007) in our estimation exercise. We use quarterly
U.S. data from 1966:I -2004:IV on log diﬀerence of real GDP, real consumption, real in-
vestment, real wage, and the GDP deﬂator, log hours worked, and the federal funds rate.
We therefore use seven observables along with seven fundamental shocks. In particular, our
estimation exercise does not – for now – feature measurement errors. We follow a standard
Bayesian estimation and model comparison procedure for linearized models. All the details
can be found in Appendix D.20
  20
     The likelihood function is evaluated using the Kalman ﬁlter. We compute the mode of the posterior and
then use a random-walk Metropolis algorithm to sample from the posterior distribution. A scaled version of



                                                   31
    As in Smets and Wouters (2007), we calibrate a few parameters: δ is set at 0.025, gy at
0.18, λw at 1.5, and εp and εw at 10. For the rest of the parameters that are estimated, the
prior distributions are described in Tables 2 and 3. We directly follow Smets and Wouters
(2007) in the priors we pick, except for the price and wage markup shocks. Smets and
Wouters (2007) estimate a scaled version of the markup shocks, which is a combination of
the true markup shocks and various structural parameters, in particular, the probability of
price and wage adjustment. Since our main goal is to conduct a comparative statics exercise
on the probability of price and wage adjustment, we estimate the “true” price and wage
markup shocks. For this reason, the prior mean of the standard deviation of the price and
wage markup shocks are set at a quite high value.
    The posterior estimates of the various parameters of the model that features wage but
not price indexation are given in Tables 4 and 5.21 Since our entire exercise is extremely
close to that of Smets and Wouters (2007), the estimates are in line with their results. The
only exceptions are the estimates pertaining to the price and wage markup shocks for reasons
described above. A point worth emphasizing here is that the policy rule is estimated with a
Taylor rule coeﬃcient of φπ = 2.07. This puts us in the parameter region in which price and
wage ﬂexibility is stabilizing for demand shocks while destabilizing for supply shocks.

4.1.2    Price-Wage Flexibility: Counterfactual Experiments

With the posterior estimates of the structural parameters and the shocks at hand, we now
conduct the following counterfactual experiment: We recover the historical realizations of
all the shocks from the estimated model and feed these into the model assuming prices and
wages are completely ﬂexible.22 We then simulate the implied counterfactual historical path
for annual output growth and compare it with the actual path, while using posterior means
as values for all parameters. Panel (a) in Figure 5 reports the results of this exercise. We
see that for the bulk of post-WWII history, output growth per year would have been more
volatile under ﬂexible prices and wages. This is especially the case in the 1970s although
output would have been slightly less volatile in the Volcker disinﬂation period of early 1980s.
Taken together this counterfactual history suggest a standard deviation of annual output
growth of 4.43 percent if prices and wages had been ﬂexible relative to what was seen in the
the inverse of the Hessian computed at the mode is used as a proposal density in the random walk Metropolis
algorithm. The results we report are based on 2.5 million draws, with one third of the draws burned-in. We
assess convergence using multiple chains and trace-plots.
  21
     We found this speciﬁcation to best ﬁt the data using a Bayesian model comparison exercise following
the methodology in Geweke (1999).
  22
     We use smoothed shocks.


                                                    32
data, which corresponds to 2.18 percent. If only prices had been ﬂexible but not wages, the
same number is 2.85 percent.
    Our theoretical analysis made clear that while nominal rigidities are stabilizing for some
shocks, this is not true for all shocks. The same insight carries over to the estimated model.
This is made clear in other panels in Figure 5, which show the evolution of annual output
growth with and without ﬂexible prices and wages for one shock at a time. Of particular note
is that in the case of “demand shocks,” output is typically more stable if prices and wages
are ﬂexible. For example, Panel (b) in Figure 5 shows the evolution of output growth if we
only feed the monetary policy shock into the model, while shutting down all other shocks.
As expected, we see that the monetary policy shock would have no eﬀect on output. As
prices and wages become rigid as in the data, however, output starts moving about. What
is particularly noteworthy here is that output drops most – as expected – during the Volcker
disinﬂation period in the early 1980s. Thus ﬂexible prices/wages would have contributed to
economic stability in that period, that is, the U.S. could have avoided the monetary driven
recession altogether which is consistent with the overall picture for aggregate output growth
in Panel (a). A similar pattern can be seen for other demand shocks. In particular, we see
that risk premium shocks have no eﬀect if there are no nominal frictions while exogenous
spending shocks and investment speciﬁc shocks have some eﬀect, but of a smaller magnitude
than if the model has the nominal rigidities of the extent observed in the data.
    Turning to “supply shocks,” we see in Figure 5, Panels (f)-(h), that output growth is
in general more volatile if prices/wages are ﬂexible, which is consistent with our theoretical
results given the estimated policy rule. We see in particular that in the 1970s output would
have been more volatile in the counterfactual analysis, consistent with the view that supply
shocks were predominant during that period. The supply shocks in the estimated model are
the productivity shock and the price and wage markup shocks as seen in Panels (f)-(h).
    While looking at a counterfactual path based on smoothed shocks is instructive, it is also
helpful to compute the unconditional standard deviation of output growth in the model,
given our estimates of the parameters and various shocks.23 We do this in Table 6, where we
include the results for both the case when only prices are ﬂexible as well as the case when
both wages and prices are ﬂexible. The table conﬁrms that we obtain the same results in
the extended model as in the analytical exercise and that it holds either when we assume
that only prices are ﬂexible or if both wages and prices are ﬂexible. Since our estimates
imply a responsive monetary policy (that is, the Taylor coeﬃcient is relatively high), we ﬁnd
 23
      Here we report the standard deviation of quarterly output growth.



                                                    33
that had prices/wages been ﬂexible, aggregate volatility would have increased for “supply”
shocks, that is, for productivity, price mark-up, and wage mark-up shocks. In contrast, it
would have decreased for “demand shocks,” that is, for risk-premium, investment-speciﬁc,
technology, exogenous spending, and monetary policy shocks. Again, note that with no
nominal rigidities, risk premium and monetary policy shocks do not have any real eﬀects at
all. These results suggest that the mechanisms we uncovered in the analytical section are
robust to extending the model to an estimated medium-scale macro model.
    Moreover, Table 6 emphasizes that behind our aggregate result of increased output growth
volatility is the feature that the volatility of output growth is particularly sensitive to changes
in price/wage stickiness for the three supply shocks.24 These shocks are precisely the ones
that lead to greater volatility of output growth when prices/wages become more ﬂexible under
the estimated monetary policy reaction function. Their eﬀect dominates the reduction in
output growth volatility due to other demand and policy shocks. Since these shocks are
at the heart of the quantitative results, it is worth exploring their interpretation in more
detail. It is also interesting to conduct some counterfactual experiments with alternative
monetary policy rules since the monetary policy reaction function is also an integral part of
our analysis.

The Role of Markup Shocks The role of markup shocks in the Smets-Wouter model
has come under considerable criticism in recent years. Chari et al. (2009), for example,
argue that wage markup shocks are too volatile, and do not have a plausible economic
identiﬁcation/interpretation. It is therefore worth better understanding the role of these
shocks for our results. To do so, here we run our counterfactual simulation in the Smets-
Wouters model by explicitly eliminating these shocks one at a time and then altogether. In
the next section, instead of shutting them down, we then go on to identify these shocks more
explicitly.
   The bottom part of Table 6 shows the eﬀect on output volatility once we exclude each of
the markup shocks from the model. The thought experiment we run is the following: Suppose
we shut down one or both of the “questionable” structural shocks and simulate our model
again excluding this shock while keeping the rest of the parameters at estimated values. How
does the model behave as we increase price and wage ﬂexibility? As the table shows, output
volatility increases as prices become perfectly ﬂexible even if both of the markup shocks are
  24
     Note that this does not mean that at the estimated values, the price and wage markup shocks are
dominant in explaining output growth variance. Unconditionally, they explain 10% and 15% of the variance
respectively. It is just that the change in variance is sensitive to change in nominal ﬂexibility for these shocks.


                                                        34
shut down. Recall that even if both shocks are shut down, there is still an important supply
shock in the model, namely technology shock, and this shock is important enough to still
generate an overall increase in volatility. If both wage and prices are ﬂexible, however (this
is the last line in the table) then output volatility goes down. In other words: under this
speciﬁcation of complete nominal ﬂexibility, technology shocks are not enough to generate
an increase in output volatility in the model given the presence of demand shocks. The table
reveals, however, that either one of these shocks is enough to generate an increase in output
volatility in the model, even if there is complete nominal ﬂexibility. Finally, we can ask the
following question, rather than shutting down both markup shocks: how large would they
need to be – relative to the baseline estimation – to generate an increase in output volatility
if both prices and wages are ﬂexible? In simulating the model we ﬁnd that the standard
deviation of the shock innovations need to be at approximately 15 percent of their estimated
values to generate an overall increase in output growth volatility.
    While the thought experiments above are instructive, and do suggest that we can even
shut down one of the markup shocks (such as the wage markup shock which has been subject
to the greatest criticism) completely and maintain the basic overall quantitative result, it
can also be somewhat misleading. Why? Because as the table reveals, then if we shut down
one of the shocks in the model – even if we think it might be questionable – the model is then
not generating the same amount of volatility for output growth. For example, the model
only generates 0.84 percent (unconditional) standard deviation in output growth when both
markups are shut down relative to 0.98 in the baseline. A better approach might be to re-
estimate the model while eliminating or providing better identiﬁcation of the questionable
shocks. By doing so, we ensure that the volatility we see in the data then gets loaded onto
some other component in the model. This is the strategy we adopt in the next section.
Before doing that, however, we ﬁrst assess the role of the monetary policy rule next.

Alternative Policy Rules One underlying assumption in our counterfactual examples
in this section is that the policy rule remains unchanged even as prices and wages become
more ﬂexible. This assumption is less troublesome than one might think at ﬁrst glance,
since if both prices and wages are fully ﬂexible, then the monetary policy rule has no eﬀects,
since monetary policy becomes irrelevant. This may matter, however, when we make only
prices ﬂexible as we do in some of our experiments. For this reason, we include in Table
7 three alternative policy rules informed by our analytical sections: involving output gap
and inﬂation, output gap growth and inﬂation, and ﬁnally output gap, wage growth, and


                                              35
inﬂation.25 In this table, we report results when we simulate the model when the central
bank follows such a targeting rule using values for the targeting rule parameters based on the
analytical section.26 Overall, the qualitative result are unchanged, output growth volatility
again increases under this policy speciﬁcation as we make only prices ﬂexible (again recall
that the monetary policy speciﬁcation is irrelevant when both wages and prices are ﬂexible).


4.2     Alternative Estimations of Wage and Price Markup Shocks
We now estimate two alternative models suggested in the literature that provide a better
identiﬁcation and interpretation of the wage and price markup shocks, and assess if our
major quantitative results continue to hold. We ﬁnd that our results continue to hold or
even strengthen.

4.2.1    Gali-Smets-Wouters Model

A prominent model that explicitly addresses the questionable wage markup shock is that
of Gali et al. (2011). Since we do not change the model, we refer the reader to the Gali
et al. (2011) paper for a detailed description of the model and in Appendix E we report
the log-linearized equilibrium conditions. Brieﬂy, in this model, the wage markup shock in
the Smets-Wouters model is decomposed into three diﬀerent parts by the introduction of a
new observable variable, namely unemployment and by allowing for measurement errors in
the wage series. The previous wage markup can now be split into a labor supply shock, a
measurement error, and again a conventional wage markup shock.
   We report the priors and the posterior estimates of the parameters obtained using the
same data as in Gali et al. (2011) in Appendix E and focus here on the counterfactual result.
Table 8 shows that in this model, the standard deviation of quarterly output growth also
goes up when either only prices or both prices and wages become ﬂexible.27 The second
part of the table also presents a similar exercise as in Table 6, that is, it asks if output
volatility still goes up with nominal ﬂexibility if we shut down the markup shocks. In all
cases, output volatility goes up, even if both markups shocks and the labor supply shock are
shut down. The reason for this somewhat stronger result than in the baseline model is that
in this estimated model, productivity shocks now play a somewhat larger role than before,
  25
     Here, the potential output we use is the output that would prevail in the case of ﬂexible price and wages
and the absence of the two markup shocks.
  26
     The rest of the parameter values are ﬁxed at estimated values.
  27
     Again, we report unconditional moments based on our estimated parameter values.



                                                     36
so that even if all other supply shocks are shut down, it remains the case the output growth
volatility goes up as nominal rigidities go to zero.
    A very appealing feature of this estimated model is that the measurement error takes up a
large fraction of the high-frequency variation in the previously estimated wage markup shock,
a point also illustrated in Justiniano et al. (2013). Accordingly the standard deviation of the
wage markup is more than 100 times smaller in this model than in the baseline Smets-Wouters
model, thus rendering it less subject to the Chari et al. (2009) criticism. Interestingly, even
if this means that the wage markup shock is much smaller, our results become even stronger
and more robust under this speciﬁcation as the quantitative results above reveal.

4.2.2    deWalque-Smets-Wouters Model

Another approach that reinterprets markup shocks is the one proposed by de Walque et al.
(2006). In that model, price-markup variation can be reinterpreted as sector-speciﬁc produc-
tivity shocks. In particular, that model does not have any price-markup shock but instead
features a ﬂexible price sector that is hit with a sector-speciﬁc productivity shock. This
productivity shock in the ﬂexible price sector then aﬀects the model in a similar manner
to the price markup shock in a one-sector model. In Appendix F we provide full details
of a two-sector medium scale model in the spirit of de Walque et al. (2006), including the
complete set-up and optimization problem of the agents, the non-linear equilibrium condi-
tions, as well as the log-linearized equilibrium conditions. We estimate this model using the
same data series as in Smets and Wouters (2007). Appendix F contains more details on the
estimation as well as the priors and posterior estimates of the model parameters.
    Table 9 shows the results based on our counterfactual experiments in this two-sector
model. Again, we see that output volatility goes up as either prices or both prices and
wages become fully ﬂexible. We also observe that even if we shut down the labor markup
shock, then the result is still maintained for price ﬂexibility. In this case, the only supply
shocks in the model are aggregate and sector speciﬁc productivity shocks. Output growth
volatility does go down, however, without labor markup shocks when both prices and wages
are ﬂexible, as shown in Table 6.


5       Conclusion
In this paper, we study the aggregate implications in a DSGE model of increased price and/or
wage ﬂexibility. Our analytical results highlight the importance of the source of shocks,

                                              37
the modeling of monetary policy, and the general equilibrium environment in assessing the
aggregate implications of increased price ﬂexibility. In particular, when monetary policy is
not responsive enough to inﬂation, output volatility goes up in the case of demand shocks
while output volatility goes up in the case of supply shocks regardless of the monetary policy
reaction function. Moreover, welfare can decrease with increased price ﬂexibility for both
demand and supply shocks if monetary policy is not very responsive to inﬂation. We also
show several instances where welfare can be lower with increased price/wage ﬂexibility, even
when monetary policy is conducted optimally. These cases arise in the face of markup shocks
or large negative demand shocks (which drive the economy to a liquidity trap) in a model
with price stickiness, and in the face of standard productivity shocks in a model with price
and wage stickiness.
    In a quantitative exercise using an estimated DSGE model and U.S. data, we ﬁnd that
conditional on the estimated values of the structural parameters and shocks, increased
price/wage ﬂexibility would indeed have been destabilizing. This result is maintained in
several variations of the popular Smets-Wouters model. The key reason for this conclusion
is the important role played by supply shocks, both eﬃcient and ineﬃcient, in the estimated
model. For this result to be overturned, we suspect the model would need to be amended
in such a way as to give demand shocks a greater role in generating output ﬂuctuations.
Further research may very well move the state-of-the-art DSGE models into this direction.
    While the following two points are a bit speculative, we believe the mechanism we have
uncovered is likely to explain at least two other empirical phenomena. First, our paper may
shed some light on why the Great Recession triggered a far smaller drop in output than the
U.S. economy experienced during the Great Depression: the Great Recession was associated
with a relatively modest decline in inﬂation, while the Great Depression was characterized
by excessive deﬂation, and the model suggests the former should trigger a smaller drop in
output than the latter. Second, our model may shed light on cross-country variation in output
volatility. One important factor there may be that in certain countries monetary policy is
relatively unstable, which may trigger prices to be more ﬂexible. The model suggests that
if certain shocks are driving the business cycle, then this may be one factor in explaining
cross-country variations in output volatility.




                                             38
References
Bils, M. and P. J. Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 112, 947–985.

Blanchard, O. and J. Galı́ (2007): “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian
 Model,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 35–65.

Calvo, G. A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 12, 383–398.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2009): “New Keynesian Models:
 Not Yet Useful for Policy Analysis,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1,
 242–66.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011): “When Is the Government
 Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 78 – 121.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113,
 1–45.

De Long, J. B. and L. H. Summers (1986): “Is Increased Price Flexibility Stabilizing?”
 American Economic Review, 76, 1031–44.

de Walque, G., F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2006): “Price Shocks in General Equi-
  librium: Alternative Speciﬁcations,” CESifo Economic Studies, 52, 153–176.

Eggertsson, G. B. (2008): “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression,” Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 98, 1476–1516.

——— (2010): “What Fiscal Policy is Eﬀective at Zero Interest Rates?” in NBER Macro-
 conomics Annual 2010, Volume 25, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER
 Chapters.

Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2003): “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
 Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34, 139–235.

Fisher, I. (1923): “The Business Cycle Largely a Dance of the Dollar,” Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 18, 1024–1028.

                                         39
——— (1925): “Our Unstable Dollar and the So-Called Business Cycle,” Journal of the
 American Statistical Association, 20, 179–202.

Galı́, J. (2011): “The Return Of The Wage Phillips Curve,” Journal of the European
 Economic Association, 9, 436–461.

——— (2012): “Notes for a New Guide to Keynes (I): Wages, Aggregate Demand, and
 Employment,” NBER Working Papers 18651, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.

Gali, J., F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2011): “Unemployment in an Estimated New
 Keynesian Model,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, Volume 26, National Bureau
 of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 329–360.

Geweke, J. (1999): “Using Simulation Methods for Bayesian Econometric Models: Infer-
 ence, Development, and Communication,” Econometric Reviews, 18, 1–73.

Gopinath, G. and R. Rigobon (2008): “Sticky Borders,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 123, 531–575.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2013): “Is There a Trade-Oﬀ
  between Inﬂation and Output Stabilization?” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 5, 1–31.

Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, London:
 Macmillan.

Kimball, M. S. (1995): “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,”
 Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27, 1241–77.

Klenow, P. J. and O. Kryvtsov (2008): “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing:
 Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Inﬂation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 863–904.

Klenow, P. J. and B. A. Malin (2010): “Microeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting,”
 NBER Working Papers 15826, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008): “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of
 Menu Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1415–1464.




                                          40
Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford (1997): “An Optimization-Based Econometric
 Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual
 1997, Volume 12, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 297–361.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
 Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586–606.

Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
  Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195–214.

Tobin, J. (1975): “Keynesian Models of Recession and Depression,” American Economic
 Review Proceedings, 65, 195–202.

Werning, I. (2011): “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Working
 paper, MIT.

Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
 Princeton University Press.



6    Tables

                        Table 1: Illustrative Parameter Values


                   Parameter   Value   Parameter        Value
                       β       0.99        σ              1
                       κ       0.02        θ              10
                       ρj       0.9     θw = θp           10
                       γ        0.7     φy only         0.125
                       ν         1       φπ ; φy 1.5, 0.2; 0.125, 20




                                          41
Table 2: Prior Distribution of Structural Parameters


 Parameters     Domain   Density   Prior Mean   Prior Stdev
      ϕ            R     Normal        4.00         1.50
     σc            R     Normal        1.50         0.37
      h          [0,1)    Beta         0.70         0.10
     ξw          [0,1)    Beta         0.50         0.10
     σl            R     Normal        2.00         0.75
     ξp          [0,1)    Beta         0.50         0.10
     ιw          [0,1)    Beta         0.50         0.15
     ιp          [0,1)    Beta         0.50         0.15
      ψ          [0,1)    Beta         0.50         0.15
      Φ            R     Normal        1.25         0.12
     rπ            R     Normal        1.50         0.25
      ρ          [0,1)    Beta         0.75         0.10
     ry            R     Normal        0.12         0.05
    rΔy            R     Normal        0.12         0.05
      π           R+     Gamma         0.62         0.10
100(β −1 − 1)     R+     Gamma         0.25         0.10
      l            R     Normal        0.00         2.00
      γ            R     Normal        0.40         0.10
      α            R     Normal        0.30         0.05




   Table 3: Prior Distribution of Shock Processes


 Parameters     Domain   Density   Prior Mean   Prior Stdev
     ρa          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     ρb          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     ρg          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     ρI          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     ρr          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     ρp          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     ρw          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
    ρga          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     μp          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     μw          [0,1)    Beta         0.5          0.2
     σa           R+      InvG         0.10         0.5
     σb           R+      InvG         0.10          2
     σg           R+      InvG         0.10          2
     σI           R+      InvG         0.10          2
     σr           R+      InvG         0.10          2
     σp           R+      InvG         4.00          4
     σw           R+      InvG         5.00          5




                             42
Table 4: Posterior Estimates of Structural Parameters


    Parameters     Prior   Posterior   Probability Interval
                   Mean      Mean              90%
         ϕ         4.00     5.4878      [3.8117 7.1473]
        σc         1.50     1.3444      [1.1319 1.5553]
         h         0.70     0.7173       [0.6469 0.7892]
        ξw         0.50     0.6184      [0.5182 0.7220]
        σl         2.00     1.4825      [0.6539 2.2722]
        ξp         0.50     0.6124      [0.5396 0.6833]
        ιw         0.50     0.6143      [0.4158 0.8182]
         ψ         0.50     0.5712      [0.3912 0.7492]
         Φ         1.25     1.6149      [1.4869 1.7426]
        rπ         1.50     2.0701      [1.7830 2.3554]
         ρ         0.75     0.7936       [0.7516 0.8367]
        ry         .125     0.0843      [0.0474 0.1209]
       rΔy         .125     0.2169      [0.1699 0.2638]
         π         .625     0.8310       [0.6115 0.9660]
   100(β −1 − 1)   0.25      0.1690     [0.6580 1.0013]
         l         0.00     -0.0723     [-1.8855 1.7663]
         γ         0.40     0.4276      [0.4033 0.4520]
         α         0.30     0.1914      [0.1620 0.2203]




  Table 5: Posterior Estimates of Shock Processes


    Parameters     Prior   Posterior   Probability Interval
                   Mean      Mean              90%
       ρa           0.5     0.9563       [0.9376 0.9754]
       ρb           0.5     0.2041       [0.0651 0.3349]
       ρg           0.5     0.9751      [0.9614 0.9890]
       ρI           0.5     0.7149      [0.6202 0.8130]
       ρr           0.5     0.1730      [0.0592 0.2817]
       ρp           0.5     0.9050       [0.8441 0.9705]
       ρw           0.5     0.9733      [0.9570 0.9899]
       ρga          0.5     0.5196      [0.3714 0.6666]
       μp           0.5     0.5587       [0.3699 0.7464]
       μw           0.5     0.8030       [0.7021 0.9055]
       σa          0.10     0.4568      [0.4107 0.5025]
       σb          0.10     0.2434      [0.2045 0.2821]
       σg          0.10     0.5285       [0.4773 0.5782]
       σI          0.10     0.4520      [0.3704 0.5322]
       σr          0.10     0.2494      [0.2233 0.2746]
       σp          4.00     3.8069      [2.0399 5.5395]
       σw          5.00     14.5539     [5.6942 23.5754]




                              43
                   Table 6: Price and Wage Flexibility Experiment


Shocks                                     Std Dev of Quarterly Output Growth
                          Baseline Nominal Stickiness Flexible Prices Flexible Prices and Wages
All                                 0.9848                2.1349                3.0881
Technology                          0.4037                0.6292                0.5291
Risk-premium                        0.4427                0.3656                0.0000
Govt-spending                       0.5036                0.4748                0.4409
Investment-speciﬁc                  0.3231                0.2555                0.2629
Monetary policy                     0.0592                0.0484                0.0000
Price markup                        0.3157                1.8481                1.2099
Wage markup                         0.3870                0.5653                2.7440
All except price markup             0.9328                1.0687                2.8412
All except wage markup              0.9056                2.0587                1.4168
All except both markup              0.8488                0.9070                0.7372




                     Table 7: Eﬀect of Diﬀerent Targeting Rules


Shocks                                     Std Dev of Quarterly Output Growth
                          Baseline Nominal Stickiness Flexible Prices Flexible Prices and Wages

Targeting rule with inﬂation and output gap
All                                 2.9780               17.7679               3.0881
All except both markup              0.9748                1.8649               0.7372

Targeting rule with inﬂation and output gap growth
All                                 1.6855               14.7131               3.0881
All except both markup              0.8763                1.7010               0.7372

Targeting rule with inﬂation, output gap, and wage growth
All                                  2.2391               14.9663              3.0881
All except both markup               0.8906                1.6841              0.7372




                                          44
Table 8: Price and Wage Flexibility Experiment in the Gali, Smets and Wouters Model


Shocks                                                  Std Dev of Quarterly Output Growth
                                                   Baseline        Flexible Prices Flexible Prices and
                                               Nominal Stickiness                        Wages
All                                                 0.9523             4.5469            9.5981
All   except   price markup                         0.9490             0.9963            2.8466
All   except   both markup                          0.9311             0.9757            1.0013
All   except   price markup and labor supply        0.9322             0.9791            2.8193
All   except   both markup and labor supply         0.9139             0.9581            0.9207




         Table 9: Price and Wage Flexibility Experiment in the Two-sector Model


Shocks                                        Std Dev of Quarterly Output Growth
                             Baseline Nominal Stickiness Flexible Prices Flexible Prices and Wages
All                                    1.1388                1.2501                2.8683
All except wage markup                 1.0932                1.1459                1.0435




                                               45
7    Figures




      (a) Responsive Monetary Policy, Demand Shock    (b) Non-Responsive Monetary Policy, Demand Shock




       (c) Responsive Monetary Policy, Supply Shock   (d) Non-Responsive Monetary Policy, Supply Shock

Figure 1: Eﬀect of Price Flexibility under Responsive and Non-Responsive Monetary Policy for Demand and
Supply Shocks
                                                    Variance of Output, Technology Shock                                                                                      Total Welfare Loss, Technology Shock
4.5                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                   i =φ Y + φ π                                                                                                                        i =φ Y + φ π
                                                                                    t   Y t  π t                                                                                                                       t        Y t      π t
                                                                                   it=φY(Yt−Yet )+    φππt                                                                                                             it=φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt

  4                                                                                it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt)                        45                                                                     it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt)
                                                                                                                         e             e                                                                                                                             e                 e
                                                                                   it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yt )+ φππt)+φdYd(Yt−Yt )                                                                                   it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yt )+ φππt)+φdYd(Yt−Yt )

                                                                                                                                                40
3.5


                                                                                                                                                35
  3

                                                                                                                                                30
2.5

                                                                                                                                                25

  2
                                                                                                                                                20

1.5
                                                                                                                                                15


  1
                                                                                                                                                10


0.5                                                                                                                                             5



  0                                                                                                                                             0
   1            2              3                4              5              6            7                     8                 9       10    1        2       3       4                5                   6                 7                       8                     9           10
                                                                   Quarters                                                                                                                        Quarters




                                                      Variance of Output, Markup Shock                                                                                            Total Welfare Loss, Markup Shock
 0.4                                                                                                                                            5.5
                                                                                    i =φ Y + φ π                                                                                                                           i =φ Y + φ π
                                                                                    t    Y t  π t                                                                                                                          t     Y t       π t
                                                                                    it=φY(Yt−Yet )+       φππt                                                                                                             it=φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt

                                                                                    i =ρ i     +(1−ρ )*(φ (Y −Ye)+ φ π )                         5                                                                         i =ρ i        +φ (Y −Ye)+ φ π
0.35                                                                                t    i t−1        i      Y       t   t   π t                                                                                           t     i t−1     Y     t   t           π t
                                                                                    it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt)+φdYd(Yt−Yet )                                                                                    it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt)+φdYd(Yt−Yet )

                                                                                                                                                4.5

 0.3

                                                                                                                                                 4


0.25
                                                                                                                                                3.5



 0.2                                                                                                                                             3



                                                                                                                                                2.5
0.15


                                                                                                                                                 2

 0.1

                                                                                                                                                1.5


0.05
                                                                                                                                                 1



  0                                                                                                                                             0.5
   1            2              3                4              5              6            7                     8                 9       10      1      2       3       4                 5                  6                  7                      8                         9       10
                                                                   Quarters                                                                                                                         Quarters




                                                    Variance of Output, Preference Shock                                                                                          Total Welfare Loss, Preference Shock
1.4                                                                                                                                              10
       it=φYYt+ φππt                                                                                                                                                                                                       it=φYYt+ φππt
       it=φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt                                                                                                                                                                                                it=φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt

       i =ρ i   +(1−ρ )*(φ (Y −Ye)+ φ π )                                                                                                            9                                                                     i =ρ i        +(1−ρ )*(φ (Y −Ye)+ φ π )
       t   i t−1       i   Y   t  t       π t                                                                                                                                                                               t    i t−1           i       Y       t       t   π t
1.2    it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yet )+   φππt)+φdYd(Yt−Yet )                                                                                                                                                               it=ρi it−1+(1−ρi)*(φY(Yt−Yet )+ φππt)+φdYd(Yt−Yet )


                                                                                                                                                     8

  1

                                                                                                                                                     7



0.8
                                                                                                                                                     6



                                                                                                                                                     5
0.6



                                                                                                                                                     4

0.4

                                                                                                                                                     3


0.2
                                                                                                                                                     2



  0                                                                                                                                                  1
   1            2              3                4              5              6            7                     8                 9       10         1       2       3       4                5                   6                 7                       8                     9        10
                                                                   Quarters                                                                                                                         Quarters




                              Figure 2: Variance of Output and Welfare under Alternative Policy Rules
                                                                                −4
                                                                             x 10    Non−Responsive Monetary Policy                                                      Responsive Monetary Policy
                                                              1.5                                                                                             5

                                                                                                                                                              4




                                  Variance of Output
                                                          1.45
                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                              1.4
                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                          1.35
                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                              1.3                                                                                             0
                                                                 0                    0.05        0.1         0.15                             0.2             0     0.05                        0.1   0.15   0.2
                                                                                                   κ                                                                                              κ
                                                                                −4
                                                                             x 10
                                                              1.5                                                                                             5




                                  Variance of Ouput Gap
                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                          1.45
                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                              1.4
                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                          1.35
                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                              1.3                                                                                             0
                                                                 0                    0.05        0.1         0.15                             0.2             0     0.05                        0.1   0.15   0.2
                                                                                                   κ                                                                                              κ
                                                                                −4
                                                                             x 10
                                                                         6                                                                                0.8

                                                                                                                                                          0.6




                                                          Welfare Loss
                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                                         0                                                                                    0
                                                                          0           0.05        0.1         0.15                             0.2             0     0.05                        0.1   0.15   0.2
                                                                                                   κ                                                                                              κ




Figure 3: Variance of Output, and Welfare Loss as a Function of Flexibility with Technology
Shocks


                                                                                                                                                     −3
                                                                                                                                               x 10
                                                           1.14                                                                          3.5                                                  0.016


                                                           1.12                                                                           3                                                   0.014


                                                                                                                                                                                              0.012
                                                                         1.1                                                             2.5
                                                                                                                Variance of Output Gap




                                                                                                                                                                         Total Welfare Loss
                           Variance of Output




                                                                                                                                                                                               0.01
                                                           1.08                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.008
                                                           1.06                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.006

                                                           1.04                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.004

                                                           1.02                                                                          0.5                                                  0.002


                                                                              1                                                           0                                                       0
                                                                               0          0.1           0.2                                0          0.1          0.2                             0    0.1    0.2
                                                                                             κ                                                            κ                                              κ




Figure 4: Variance of Output and Welfare Loss under Discretion as a Function of Flexibility
with Technology Shocks




                                                                                                                                                 48
                                                       Actual and Counterfactual Output Growth                                                                                                          Output Growth due to Monetary Shocks under
                                             15%
                                                           under Flexible Prices and Wages                                                                                                                       Flexible Prices and Wages
                                                                                                                                                                                                 4%


                                             10%                                                                                                                                                 3%




                                                                                                                                                                Annualized Output Growth
                                                                                                                                                                                                 3%
                  Annualized Output Growth




                                              5%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2%


                                              0%                                                                                                                                                 2%
                                                    66

                                                    68

                                                    70

                                                    72

                                                    74

                                                    76

                                                    78

                                                    80

                                                    82

                                                    84

                                                    86

                                                    88

                                                    90

                                                    92

                                                    94

                                                    96

                                                    98

                                                    00

                                                    02

                                                    04
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1%
                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  19

                                                  20

                                                  20

                                                  20
                                             -5%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1%

                                                                                                                                                                                                 0%
                                             -10%




                                                                                                                                                                                                    66

                                                                                                                                                                                                    68

                                                                                                                                                                                                    70

                                                                                                                                                                                                    72

                                                                                                                                                                                                    74

                                                                                                                                                                                                    76

                                                                                                                                                                                                    78

                                                                                                                                                                                                    80

                                                                                                                                                                                                    82

                                                                                                                                                                                                    84

                                                                                                                                                                                                    86

                                                                                                                                                                                                    88

                                                                                                                                                                                                    90

                                                                                                                                                                                                    92

                                                                                                                                                                                                    94

                                                                                                                                                                                                    96

                                                                                                                                                                                                    98

                                                                                                                                                                                                    00

                                                                                                                                                                                                    02

                                                                                                                                                                                                    04
                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                             -15%          Historical Data               Counterfactual Data, Flexible Prices and Wages                                                                      Monetary Shock, Flexible Prices and Wages                    Monetary Shock, Base Case



                                                                                                       (a)                                                                                                                                                    (b)
                                                     Output Growth due to Risk Premium Shocks                                                                                                                   Output Growth due to Investment-Specific
                                                          under Flexible Prices and Wages                                                                                                                        Shocks under Flexible Prices and Wages
                                4%                                                                                                                                                               4%

                                4%                                                                                                                                                               3%




                                                                                                                                                                      Annualized Output Growth
Annualized Output Growth




                                3%                                                                                                                                                               3%

                                3%                                                                                                                                                               2%

                                2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2%

                                2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1%
                                1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1%
                                1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0%
                                0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                      66

                                                                                                                                                                                                            68

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       72

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             74

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   76

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        78

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   82

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         84

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               86

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    88

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               92

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     94

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           96

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                98

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                             66

                                                    68

                                                          70

                                                               72

                                                                    74

                                                                          76

                                                                               78

                                                                                    80

                                                                                           82

                                                                                                 84

                                                                                                      86

                                                                                                           88

                                                                                                                 90

                                                                                                                      92

                                                                                                                           94

                                                                                                                                 96

                                                                                                                                      98

                                                                                                                                           00

                                                                                                                                                 02

                                                                                                                                                      04
                                             19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                         19

                                                                              19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Investment-Specific Shock, Flexible Prices and Wages
                                                    Risk Premium Shock, Flexible Prices and Wages                Risk Premium Shock, Base Case                                                                                Investment-Specific Shock, Base Case


                                                                                                       (c)                                                                                                                                                    (d)
                                                    Output Growth due to Government Spending                                                                                                                 Output Growth due to Technology Shocks
                                                      Shocks under Flexible Prices and Wages                                                                                                                     under Flexible Prices and Wages
                                5%                                                                                                                                                               5%

                                4%
Annualized Output Growth




                                4%                                                                                                                                                               4%
                                                                                                                                                           Annualized Output Growth




                                3%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 3%
                                3%

                                2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2%
                                2%

                                1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1%
                                1%

                                0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0%
                                             66

                                                    68

                                                          70

                                                               72

                                                                    74

                                                                          76

                                                                               78

                                                                                    80

                                                                                           82

                                                                                                 84

                                                                                                      86

                                                                                                           88

                                                                                                                 90

                                                                                                                      92

                                                                                                                           94

                                                                                                                                 96

                                                                                                                                      98

                                                                                                                                           00

                                                                                                                                                 02

                                                                                                                                                      04




                                                                                                                                                                                                      66

                                                                                                                                                                                                            68

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       72

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  76

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        78

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  82

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              86

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    88

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              92

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          96

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                98

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                             19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                         19

                                                                              19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                    Government Spending Shock, Flexible Prices and Wages                                                                      -1%
                                                                    Government Spending Shock, Base Case                                                                                                    Technology Shock, Flexible Prices and Wages                   Technology Shock, Base Case



                                                                                                       (e)                                                                                                                                                    (f)
                                                      Output Growth due to Price Markup Shocks                                                                                                              Output Growth due to Wage Markup Shocks
                                                           under Flexible Prices and Wages                                                                                                                       under Flexible Prices and Wages
                                         5%                                                                                                                                                      6%

                                                                                                                                                                                                 5%
                                         4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 4%
                                         3%
  Annualized Output Growth




                                                                                                                                                                   Annualized Output Growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                 3%
                                         2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2%

                                         1%                                                                                                                                                      1%

                                                                                                                                                                                                 0%
                                         0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                       66

                                                                                                                                                                                                            68

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       72



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   76

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        78

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   82



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               86

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    88

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               92



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           96

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                98

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             74




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         84




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     94




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 04




                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1%
                                              66

                                                     68

                                                          70

                                                               72



                                                                          76

                                                                               78

                                                                                     80

                                                                                            82



                                                                                                      86

                                                                                                            88

                                                                                                                 90

                                                                                                                      92



                                                                                                                                 96

                                                                                                                                      98

                                                                                                                                            00

                                                                                                                                                 02
                                                                     74




                                                                                                 84




                                                                                                                            94




                                                                                                                                                      04




                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                             19

                                                    19

                                                         19

                                                               19



                                                                         19

                                                                               19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                          19



                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                      19



                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                    19




                                                                                                19




                                                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                      20




                                   -1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -2%
                                   -2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -3%

                                   -3%                                                                                                                                                           -4%
                                                    Price Markup Shock, Flexible Prices and Wages                Price Markup Shock, Base Case                                                             Wage Markup Shock, Flexible Prices and Wages                   Wage Markup Shock, Base Case



                                                                                                       (g)                                                                                                                                                    (h)

                                                         Figure 5: Counterfactual and Actual Output Growth, All Shocks and by Individual Shocks
