NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEARCH FRICTIONS AND MARKET POWER IN NEGOTIATED PRICE MARKETS
Jason Allen
Robert Clark
Jean-François Houde
Working Paper 19883
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19883
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

This research has benefited from the financial support of the NSF (SES-1024840). We thank the Canada
Mortgage and Housing Corporation and Genworth Financial for providing us with the data. We also
thank the Altus-Group. We thank the many seminar participants who have provided feedback on this
paper. We have greatly benefited from discussions with Ken Hendricks, Ali Hortaçsu, Matt Lewis,
Jack Porter, Alan Sorensen, and Andrew Sweeting. The views in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Canada. All errors are our own. This paper has
previously circulated under the title: “Price negotiation in differentiated product markets: The case
of insured mortgages in Canada”. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jason Allen, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Search Frictions and Market Power in Negotiated Price Markets
Jason Allen, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde
NBER Working Paper No. 19883
February 2014, Revised April 2014
JEL No. L13,L41,L81
ABSTRACT
This paper develops and estimates a search and bargaining model designed to measure the welfare
loss associated with frictions in oligopoly markets with negotiated prices. We use the model to quantify
the consumer surplus loss induced by the presence of search frictions in the Canadian mortgage market,
and evaluate the relative importance of market power, inefficient allocation, and direct search costs
in explaining the loss. Our results suggest that search frictions reduce consumer surplus by almost
$20 per month per consumer, and that 17% of this reduction can be associated with discrimination,
30% with inefficient matching, and the remainder with the search cost.
Jason Allen
Bank of Canada
234 Wellington Street
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9
jallen@bankofcanada.ca
Robert Clark
Institute of Applied Economics
HEC Montreal
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal (Quebec) H3T 2A7
Canada
Robert.Clark@hec.ca

Jean-François Houde
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
3008 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
houde@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

In a large number of markets, prices are determined through a negotiation process between buyers
and sellers. Our focus in this paper is on one such environment: the Canadian mortgage market.
In this market, national lenders post common interest rates, but in-branch loan officers have considerable freedom to negotiate interest rates directly with borrowers. Consistent with this practice,
less than 25% of new home buyers pay the posted-rate, and observed financial characteristics of
borrowers explain roughly 40% of the variance of the interest rate spread between transaction
rates and the cost of funds.1 Price negotiation is not unique to the Canadian mortgage market.
For instance, while U.S. mortgage lenders post market-specific interest rates, Hall and Woodward
(2012) document that brokers charge different closing fees for seemingly homogenous services, by
bargaining directly with borrowers.
In negotiated-price markets, transaction prices are determined by the relative bargaining leverage of buyers and sellers. On the seller side, leverage depends on the spread between the posted
price and costs. For buyers, leverage is created by the threat of obtaining competitive offers. Importantly, the credibility of this threat depends on the level of competition and product differentiation between sellers, and on the cost of searching for multiple offers. In our setting, search is costly
for most consumers both because of the difficulty of obtaining information about prices, and because of the time cost associated with haggling with multiple sellers. In addition, most consumers
combine the majority of their financial services, including their mortgage, with the same bank, and
face sizable switching costs. Therefore, while mortgage contracts are homogenous across lenders,
banks offer differentiated services.
The main objective of this paper is to quantify the welfare impact of search frictions in this class
of markets. To do so, we build and estimate an equilibrium model of bargaining with asymmetric information that incorporates switching costs and imperfect competition into a setting where
consumers endogenously choose whether or not to search for multiple offers. This allows us to
disentangle price differences caused by price discrimination from those caused by cost differences,
and to estimate the distribution of costs for consumers of haggling over prices. We use the estimated model to measure the effect of eliminating search frictions on consumer surplus, and to
analyze how competition attenuates these frictions in determining the distribution of negotiated
prices.
Despite its prevalence, this form of pricing has largely been ignored by empirical researchers.
The main contribution of this paper is therefore to propose a tractable model that incorporates
three key features shared by most negotiated price markets: (i) the existence of search frictions, (ii)
market concentration and differentiated products, and (iii) bargaining between buyers and sellers.
Although previous papers have studied related questions with models that incorporate some of
1

Prices are dispersed despite the fact that banks are fully insured against default risks, and consumers purchase
homogeneous mortgage contracts. See Allen et al. (2013b) for a descriptive analysis of dispersion in this market.

1

these features, none have combined all three in a coherent framework. First, while there exists an
extensive literature in Industrial Organization (IO) on price competition in differentiated product
markets, it has so far ignored dispersion in transaction prices across consumers, and/or abstracted
from the price-setting mechanism actually used in the market.2 Second, the search literature in IO
has focused mostly on models in which firms offer random posted-prices to consumers irrespective of their characteristics, thereby ignoring the presence of price discrimination.3 Third, there
is a growing empirical literature evaluating market power in markets with price negotiations, using frictionless bargaining models with perfect information.4 Abstracting from information and
search frictions implies that negotiations never fail, and allocations are efficient. Finally, there is a
large literature in labor economics and finance studying search and matching frictions in markets
with bargaining.5 However, the models used in these literatures do not address the fact that different buyers face different market structures, and, as a result, would mis-measure the bargaining
leverage of consumers in concentrated markets such as retail banking.
The closest paper to our’s in the search and bargaining literature is Gavazza (2013), who studies the secondary business-aircraft market, and measures the misallocation of planes caused by
the presence of search frictions relative to a perfectly competitive Walrasian market. In contrast,
we evaluate the welfare cost of search frictions relative to a counter-factual environment in which
consumers are able to freely obtain a large number of quotes, while still facing an imperfectly competitive market. This allows us to quantify the consumer surplus loss due to the presence of price
discrimination and market power, which is a first-order concern in many negotiated price markets.
Indeed, a large number of papers have tested for the presence of price discrimination by analyzing negotiated prices in the markets for new cars (Goldberg (1996), Scott-Morton et al. (2001), and
Busse et al. (2006)), hospital equipments (Grennan (2013)), and health insurance (Dafny (2010)).
Our model allows us to quantify the importance of search frictions in generating such price discrimination opportunities.
We build a two-period search model, in which incumbent banks can price discriminate based
on the expected value of their clients’ search opportunities. In particular, individual borrowers
are initially matched with their main financial institution (home bank) to obtain a quote, and can
then decide, based on their expected net gain from searching, whether or not to gather additional
quotes. If they reject the initial offer and choose to search, lenders located in their neighborhood
2
In their study of the demand for new automobiles Berry et al. (2004) use the median transaction price. Langer
(2011) exploits price differences across car buyers of different demographic groups in a model of third-degree price
discrimination, but abstracts from individual bargaining.
3
See for instance Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004), Hong and Shum (2006), and Wildenbeest (2011). There is also a
large literature in economics and marketing, devoted to measuring the magnitude of consumer search costs, using
exogenous price distributions (see for instance Sorensen (2001), De Los Santos et al. (2011), and Honka (2012)).
4
See for instance Grennan (2013), Lewis and Pflum (2013), and Gowrisankaran et al. (2013)). Crawford and Yurukoglu (2011) estimates a related model applied to the cable market.
5
The on-the-job search literature uses a similar price-setting mechanism, for instance Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002)
and Dey and Flynn (2005), but do not study concentrated markets with product differentiation.

2

compete via an English auction for the mortgage contract. This modeling strategy is related to
the search and bargaining models developed by Wolinsky (1987), Chatterjee and Lee (1998), and
Bester (1993), in which consumers negotiate with one firm, but can search across stores for better
prices.
In this framework, market power arises from three sources. First, the initial bank visited by
a consumer is in a quasi-monopoly position, and can tailor individual offers to reflect the consumer’s outside option. In addition, all lenders in our data-set offer multiple complementary
financial services. Therefore, to the extent that the cost of switching banks is non-negligible, home
banks offer a differentiated service, which reduces the bargaining leverage of consumers. Finally,
the small number of lenders available in the market allows banks to earn an additional profit
margin.
To estimate the model we use detailed administrative data on a large set of approved mortgages in Canada between 1999 and 2002. Our analysis focuses on individually negotiated contracts, thereby excluding transactions generated through intermediaries (e.g. mortgage brokers),
which account for about 25% of total transactions. These data provide information on features
of the mortgage, household characteristics (including place of residence), and market-level characteristics. An advantage of our setting is that all of the mortgage contracts in our sample are
insured by the government. This allows us to abstract from concerns related to the risk of default,
and focus on homogeneous contracts.
In order to quantify the magnitude of search costs, relative to other forms of loyalty, we supplement these mortgage-contract data with aggregate moments obtained from a survey of the
shopping behavior of new mortgage buyers. We use this auxiliary source of information to calculate the search probability across different demographic groups: city size, income group, region,
and new/previous home buyers.
The key parameters generating market power are those related to search and switching costs,
and the relative importance of cost differences across lenders. We estimate that firms face relatively homogeneous lending costs for the same borrower. In contrast, we estimate that borrowers
face significant search costs and loyalty-premium. We find that the median consumer in our data
faces an upfront a search cost of $1,028. In addition, consumers are willing to forego on average
$22 a month to stay with their home bank, and potentially avoid having to switch banks.
The presence of search costs and differentiation generates nearly 60% of the average positive
profit margins. The average profit margin above the marginal cost of lenders is estimated to be
slightly lower than 30 basis points (bps), which leads to a 4.31% average markup. Not surprisingly,
profit margins are also highly dispersed: the inter-decile range is equal to 55 bps, or about twice
the median margin. This corresponds to about 50% of the residual dispersion of transaction rates.
In order to quantify the welfare cost of search frictions, we perform a set of counter-factual
experiments in which we eliminate the search costs of consumers. The surplus loss associated

3

with search frictions originates from three sources: (i) misallocation of buyers and sellers, (ii)
price discrimination, and (iii) the direct cost of gathering multiple quotes. Our results suggest
that, overall, search frictions reduce average consumer surplus by almost $20 per month, over a
five years period. Approximately 17% of the loss in consumer surplus comes from the ability of
home banks to price discriminate with their initial quote. A further 30% is associated with the
misallocation of contracts, and 55% with the direct cost of searching.
Moreover, we find that the presence of a home-bank premium attenuates the effect of search
frictions by reducing search costs and improving allocation: by starting their search process with
the highest expected value firm, consumers reduce the extent of misallocation in the market. This
improvement in consumer surplus is present despite the fact that switching costs increase market
power. Similarly, the presence of a posted-rate limits the ability of firms to price discriminate, and
therefore reduces the welfare cost of search frictions.
To study the role of competition, we simulate counter-factual mergers in increasingly competitive markets. We find that as the number of firms in the market increases, the welfare loss from
price discrimination shrinks, but this benefit is more than offset by an increase in misallocation
and larger search costs.
In addition, our results show that the benefits of competition are not equally distributed across
consumers, due to the presence of heterogeneous search costs. In particular, eliminating a lender
significantly raises the rates paid by consumers at the bottom and middle of the rate distribution,
but has little effect on consumers at the top. As a result, we show that the dispersion of transaction
prices is increasing in the number of competitors in the market. This prediction is confirmed
empirically by Allen et al. (2013a). In that paper, we conduct a retrospective analysis of a merger
that took place in the same market, and find that the loss of a lender is associated with a 10% to
15% reduction in the residual dispersion of transaction rates.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents details on the Canadian mortgage market,
including market structure, contract types, and pricing strategies, and introduces our data sets.
Section 3 presents the model. Section 4 discusses the estimation strategy and Section 5 describes
the empirical results. Section 6 presents the counterfactuals. Finally, Section 7 concludes.

2
2.1

Data
Mortgage contracts and sample selection

Canada features two types of mortgage contracts – conventional, which are uninsured since they
have a low loan-to-value ratio, and high loan-to-value, which require insurance (for the lifetime of
the mortgage). Today, 80% of new home-buyers require mortgage insurance. The primary insurer
is the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC), a crown corporation with an explicit
guarantee from the federal government. During our sample period a private firm, Genworth
4

Table 1: Summary statistics on mortgage contracts in the selected sample
VARIABLES
Interest rate spread (bps)
Residual spread (bps)
Positive discounts (bps)
1(Discount=0)
Monthly payment ($)
Total loan ($/100K)
Income ($/100K)
FICO score
Switcher
1(Max. LTV)
1(Previous owner)
Number of FIs (5 KM)
HHI (5 KM)
Relative branch network

N
29,000
29,000
22,240
29,000
29,000
29,000
29,000
29,000
22,875
29,000
29,000
29,000
29,000
29,000

Mean
129
0
77.7
23.3
966
138
69.1
669
26.7
38.2
24.3
7.82
1800
1.46

SD
61.4
49.7
40
42.3
393
57.2
27.9
73.6
44.2
48.6
42.9
1.73
509
.945

P25
86.5
-32.1
50

P50
123
-2.96
75

P75
171
34.7
95

654
92.2
49.2
650

906
129
64.8
700

1219
176
82.8
750

7
1493
.84

8
1679
1.22

9
1918
1.83

Financial, also provided mortgage insurance, and had a government guarantee, although for only
90%. CMHC’s market share during our sample period averages around 80%. Both insurers use the
same guidelines for insuring mortgages, and charge the lenders an insurance premium, ranging
from 1.75 to 3.75% of the value of the loan, which is passed on by lenders to borrowers. Appendix
A describes the insurance rules, and defines all of the variables included in the data-set.6
Our main data-set is a sample of insured contracts from the Canada Mortgage and Housing
Corporation (CMHC), from January 1999 and October 2002. We obtained a 10% random sample
of all contracts from CMHC. The data-set contains information on 20 household/mortgage characteristics, including the financial characteristics of the contract (i.e. rate, loan-size, house price,
debt-ratio, risk-type), and some demographic characteristics (e.g. income, prior relationship with
the bank, residential status, dwelling type). In addition, we observe the location of the purchased
house up to the forward sortation area (FSA).7
We restrict our sample to contracts with homogenous terms. In particular, from the original
sample we select contracts that have the following characteristics: (i) 25 year amortization period,
(ii) 5 year fixed-rate term, (iii) newly issued mortgages (i.e. excluding refinancing and renewal),
(iii) contracts that were negotiated individually (i.e. without a broker), (iv) contracts without
missing values for key attributes (e.g. credit score, broker, and residential status).
The final sample includes 29,000 observations, or about 33% of the initial sample. 18% of the
initial sample contained missing characteristics; either risk type or business originator (i.e. branch
or broker). This is because CMHC started collecting these transaction characteristics systematically only in the second half of 1999. We also drop broker transactions, (28%), as well as short6

See also Allen et al. (2013b) for a detailed discussion of the data.
The FSA is the first half of a postal code. We observe nearly 1,300 FSA in the sample. While the average forward
sortation area (FSA) has a radius of 7.6 kilometers, the median is much lower at 2.6 kilometers.
7

5

0

.002

Kernel density
.004
.006

.008

Figure 1: Dispersion of interest rate spreads between 1999-2001

-200

-100

0
100
Interest rate spread (bps)
Spread density

200

300

Residual density

term, variable rate and mortgage renewal contracts (40%). Finally, we drop 10% of transactions
for which the lender is located more than 5 KM away from the centroid of FSA the new house (see
discussion below).
Table 1 describes the main financial and demographic characteristics of the borrowers in our
sample, where we trim the top and bottom 0.5% of observations in terms of income, and loan-size.
The resulting sample corresponds to a fairly symmetric distribution of income and loan-size. The
average loan-size is about $138, 000 which is twice the average annual household income. The
average monthly payment is $966, and the average interest rate spread is 129 basis points.
Importantly, only about 27% of households switch banks when negotiating a new mortgage
loan. This high loyalty rate is consistent with the fact that most consumers combine multiple
financial services with the same bank. The large Canadian banks are increasingly offering bundles
of services to their clients, helped in part by the deregulation of the industry in the early 1990s.
For instance, a representative survey of Canadian finances from Ipsos-Reid shows that 67% of
Canadian households have their mortgage at the same financial institution as their main checking
account.8 In addition, 55% of household loans, 78% of credit cards, 73% of term deposits, 45% of
bonds/guaranteed investments and 39% of mutual funds are held at the same financial institution
as the household’s main checking account.
The loan-to-value (LTV) variable shows that many consumers are constrained by the minimum down-payment of 5% imposed by the government guidelines. Nearly 40% of households
invest the minimum, and the average loan-to-value ratio is 91%. Because of the piece-wise linear
structure of the insurance premiums, LTV ratios are highly localized around 90 and 95.
8

This figure is slightly lower than the 73% reported in Table 1 because we excluded broker-negotiated transactions.
Consumers dealing with brokers are significantly more likely to switch bank (75%).

6

2.2

Pricing and negotiation

The Canadian mortgage market is currently dominated by six national banks (Bank of Montreal,
Bank of Nova Scotia, Banque Nationale, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Royal Bank Financial Group, and TD Bank Financial Group), a regional cooperative network (Desjardins in Québec),
and a provincially owned deposit-taking institution (Alberta’s ATB Financial). Collectively, they
control 90% of banking industry assets. For convenience we label these institutions the “Big 8.”
The large Canadian banks operate nationally and post prices that are common across the country on a weekly basis in both national and local newspapers, as well as online. There is little dispersion in posted prices, especially at the big banks where the coefficient of variation on posted
rates is close to zero. In contrast, there is a significant amount of dispersion in transaction rates.
Approximately 25% of borrowers pay the posted rate.9 The remainder receive a discount.
Figure 1 illustrates this dispersion by plotting the distribution of retail interest rates in the
sample. We measure spreads using the 5-year bond-rate as a proxy for marginal cost. The transaction rate is on average 1.3 percentage points above the 5-year bond rate, and exhibits substantial dispersion. Importantly, a large share of the dispersion is left unexplained when we control
for a rich set of covariates: financial characteristics, week fixed effects, lender/province fixedeffects, lender/year fixed-effects, and location fixed-effects. These covariates explain 44% of the
total variance of observed spreads. The figure also plots the residual dispersion in spreads. The
standard-deviation of retail spreads is equal to 61 basis points, while the residual spread has a
standard-deviation of 50 basis points.
This dispersion comes about because potential borrowers can search for and negotiate over
rates. Borrowers bargain directly with local branch managers or hire a broker to search on their
behalf.10 Our model excludes broker transactions and focuses only on branch-level transactions.
Our data do not provide direct information on the number of quotes gathered by borrowers,
therefore we supplement them with survey evidence from the Altus Group (FIRM). This survey
reveals a number of facts regarding the way Canadians shop for mortgages. On average 59%
of Canadians search. Broken down by ownership we see that 67% of new home buyers gather
multiple quotes, compared to just 51% for previous home owners. The search probability also
varies significantly across demographic groups. In particular, it is higher in more populated than
in less populated areas, and for high income than for low income individuals. Since the survey
does not condition on more than one variable at a time, the latter results most likely reflect the
relationship between loan size and search. In our empirical analysis below we will match these
moments.
9

The 25% is based on the posted price being defined as the posted rate within 90 days from the closing date minus
the negotiated rate. The majority of lenders offer 90-day rate guarantees, which is why we use this definition. Some
lenders have occasionally offered 120-day rate guarantees.
10
Local branch managers compete against rival banks, but not against other branches of the same bank. Brokers are
“hired” by borrowers to gather the best quotes from multiple lenders but compensated by lenders.

7

0

.1

Fraction
.2

.3

.4

Figure 2: Distribution of minimum distances between banks and consumers

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Distance7to7chosen7bank

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Average7distance7to7others

Note:7Distances7are7calculated7over7bank7located7within7at7least7507Km.

2.3

Local markets and lender information

Our main data-set contains the lender information for ten lenders during our sample period (the
big 8 plus Canada Trust and Vancity). For mortgage contracts where we do not have a lender
name but only a lender type, these are coded as “Other Bank”, “Other credit union”, and “Other
trusts”. The credit-union and trust categories are very fragmented, and contain mostly regional
financial institutions. We therefore combine both into a single “Other Lender” category.
The “Other Bank” category includes mostly two institutions: Laurentian Bank and HSBC. The
former is only present in Québec and Eastern Ontario, while the latter is present mostly in British
Colombia and Ontario. We exploit this geographic segmentation and assign the “Other banks”
customers to HSBC or Laurentian based on their relative presence in the local market around each
home location. After performing this imputation, consumers face at most 13 lending options: the
Big 8, Canada Trust, Laurentian Bank, Vancity, HSBC, and Other Lender.
Not all consumers have access to every option, because of the uneven distribution of branches
across local markets. We exploit this variation by assuming that consumers shop for their mortgage locally, in a neighborhood around the location of their new house (e.g. municipality). We
define this as a consumer’s choice set, which is their home bank h plus all other banks in their
neighborhood, Ni . To implement this, we match the new house location with the postal code associated with each financial institution’s branches (available annually from Micromedia-ProQuest).
The information relative to the location of each house is coarser than the location of branches.
Therefore, we assume that each house is located in the center of its FSA, and calculate a somewhat
large Euclidian distance radius of 5KM around it to define the borrower’s maximum choice-set.
Formally, a lender is part of consumer i’s maximum choice-set if it has a branch located within less
8

than 5KM of the house location. We use this definition to measure the relative presence of each
lender (i.e. number of branches in a choice-set), and the number of lenders within each choice-set
(i.e. number of lenders with at least one branch).
Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of minimum distances between each house’s FSA centroid
and the closest branch of each lender. On average consumers transact with banks that tend to be
located close to their house. The average minimum Euclidian distance is nearly 1.5KM for the
chosen institution, and 2.4KM for the other lenders. In fact the distributions indicate that 80% of
consumers transact with a bank that has a branch within 2KM of their new house, while only 40%
of consumers have an average distance to competing lenders less than or equal to 2KM.
This feature reflects the fact that consumers tend to choose lenders with large networks of
branches. Table 1 reports the average network size of the chosen institution relative to the average
size of others present in the same neighborhood (i.e. relative network size). On average consumers
transact with lenders that are nearly 60% larger than their competitors in terms of branches; the
median is smaller at 28%. Table 1 also presents measures on the level of concentration in a consumers choice-set. On average each consumer faces 7.8 lenders within 5 KM. Most of these banks
have a relatively small presence, indicated by the large Herfindahl-Hirschman index, calculated
using the distribution of branches within 5KM of each contract.

3

Model

Our modeling assumptions reflect three characteristics of mortgage markets. First, while a significant fraction of consumers obtain only one rate quote, nearly everyone visits their home bank
when shopping for a new mortgage. Second, loan officers can lower previously made offers in
an effort to retain potential clients. Third, competition takes place locally between branch managers of competing banks, since consumers must contact loan officers directly in order to obtain
discounts, and branches that are part of the same network do not compete for the same customers.
We describe the model in detail in the next three subsections. First, we present the notation,
and formally define the timing of the model. Then, we solve the model backwards, starting with
the second stage of the model in which banks are allowed to compete for consumers. Finally, we
describe the search decision of consumers, and the process generating the initial quote.

3.1

Timing and payoffs

The timing of the model is as follows. In an initial period outside the model, consumers choose
the type of house they want to buy, the loan-size Li , and the timing of home purchase. Buyers
also observe the posted price of lenders, which for simplicity we assume is the same across banks.
Empirically this is nearly always true throughout our entire sample period. In addition, for a
particular bank, the posted price is common for all regions in the country.
9

Taking these characteristics as given, consumers then visit their home bank h, and receive
an initial quote, p0i , measured in dollars per month. At this point information about the home
bank’s cost is publicly revealed, and consumers privately observe their cost of gathering additional quotes (denoted κi ).11
If the initial offer is rejected, consumers organize a multilateral negotiation game between N
banks in their choice-set, denoted by Ni . The full choice-set is given by Ni ∪ h since we allow the
home bank to participate in the second-stage negotiation. So there are N + 1 lenders in the full
choice set.
We model the multilateral negotiation process as an English auction game among lenders in
Ni ∪ h, with a bid-preference advantage for the home-bank. The simultaneous assumption in the
second stage allows us to abstract from considerations related to the order of arrival of competing
offers. We believe it is a more accurate description of the market than a model with sequential
offers without recall. In practice, banks are able to lower their initial offer if consumers receive a
lower price quote from a competing bank.
We assume the following payoff structure for consumers and firms, respectively:
Consumers:
Firms:

Uij = λi 1(j = h) − pij ,

(1)

πij = pij − (cij + εi ),

(2)

where pij is the monthly payment offered by bank j.
The parameter λi measures consumer i’s willingness to pay for their home-bank. Throughout
we refer to λ using the terminology loyalty premium and switching cost interchangeably. Consumers are assumed to be associated with at most one lender, and therefore 1(j = h) is a dummy
variable equal to one if consumer i has prior experience dealing with bank j, and zero otherwise.
The cost term measures the direct lending costs for the bank, net of the future benefits associated with selling complementary services to consumer i. Both components are related to variables
affecting the risk of default, and the risk of pre-payment over the length of the contract. While
lenders are fully insured against default risk, the event of default implies additional transaction
costs to lenders that lower the value of lending to risky borrowers. Pre-payment risk is perhaps
more relevant in our context, since consumers are allowed to reimburse up to 20% of their mortgage every year without penalty.12
Since we do not observe the performance of the contract along these two dimensions, cij + εi
approximates the net present value of the contract. This cost function includes a common unobserved attribute εi that symmetrically affects all lenders. The idiosyncratic component cij contains
variables that are observed such as bank-specific effects and consumer characteristics, and a match
11

Note that information about lenders other than the home bank is not revealed at this stage. This would be a “full
information” version of the model, and is available upon request.
12
In practice, however, borrowers pre-pay, on average, an additional 1% of their mortgage every year.

10

value shock that is privately observed by lenders and realized only in the game’s second stage.
The match value is independently distributed across lenders and consumers. It is important to
note that we rule out the possibility that the home bank has more information than other lenders,
since otherwise, the problem would involve adverse selection, and the initial quote would be
much more complicated. For a discussion of pricing when firms are able to identify previous customers and use information learned from their past purchases see the survey by Fudenberg and
Villas-Boas (2007).13
In both pricing stages, banks are constrained by their posted rate, essentially a price ceiling
on the negotiation.14 We assume that each consumer faces a posted price given by the monthly
payment associated with the posted rate valid at the time of negotiation, denoted by p̄i . The
presence of the posted rate forces some lenders to reject loans that would lead to negative profits.
The loan qualifying condition for all banks is given by: cij + εi < p̄i .
The value of shopping, net of the search cost κi , is a function of the equilibrium price vector
offered by banks. Consumers choose the lender that generates the highest indirect utility:

λ − p
i
h
Wi =
− min

j∈Ni

If λi − ph > − minj∈N pj ,
pj

(3)

Else.

The value of shopping is a random variable determined by the realization of firms’ costs, and
the mode of competition. The search cost κi therefore measures both the time cost of generating
competition between firms, and the cost of obtaining additional information about lenders.
The gross transaction surplus from an (ij) match is equal to:15
Vij = λi 1(j = h) − (cij + εi ).

(4)

Finally, we use c(k) to denote the k th lowest cost option in Ni . The distribution of costs for firm
j is given by Gj (x) = Pr(cij < x), and we use G(k) (x) = Pr(c(k) < x) to denote the CDF of the k th
order statistic of the cost distribution.

3.2

Competition stage

Conditional on rejecting p0 , the home bank h competes with lenders in the choice-set Ni . We model
this competition as an English auction with heterogeneous firms, and bid-preference favoring the
13
A subset of this literature has focused on credit markets and the extent to which lenders can learn about the ability
of their borrowers to repay loans and use this information in their future credit-decisions and pricing. See for instance:
Dell’Ariccia et al. (1999) and Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2004).
14
In Canada overage, i.e. pricing over the posted rate, is illegal.
15
It should be noted that most of the model’s predictions are very similar whether we assume that the match value
enters firms’ profits, or consumers’ willingness to pay.

11

home bank.16 Since the initial quote can be recalled, firms face a reservation price equal to: p0 ≤ p.
We can distinguish between two cases leading to a transaction: (i) p̄i − ch < εi , and (ii) εi <
p0i

− ch ≤ pi − ch . In the first case the borrower does not qualify at the home bank. As such, the

lowest cost bank will win by offering a price equal to the lending cost of the second most efficient
qualifying lender:
p∗i = min{c(2) + εi , p̄i }.

(5)

This occurs if and only if, εi < p̄i − c(1) .
If the borrower qualifies at the home bank, the highest surplus bank will win, and offer a quote
that provides the same utility as the second best option. The equilibrium pricing function is:

0


pi

p∗i = λi + c(1) + εi



min{c − λ , c
h

i

If c(1) > p0i − εi − λi
If ch − λi < c(1) < p0i − εi

(2) } + εi

(6)

Otherwise.

This equation highlights the fact that at the competition stage loyal consumers will on average pay
a premium, while lenders directly competing with the home-bank will on average have to offer a
discount by a margin equal to the switching cost in order to attract new customers.
Finally, we assume that consumers and lenders have rational expectations over the outcome of
the competition stage, which leads to the following expression for the expected value of shopping:
E[Wi |p0i , εi ]

=

(λi − p0i )(1 − G(1) (p0i

Z
− εi − λi )) +



+(λi − ch − εi ) G(1) (ch − λi ) − G(2) (ch − λi ) +

Z

p0i −εi

−(c(1) + εi )g(1) (c(1) )dc(1)

ch −λi
ch −λi

−(c(2) + εi )g(2) (c(2) )dc(2) .

(7)

−∞

3.3

Search decision and initial quote

Consumers choose to search for additional quotes by weighing the value of accepting p0i , or paying
a sunk cost κi in order to lower their monthly payment. The search decision of consumers is
defined by a threshold function, which yields a search probability that is increasing in the outside
option of consumers and decreasing in the loyalty premium:




Pr Reject|p0i , εi = Pr λi − p0i < E Wi |p0i , εi − κi = Hi (p0i , εi ).

(8)

Note that we index the search probability by i to highlight the fact that consumers face different
expected values of shopping, and different search cost distributions (e.g. increasing in income).
16

To our knowledge, the use of auction theory to model multilateral bargaining was first used in the labor literature
by Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002). Recently, Hall and Woodward (2012) use a similar price mechanism to measure the
gains from search in the market for mortgage brokers.

12

Lenders do not commit to a fixed interest rate, and are open to haggling with consumers based
on their outside options. This allows the home bank to discriminate by offering up to two quotes
to the same consumer: (i) an initial quote p0 , and (ii) a competitive quote p∗ if the first is rejected.
The price discrimination problem is based on the expected value of shopping and the distribution of search costs. More specifically, anticipating the second-stage outcome, the home bank
chooses p0 to maximize its expected profit:
max
p0 ≤p̄

(p0 − ch − εi )[1 − Hi (p0 , εi )] + Hi (p0 , εi )E(π ∗ |p0 , εi ),

where, E(π ∗ |p0 , εi ) = [1 − G(1) (ch − λi )]E(p∗ − ch − εi |c(1) > ch − λi ).
Importantly, the home bank will offer a quote only if it makes positive profit:  < p − ch . The
optimal initial quote first order condition is:
p0 − ch − εi =

1 − Hi (p0 , εi )
Hi (p0 , εi ) ∂E(π ∗ |p0 , εi )
+ E(π ∗ |p0 , εi ) +
0
|
{z
}
h (p , ε )
hi (p0 , εi )
∂p0
| i {z i }
{z
}
|
Cost+Quality
Search cost
distribution

Differentiation

(9)

Reserve price effect

where hi (p0 , εi ) = ∂Hi (p0 , εi )/∂p0 is the marginal effect of p0 on the search probability, which is
analogous to the slope of the demand curve for the initial lender.
The previous expression implicitly defines firms’ profit margins from price discrimination. It
highlights three sources of profits for the home bank: (i) positive average search costs, (ii) market
power from differentiation in cost and quality (i.e. match value differences and loyalty premium),
and (iii) the reserve price effect. If firms are homogenous, the only source of profits will stem from
the ability of the home bank to offer higher quotes to high search cost consumers.
Although the initial quote does not have a closed-form solution, it is additive in the common
cost shock in the interior: p0i = p̄0i + εi . To see this, note that if p0i is additive, since the equilibrium
second-stage price is additive in εi , the expected value of shopping is also additive in εi . As a
result, in the interior, the search probability is independent of εi , since only the difference between
p0 and E(Wi |p0i ) matters for determining the threshold of consumers. We use H̄i to denote the
equilibrium search probability when p0i < p̄i . Similarly, the expected second-stage profit is independent of εi , since p∗ is additive in i . Therefore, the right-hand-side of equation 9 is independent
of εi , which confirms that p0i = p̄0i + εi is a solution to the first-order condition of the initial lender.

4

Estimation method

In this section we describe the steps taken to estimate the model parameters. We begin by describing the functional form assumptions imposed on consumers and lenders’ unobserved attributes.

13

Then we derive the likelihood function induced by the model, and discuss the sources of identification in the final subsection.

4.1

Distributional assumptions

Our baseline model has three sources of randomness beyond observed financial and demographic
characteristics: (i) the identity of banks with prior experience and origin of the first quote, (ii) the
common unobserved profit shock i , and (iii) idiosyncratic cost differences between lenders. We
describe each in turn.
Distribution of main financial institutions The identity of home banks is partially observed
when consumers transact with a bank with which they have at least one month of experience, and
consumers are assumed to have experience with at most one bank. For consumers who switch
institutions, the identity of the prior-experience bank is unknown (i.e. we only know that it is not
chosen). Moreover, this variable is absent for the 20% of contracts insured by Genworth, and is
missing entirely for one bank.
We assume that 1(j = h) is a multinomial random variable with probability distribution ψij (Xi ).
This distribution is a function of consumers’ locations and income group. We estimate this probability distribution separately using a survey of consumer finances conducted by Ipsos-Reid, which
identifies the main financial institution of consumers.17 This data-set surveys nearly 12, 000 households per year in all regions of the country. We group the data into six years, ten regions, and four
income categories. Within these sub-samples we estimate the probability of a consumer choosing
one of the twelve largest lenders as their main financial institution. This probability corresponds
to the density of positive experience level given the year, income, and location of borrower i.
We use the distribution of main financial institutions to integrate over the identity of the homebank for switching consumers or for consumers with missing data. Formally, we let Statusi ∈
{Loyal, Switching, M/V} denote the switching status of consumer i. Then the conditional probability that bank h is the first mover is:



1(h = bi )


P
Pr (h|bi , Statusi , Xi , Ni ) = 1(h 6= bi )ψh (Xi )/ j6=b ψj (Xi )
i



φ (X )
h

i

If Statusi = Loyal,
If Statusi = Switching,

(10)

If Statusi = M/V.

An additional problem is that the experience duration variable might be measured with error.
For instance, some loyal consumers who obtained a pre-qualifying offer might be considered loyal
because they received an offer more than a month before closing. We take this feature into account
by incorporating a binomial IID measurement error. With probability ρ the identity of the home
17

Source: Consumer finance monitor (CFM), Ipsos-Reid, 1999-2002.

14

bank is drawn from the conditional probability described in equation 10, and with probability
1 − ρ the identity of the home bank is drawn from the unconditional distribution φh (Xi ). Let
Pr(h|bi , ρ, Statusi , Xi ) denote the measurement-error adjusted probability distribution function.
Cost function We parametrize the cost of lending to consumer i using the following reduced-form
function:
cij = Li × (Zi β + εi − uij )

(11)

where uij = 0 if j = h.
Lending costs are measured on a monthly basis, using a 25-year amortization period. The
function in parenthesis parametrizes the monthly cost of a $100,000 loan. The vector Zi controls
for observed financial characteristics of the borrower (e.g. income, loan-size, FICO score, LTV, etc),
the bond-rate, as well as period, location and bank fixed-effects. The location fixed-effects identify
the region of the country where the house is located, defined using the first digit of the postal code
(i.e. postal district). Because of the small number of observations in the Maritimes and Prairies,
we group those provinces in two regions. This leaves us with ten unique regions.
The common shock i is normally distributed with mean zero and variance σ2 , and the vector
of bank-specific idiosyncratic cost shocks {uij } are independently distributed according to a type1 extreme-value (EV) distribution with location and scale parameters (−σu γ, σu ).18 We interpret
uij as a mean-zero deviation from the lending cost of the home-bank.
As a result, conditional on i , the lending cost is also distributed according to a type-1 extremevalue distribution. The EV distribution assumption leads to analytical expressions for the distribution functions of the first and second-order statistics, and has often been used to model asymmetric
value distributions in auction settings (see for instance Brannan and Froeb (2000)).
We use g(k) (x) to denote the density of the k th order statistic of the lending cost distribution,
and f (x) to denote the density of the common component εi .
Other functional forms Our main empirical specification allows for heterogeneous expected
search-cost and loyalty premium. In particular, we allow κ̄ and λ to vary across new and experienced home buyers, and income categories:
log(κ̄i ) = κ̄0 + κ̄inc Incomei + κ̄owner 1(Previous owneri ),
log(λi ) = λ0 + λinc Incomei + λowner 1(Previous owneri ).
18

The location parameter of uij is normalized to −σu γ so that uij is mean-zero.

15

4.2

Likelihood function

We estimate the model by maximum likelihood. The endogenous outcomes of the model are: the
chosen lender and transaction price (Bi , Pi ), as well as the selling mechanism Mi = {A, N} (i.e.
Auction versus Negotiation). The observed prices are either generated from consumers accepting
the initial quote (i.e. Mi = N), or accepting the competitive offer (i.e. Mi = A). Importantly, only
the latter case is feasible if Bi 6= h, while both cases have positive likelihood if Bi = h. We first
derive the likelihood contribution for the loyal case followed by the case of switchers.
In order to derive the likelihood contribution of each individual, we first condition on the
choice-set Ni , the observed characteristics Zi , the identity of home-bank h, and the model parameter vector θ. After describing the likelihood contribution conditional on Ii = (Ni , Zi , h), we
discuss the integration of h.
Moreover, since we only observed accepted offers, we must adjust the likelihood to control for
endogenous selection. In particular, because of the posted-rate, some consumers fail to qualify
for a loan at every bank in their choice-set. To control for this possibility, we maximize a conditional likelihood function, adjusted by the probability of qualifying for a loan given observed
characteristics Zi and choice-set Ni .
Finally, in the last subsection we describe how we incorporate aggregate moments on the probability of search.
We use the following notation. We use cap-letters to refer to random outcome variables, and
small-case letters to refer to the realizations of consumer i. We remove the conditioning (Ii , θ)
whenever necessary, since it is common to all probabilities. In order to simplify the notation,
we also use individual subscripts i only for the outcomes variables and random shocks, with the
understanding that all functions and variables are consumer-specific and depend on Ii .
Likelihood contribution for loyal consumers The main obstacle in evaluating the likelihood function is that we do not observe the selling mechanism, Si . The unconditional likelihood contribution of loyal consumers is therefore:
Li (pi , Bi = h|Ii ) = Li (pi , Bi = h, Mi = n|Ii ) + Li (pi , Bi = h, Mi = a|Ii ) .
|
{z
} |
{z
}
LN
i (pi ,h|Ii )

(12)

LA
i (pi ,h|Ii )

Recall that the interior solution of the home-bank first-order condition is additive in εi : p0i =
p̄0 + εi . Therefore, if εi < p̄ − p̄0 we have pi = p̄0 + i and the search probability is constant: H(εi ) =
H̄. Otherwise we do not have an interior solution and the price is equal to p̄. The likelihood of
observing pi thus has a truncated form:

f (p − p̄0 )(1 − H̄)
i
LN
(p
,
h|I
)
=
i
i
R
i
p̄−c
h

pi −p̄ (1 − H(εi ))f (εi )dεi
16

If pi < p̄,
If pi = p̄,

(13)

where the search probability in the constrained case is equal to H(εi ) = 1 − exp − (E[W |p̄, εi ) −

λ + p̄)/κ̄i .
The likelihood contribution from the auction mechanism involves the distribution of lowestcost lender among competing options, denoted by g(1) (x). If the observed price is unconstrained,
the transaction price is either equal to the competitive price λ + c(1) + εi , or the reserve price
p̄0 + εi . The latter outcome is realized if the initial quote is preferred to the price offered by the most
efficient lender: p̄0 + εi < λ + c(1) + εi . In contrast, the observed price is equal to p̄ if the competitive
price is larger than the posted price, and the initial quote is constrained: λ + c(1) + εi > p̄ > p̄0 + εi .
The likelihood of observing pi from loyal consumers with the auction mechanism is given by:
 R
p̄−ch


g (p − λ − εi )H(εi )f (εi )dεi

 −∞ (1) i

A
Li (pi , h|Ii ) =
+ 1 − G(1) (p̄0 − λ) H̄f (pi − p̄0 )



R p̄−ch 1 − G (p̄ − λ − ε ) H(ε )f (ε )dε
i
i
i
i
(1)
p̄−p̄0

If pi < p̄,

(14)

If pi = p̄.

Likelihood contribution for switching consumers If the observed price is unconstrained and
the home bank offers a quote (i.e. ch + εi < p̄), the transaction price is equal to the minimum of
ch − λ + εi and c(2) + εi . If the consumer does not qualify for a loan at his/her home bank, the
transaction price is the minimum of the posted-price, and the second-lowest cost. This occurs if
i > p̄ − ch . Therefore, the transaction price for switching consumers is equal to p̄ if and only if the
chosen lender is the only qualifying bank.
In the two cases where the transaction price is equal to c(2) + εi , the consumer’s choice reveals
the most efficient lender (i.e. c(1) = cbi ), and the value of c(2) is the minimum cost among other
lenders. We use g−bi (x) to denote the density of lowest cost among Ni \bi lenders. Using this
notation, we can write the likelihood contribution in the unconstrained case as the sum of three
parts:
Z

∞

Li (pi , bi |Ii ) =

Z
g−b (pi − εi )Gbi (pi − ε)f (εi )dεi +

p̄−ch

p̄−ch

pi −ch +λ

g−b (pi − εi )Gbi (pi − ε)H(εi )f (εi )dεi

+(1 − G−bi (ch − λ))Gbi (ch − λ)f (pi − ch + λ)H(pi − ch + λ).

(15)

Note that the search probability is set to one in the first term, since the home-bank does not offer
a quote (i.e. ch + εi > p̄). Also, the second term is equal to zero if p̄ < pi + λ.19
In the constrained case, the likelihood contribution is given by:
Z

∞

Li (pi , bi |Ii ) =

(1 − G−bi (p̄ − εi )) Gbi (p̄i − εi )f (εi )dεi ,

If pi = p̄.

(16)

p̄−ch
19
This creates a discontinuity in the likelihood, affecting primarily the parameters determining λ. To remedy this
problem we smooth the likelihood by multiplying the second term in equation 15 by (1 + exp((λ − p̄ + pi )/s))−1 ,
where s is a smoothing parameter set to 0.01.

17

Integration of other unobservables and selection The unconditional likelihood contribution of
each individual is evaluated by integrating out the identity of the home bank h. Recall, that h
is missing for a sample of contracts, and is unobserved for switchers. We therefore express the
unconditional likelihood by summing over all possible combinations:
Li (pi , bi |Xi , θ) =

X

Pr (h|bi , ρ, Xi ) Li (pi , bi |Xi , h, β),

h

where Pr (h|bi , ρ, Xi ) is the conditional probability distribution for the identity of the home bank,
and incorporates measurement error (ρ). Note that we condition on bi when evaluating the homebank probability since for switchers the probability that h = bi is zero.
In order to correct for selection, we calculate the probability of qualifying for a loan from at
least one bank in consumer i’s choice-set. This is given by the probability that the minimum of
c(1) + εi and ch + εi is lower than p̄:
Pr(Qualify|Xi , θ) =

X

Z

∞

F (p̄ − min{c(1) , ch })g(1) (c(1) )dc(1) ,

ψh (Xi )

h

(17)

−∞

where ψh (Xi ) is the unconditional probability distribution for the identity of the home bank.
Using this probability, we can evaluate the conditional likelihood contribution of individual i:
Lci (pi , bi |Xi , θ) = Li (pi , bi |Xi , θ)/ Pr(Qualify|Xi , θ).

(18)

Aggregate likelihood function The aggregate likelihood function sums over the n observed contracts, and incorporates additional external survey information on search effort. We use the results
of the annual FIRM survey conducted by the Altus Group (described in Section 2.2) to match the
probability of gathering more than one quote along four dimensions: new-home buyers, city-size,
region, and income group.
Using the model and the observed new-home buyer characteristics we calculate the probability
of rejecting the initial quote; integrating over the model shocks and the identity of the home bank.
Let H̄g (θ) denote this function for demographic group G. Similarly, let Ĥg denote the analog
probability calculated from the survey.
We use the central-limit theorem to evaluate the likelihood of observing Ĥg under the null hypothesis that the model is correctly specified. That is, under the model specification, Ĥg − H̄g (θ)
is normally distributed with mean zero and variance σg2 /Ng , where σg2 is the model predicted variance in the search probability across consumers in group g, and Ng is the number of households

18

surveyed by the Altus Group.20 The likelihood of the auxiliary data is therefore given by:
Q(Ĥ|θ) =


Y p
φ
Ng (Ĥg − H̄g (θ))/σg ,

(19)

g

where φ(x) is the standard normal density.
Finally, we combine Q(Ĥ|θ) and Lci (pi , bi |Xi , θ) to form the aggregate log-likelihood function
that is maximized when estimating θ:21
L(p, b|X, θ) =

X

log Lci (pi , bi |Xi , θ) + log Q(Ĥ|θ).

(20)

i

Notice that the two likelihood components are not on the same scale, since the FIRM survey contains fewer observations than the mortgage contract data-set. Therefore, we also test the robustness of our main estimates to the addition of an extra weight ω that penalizes the likelihood for
violating the aggregate search moments:
Lω (p, b|X, θ) =

X

log Lci (pi , bi |Xi , θ) + ω log Q(Ĥ|θ).

(21)

i

Computational steps In order to evaluate the aggregate likelihood function, we must first
solve the optimal initial offer defined implicitly by equation 9. This non-linear equation needs
to be solved separately for every consumer/home bank combination. We perform this operation
numerically using a Newton algorithm that uses for the first and second derivatives of firms’ expected profits. We also use starting values defined as the expected initial quote from the complete
information problem, for which we have an analytical expression. This procedure is very robust
and converges in a small number of steps. Notice that since the interior solution is additive in
εi , this non-linear equation needs to be solved only once for each evaluation of the likelihood
contribution of each household, Li (li , bi |Xi , h, β).
In addition, the integrals are evaluated numerically using a quadrature approximation. We
use Monte-Carlo integration to calculate the predicted search probability used in equation 19. The
average search probability is calculated over a large number of households within each category,
and is therefore less sensitive to approximation errors even with a small number of simulated
draws (we use ten draws for each household).
20

We estimate σg by calculating the within group variance in search probability using the sample of individual contracts. Since this variance depends on the model parameter values, we follow a two-step approach: (i) calculate σg
using an initial estimate of θ (e.g. starting with σa = 1), and (ii) hold σg fixed to estimate θ̂.
21
The parameters are estimated by maximizing the aggregate log-likelihood function using the Broyden-FletcherGoldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) numerical optimization algorithm within the Ox matrix programming language (Doornik
2007).

19

4.3

Identification

The model includes four groups of parameters: (i) consumer observed heterogeneity (β), (ii) unobserved cost heterogeneity (σu and σ ), (iii) search cost (κ̄), and (iv) switching cost (λ).
Although we estimate the model by maximum likelihood, it is useful to consider the empirical
moments contained in the data. The contract data include information on market share, and conditional price distributions. For instance, we can measure the reduced-form relationship between
average prices and the number of lenders in consumers’ choice-sets, or other borrower-specific
attributes. Similarly, we measure the fraction of switchers, along with the premium that loyal consumers pay above switchers. Finally, we augment the contract data with the fraction of consumers
who gather more than one quote along four key borrower characteristics.
Intuitively, the cost parameters can be identified from the sample of switchers. Under the
timing assumption of the model, most switchers are consumers who reject the initial quote, and
initiate the competitive stage. The transaction price therefore reflects the second-order statistic
of the cost distribution. This conditional price distribution can therefore be used to identify the
contribution of observed consumer characteristics.
The residual dispersion can be explained by u or : the idiosyncratic and common unobserved
cost shocks. To differentiate between the two, we exploit variation in the size of consumers’ choicesets. Indeed, the number of lenders directly affects the distribution of the second-order statistic
through the value of σu . The reduced-form relationship between transaction rates and number of
lenders, and the importance of residual price dispersion, therefore identify the relative importance
of σu and σ .
The data exhibit three sources of variation in the choice-set of consumers. First, consumers
living in urban areas tend to face a richer choice-set than do consumers living in small cities.
Second, nearly 50% of consumers were directly affected by the merger between Canada Trust and
Toronto Dominion Bank in 2000, and effectively lost one lender. The third source of variation
comes from changes in the distribution of branches across markets.
The two remaining groups of parameters are identified from differences in the price distribution across switching and loyal consumers, and from the relative fraction of switchers and
searchers. Intuitively the task is to differentiate between two competing interpretations for the
observed consumer loyalty: high switching cost (or loyalty premium), and/or high search cost.
In the model, the search and switching probabilities are functions of the search-cost and loyalty premium parameters. Intuitively, any differences between these two probabilities reveal the
presence of positive switching cost. Indeed, we observe that 59% of consumers search in the population, while more than 75% of consumers remain loyal. This suggests a sizable loyalty premium.
In addition, the level of the premium is separately identified from the observed price difference
between loyal and switching consumers. Therefore, we have at least three moments to identify
three parameters.
20

Table 2: Maximum likelihood estimation results
Heterogeneity and preferences
Est.
S.E.
Common shock (σε )
0.291 0.002
Idiosyncratic shock (σu ) 0.146 0.001
Avg. search cost
κ̄0
-1.680 0.027
κ̄inc
0.603 0.037
κ̄owner
0.289 0.032
Home premium
λ0
-2.040 0.006
λinc
0.715 0.004
λowner
0.036 0.003
Measurement error
0.948 0.005
Number of parameters
Sample Size
Log-likelihood/10,000

47
29,000
-4.015

Cost function
Coef.
Intercept
3.590
Bond rate
0.624
Loan size
0.089
Income
-0.209
Loan/Income
-0.111
Other debt
-0.055
FICO score
-0.510
Max. LTV
0.060
Previous owner
-0.012
Region FE
Year FE
Quarter FE
Bank FE
Bank FE Std-Dev

S.E.
0.054
0.007
0.016
0.032
0.011
0.006
0.028
0.005
0.005

X
X
X
X
0.101

Average search cost function: log(κ̄i ) = κ0 + κinc Incomei + κowner Previous owneri . Home
bank premium function: log(λi ) = λ0 + λinc Incomei + λowner Previous owneri . Cost function:
Ci = Li × (Zi β + εi − ui ). Units: $/100

The model also implies strong restrictions on the relationship between search/switching, and
observed characteristics of markets and loans. For instance, the value of shopping is increasing
in the loan-size and the number of competitors; both features that we observe in the survey data.
Therefore, in practice the search cost and loyalty premium parameters are identified from more
than three sources of variation.
Finally, the fact that we observe search and switching outcomes by income and home buyer
status allows us to parametrize κ̄i and λi as a function of these two variables.

5

Estimation results

Table 2 presents the maximum likelihood estimates of the key parameters of the model. The
model is estimated on the sample of 29,000 CMHC-insured contracts. Our main specification
incorporates heterogenous average search-cost and loyalty premium functions. Table 12 in the
Appendix contains additional results for three alternative specifications: (i) with homogenous
average search-cost and loyalty premium functions, (ii) with both CMHC and Genworth contracts,
and (iii) with a larger weight on the aggregate search moments (i.e. ω = 100 in equation 19).
Overall, the first specification allows us to easily reject the null hypothesis of homogenous search
and switching costs, while the second specification suggests that the fit of the model is better
within the CMHC sample. This result is in part due to the fact the Genworth excludes contracts
from the “Other bank” category, while CMHC does not. The third specification reveals that it is
21

Table 3: Model predictions and marginal effects
VARIABLES
Monthly payment
Lending cost

Mean
(1)
705.99
688.49

Std-Dev
(2)
49.55
50.12

P-25
(3)
672.09
653.80

Median
(4)
703.59
686.87

P-75
(5)
739.94
724.43

Payment marginal effects:
∆sd Income
∆sd Loan size

4.59
-10.83

2.70
3.51

2.55
-12.70

4.33
-10.11

6.36
-8.33

Lending cost marginal effects:
∆sd Income
∆sd Loan size

1.40
-5.44

3.19
4.16

-1.01
-7.65

1.10
-4.58

3.50
-2.49

Search cost – κi
∆sd Income
∆ Previous owner

29.52
5.31
11.07

33.01
1.42
7.56

6.86
4.34
6.19

19.15
4.90
9.51

40.70
5.88
13.73

Home bank premium – λi
∆sd Income
∆ Previous owner

21.99
4.42
0.80

5.42
1.09
0.19

18.60
3.74
0.68

20.82
4.19
0.76

23.73
4.77
0.86

Monthly payment and Lending costs are normalized to represent a $100,000 loan. ∆sd corresponds to the effect of a one standard deviation increase in income or loan size. ∆ Previous
owner measures the marginal effect of being a previous owner borrowers relative to a new home
buyers. Search costs and home-bank premiums are measured on a per-month basis.

necessary to increase the average search cost and loyalty premium in order to match the aggregate
search moments. We discuss the tradeoff between fitting the price data and the search moments
in greater detail in Section 5.2.

5.1

Preference and cost function parameter estimates

Consumer-preference and consumer-heterogeneity parameters are presented on the left-hand side
of Table 2, and the cost function parameters (β) on the right. The price coefficient is normalized
to one and monthly payments are measured in hundreds of dollars. In order to better illustrate
the magnitude of the estimates, in Table 3 we also present marginal effects obtained by simulating
contract terms using the estimated model.22 We use this simulated sample in the goodness of fit
analysis presented in the next subsection. Next, we describe the predictions of the model in terms
of profit margins, search/switching costs, and price discrimination.
Unobserved heterogeneity and profit margins The first two parameters, σε and σu , measure the
relative importance of consumer unobserved heterogeneity with respect to the cost of lending.
22
To obtain a simulated sample of contracts, we sample the random shocks of the model for every household in our
main data-set, and compute the equilibrium outcomes. We repeat this process ten times for each borrower.

22

The standard-deviation of the common component is 62% larger than the standard-deviation of
idiosyncratic shock (i.e. 0.291 versus 0.187), suggesting that most of the residual price dispersion is due to consumer-level unobserved heterogeneity rather than to idiosyncratic differences
across lenders.23 Similarly, the estimates of the bank fixed-effects reveal relatively small systematic differences across lenders. Three of the eleven coefficients are not statistically different from
zero (relative to the reference bank), and the standard deviation across the fixed-effects is equal to
0.106, or 56% of the dispersion of the idiosyncratic shock.
Our estimate of σu has key implications for our understanding of the importance of market
power in this market. Abstracting from bank fixed-effects, the average difference between the
first and second lowest cost lender, c(1) and c(2) , is equal to $20 in duopoly settings, $12 with three
lenders, and approaches $5 when N goes to 12. These differences imply that in an environment
without switching costs, the competition stage would lead to profit margins of about $7 per month
for the average market and a loan-size of $100,000.
In the model, market power also exists because of price discrimination motives (i.e. first-stage
quote), and product differentiation associated with the loyalty premium. The first two rows of
Table 3 show the distribution of monthly payments and lending costs for a homogenous loan-size
of $100,000. The difference between the two leads to an average profit margin of $17. Therefore,
about 60% of observed margins are caused by factors other than idiosyncratic cost differences between lenders; namely product differentiation (switching costs/loyalty premium), and the presence of search costs.
Importantly, profit margins are highly dispersed across consumers. In Figure 3 we plot the
distribution of profits, expressed in basis points, for two groups of borrowers: searchers and nonsearchers. Consistent with the previous discussion, margins for searchers are significantly lower,
and mostly concentrated between 0 and 25 bps (the median is 16 bps). In contrast, the median
profit margin is 33 bps for non-searchers. In both cases, the distribution has coverage from 0 to
more than 100 bps, and the inter-decile range is equal to 54 bps. This corresponds to about 50% of
the residual dispersion of transaction rates.
In addition, our results imply that the market is more competitive than what the average
spread between transaction rates and the 5-year bond-rate might initially suggests; the average
profit margin is equal to 27 bps, and the average spread is 130 bps. This is consistent with the
idea that mortgage contracts are nearly homogenous across lenders, and represent a large share
of consumers’ budgets. It also implies that each transaction involves significant transaction costs
over the cost of funds. Recall that the average borrower is able to negotiate 75 bps off the postedrate. The marginal cost of lending is therefore roughly 100 bps below the posted-rate, and 100
bps above the 5-year bond-rate. This cost originates from a variety of sources: the compensation
of loan officers (bonuses and commissions), the premium associated with pre-payment risks, and
23

√
The standard deviation of an extreme-value random variable is equal to σu π/ 6, or 0.18 in our case.

23

0

.1

Frequencies
.2

.3

Figure 3: Distribution of profit margins for searchers and non-searchers

0

10

20

30

40

50

Margins9of9nonBsearchers

60

70

80

90

100+

Margins9of9searchers

Units:9Percentage9basis9points

transaction costs associated with the securitization of contracts.
Search cost and loyalty premium The bottom two panels of Table 3 report the predicted distribution of search costs and loyalty premiums, as well as the effect of loan-size and income on these
two parameters. The parameters entering the search cost distribution suggest that search frictions
are economically important. The average search cost is $29, and is increasing in income and ownership experience. New home-buyers are estimated to have significantly lower search costs on
average ($11.07). The effect of income is somewhat smaller. A one standard-deviation increase in
income leads to a $5 increase in the average search cost of consumers. This is consistent with an
interpretation of search costs as being proportional to the time cost of collecting multiple quotes.
The fact that new home-buyers face lower search costs is somewhat counter-intuitive, since
previous owners are, in principle, more experienced at negotiating mortgage contracts. In the
data, this difference is identified from the fact that new-home buyers are significantly more likely
to switch, and are less likely to gather more than one quote according to the national survey.
However, despite these differences, conditional on other financial characteristics, previous owners
are observed to pay only slightly more than new-home buyers (about 3 bps). Therefore, the model
reconciles these facts by inferring that new home buyers face relatively low search costs, but are
associated with a higher lending cost of about $1.5/month for a $100,000 loan.
To understand the magnitude of these estimates, it is useful to aggregate the monthly search
cost over the length of the contract. According to the model, the marginal consumer accepting the
initial quote is indifferent between searching, and reducing his expected monthly payment by $κi .
Over a five year period, assuming an annual discount factor of 0.96, these estimates correspond

24

to an average upfront search cost of $1,657, and a median of $1,028.24 Are these number realistic?
Hall and Woodward (2012) calculate that a U.S. home buyer could save an average of $983 on
origination fees by requesting quotes from two brokers rather than one. Our estimate of the search
cost is consistent with this measure.
Turning to the estimate of λi , we find that the average loyalty premium is equal to $22 per
month. Like with search costs, new home-buyers enjoy a larger premium, but the difference is
small ($0.80 per month). In comparison, the effect of income on the loyalty premium is much
larger; a one standard deviation increase in income raises λi by $4.42 per month.
Over five years, the discounted value of the loyalty premium corresponds to an upfront value
of approximately $1,028. This utility gains originates from the presence of switching costs, and
complementarities between mortgage lending and other financial services. For instance, consumers could perceive that combining multiple accounts under one bank improves the convenience of the services, which would lead to direct utility gains. In addition, the home bank
can compete with rival mortgage lenders by offering discounts on other services, such as checking/saving accounts or preferential terms on other loans or lines of credits. This interpretation is
valid only if other multi-product lenders cannot make similar offers, because, for instance, switching main financial institutions is too costly.
How do our results compare to existing estimates of search and switching costs in the literature? Perhaps the closest point of comparison comes from Honka’s (2012) analysis of the insurance
market. She estimates the cost of searching for policies to be $28 per online search and $100 per
offline search, and switching costs of $115. To compare these numbers to ours we calculate the
ratio of the search cost to the standard-deviation of monthly payments for the average loan-size
(i.e. $70/Month). In our context, this ratio is 27% (= 19/70).25 In comparison, the estimates from
Honka (2012) range between 10% for online transactions, and 35% for offline.
We can also compare our findings to those of Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) and Hong and
Shum (2006). Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) estimate a median search cost of 5 basis points (or
$5 per $10000 invested), yielding a ratio of 8%. The average search cost across the four books
considered by Hong and Shum (2006) is $1.58 (for non sequential search), yielding a ratio of 33%.
Overall our results are consistent with those in the literature. We should also point out that
searching for mortgages is more complicated than searching for many of the products studied in
the literature because of the negotiation process. Also, our model implicitly assumes that consumers search over all options. However, once they have identified the two most efficient lenders,
consumers in practice need to haggle only with two firms. Therefore, we can think of the search
process as one with two steps: first, identify the most efficient lenders, second, haggle.
24

The search cost is measured in terms of monthly payment
units. Since the contract is written over a 60 month
P
κi
period, the discounted value of the search cost is equal to 60
t=0 (1+r)60 . We use an annual discount factor of 0.96.
25
Note that the median search cost of $19 corresponds to roughly 22 bps. Given rate spread in basis points of 61 bps,
this corresponds to a ratio of about 35%.

25

Price discrimination vs cost differences An important concern when studying markets with
price dispersion is to separate the observed differences caused by price discrimination, from those
caused by cost differences across individuals. In our context, differences in loan-size and income
across borrowers lead to major differences in prices across borrowers. In Table 3, we report the
marginal effect of both variables on monthly payments (i.e. the reduced-form of the model) and
on lending costs, for a standardized loan-size of $100,000.26 Consistent with previous findings in
Allen et al. (2013b), the model predicts that, after conditioning on financial and demographic characteristics of borrowers, richer households pay higher rates, and consumers financing bigger loans
are more likely to obtain large discounts. For a loan-size of $100,000, a one standard-deviation increase in income increases payments by $4.59/month, while a one standard-deviation increase in
loan-size decreases payments by $10.83/month.
The estimated lending cost function reveals that only about thirty percent of the income effect
on payments is due to cost differences; the rest is explained by larger search and switching costs.
Similarly the lending cost function is non-monotonic in income: the effect of increasing income
by one standard-deviation is negative at the top of the income distribution (i.e. from the 75th percentile). The positive relationship between lending cost and income is consistent with the fact that
banks mostly face pre-payment risks, given the insurance coverage provided by the government
against default risks. The fact that the sign of the income effect is reversed at the top highlights the
value of attracting wealthier customers, both because of lower default risks and larger revenues
from complementary services.
Looking at the loan-size marginal effects, roughly half of the reduced-form relationship is explained by cost differences. A one standard-deviation increase in loan-size reduces the cost of
lending by $5.44 per month. The remainder is explained by the search decision of consumers,
since borrowers financing larger loans are more likely to search. This is because the gains from
search are increasing in loan-size, while the search cost is fixed. Note that this relationship is also
true in the FIRM survey. Households earning more than $60,000 (a proxy for loan-size) are 10.5%
more likely to search multiple lenders than those earning less than $60,000.

5.2

Goodness of fit

We next provide a number of tests for the goodness of fit of our model. Figure 4 shows that the
estimated model reproduces fairly well the overall shape of the discount distribution. There are
two main takeaways. First, the data show a large mass of consumers receiving 75 and 100 bps
discounts. This would appear to be the result of bunching by loan officers around a common
discount size, which is not something that the model can predict.
26

The monthly payment marginal effects are obtained by regressing predicted monthly payments on all the state
variables of the model (i.e. financial characteristics, market structure, and fixed-effects), while the lending cost marginal
effects are obtained directly from the cost function reported in Table 2.

26

0

.1

Frequencies
.2

.3

Figure 4: Predicted and observed distribution of negotiated discounts

0

25

50

75

100

Sample5discounts

125

150

175

200+

Simulated5discounts

Units:5Percentage5basis5points

Second, a related implication of this behavior is that few consumers receive small discounts,
and the density of discounts is sharply increasing past zero in the data. The model predicts a
similar pattern, but much less pronounced. This is mostly caused by the distribution of discounts
among non-searchers, which is strictly decreasing. In contrast, the model implies a discount distribution for searchers that has a similar dip at 25 bps, because few consumers gathering multiple
quotes receive small discounts.
Table 4 looks at how well the model matches the search probabilities of different demographic
groups. The first column corresponds to the model prediction using our baseline specification,
and the last two reproduce the aggregate moments from the national survey of new home buyers.
The model tends to over-predict search. The unconditional average search probability predicted by the model is 64%, compared with 59% according to the national survey. Similarly, while
the model matches reasonably well the survey’s qualitative predictions, it has a hard time matching the magnitude of the differences across groups. This is especially true for the differences across
small and large cities, which are nearly 20 percentage points in the survey data, and 10 percentage
points in the model. Despite this, note that most of the differences between the model predicted
probabilities and survey results are not statistically significant, given the relatively small number
of observations in the survey. In the baseline specification, three out ten mean differences are
statistically different from zero using a 10% significance level.
Importantly, the middle column shows that the model can rationalize most of the observed
search patterns, by imposing a larger weight on the aggregate moments (i.e. specification 3 in
Table 12 presented in the Appendix). Across all groups, the model matches the survey results
well, and the predicted search probability is exactly equal to 59%. Only the mean difference cor-

27

Table 4: Observed and predicted search probability by demographic groups
VARIABLES

Baseline
Specification
(1)

Penalty
Specification
(2)

0.657
0.614

0.623
0.540

0.619
0.560

126
141

0.650
0.606b

0.673
0.509

0.673
0.509

153
106

0.673
0.627
0.584a

0.645
0.565b
0.506

0.640
0.667
0.443

75
114
79

0.586
0.669
0.638c

0.492
0.655
0.564

0.515
0.716
0.534

103
102
73

Income
> $60K
≤ $60K
Ownership status
New home buyers
Previous owners
City size
Pop. > 1M
1M ≥ Pop. > 100K
Pop. ≤ 100K
Regions
East
Ontario
West

Survey data
Avg. Nb. Obs.
(3)
(4)

Mean tests: Survey average = Model average. Significance levels: a = 1%, b = 5%, c = 10%.
P-values are calculated using the asymptotic standard-errors of the survey.

responding to the non-monotonicity of the search probability with respect to city size is statically
different from zero.
The fact that the baseline specification does not as accurately match the aggregate moments
highlights a tension between the price and search moments. As hinted by specification (3) in
Table 12, the model requires a relatively large search cost and loyalty premium to bring the search
probability down to less than 60%. In turn, this increases the predicted average discount that
switching consumers obtain, much beyond what we observe. In addition, the model requires
larger idiosyncratic differences across lenders to match the observed relationship between market
size and search. This is because σu determines the rate at which the gain from search increases with
competition. However, increasing σu also leads to a steeper reduced-form relationship between
price and market structure than the one we observe in the data. Since the number of observations
in the contract data is much larger than the number of households in the survey, the un-penalized
likelihood resolves this conflict by assigning relatively more weight to the price relationships.
Finally, in Table 5 we evaluate the ability of the model to reproduce the observed reduced-form
relationships between transaction rates and observed characteristics of borrowers. To highlight
the ability of the model to explain the cross-sectional distribution of rates, we regress the interestrate spread, simulated and observed, on financial and market characteristics of the borrowers.
Although we omit the financial characteristics variables form this table, the model does a good job
at predicting most of these reduced-form relationships, as hinted by the R2 reported at the bottom
of the table. Similarly, the average marginal effects of loan-size and income on transaction rate are
well explained by the model (bottom).
28

Table 5: Reduced-form interest rate spread regressions
VARIABLES
Prior relationship

Sample
(1)
-0.0792a
(0.00866)

Simulations
(3)
(4)
-0.453a
-0.218a
(0.00203) (0.00248)
-0.353a
(0.00217)
0.0183a
0.0128a
0.00796a
(0.00245) (0.00225) (0.00218)
0.0154a
0.00382a
0.00193
(0.00145) (0.00124) (0.00118)
-0.0867a
-0.0630a
-0.0762a
(0.00499) (0.00400) (0.00395)

(2)
-0.368a
(0.00254)

Search indicator
Previous owner
Relative network size
Number of competitors (log)
Average marginal effects:
Income effect
Loan size effect
Prior relationship
Observations
R-squared

0.0305a
(0.00720)
0.0174a
(0.00405)
-0.0426a
(0.0128)
0.487
-0.313

0.384
-0.246

0.347
-0.215

0.335
-0.207

W/ Error
29,000
0.345

W/ Error
301,136
0.407

True
301,136
0.450

True
301,136
0.493

Dependent variable: Negotiated rate - 5 year bond rate. Additional controls: Financial
characteristics of borrowers, region, year and quarter fixed-effects. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Significance levels: a = 1%, b = 5%, c = 10%.

The model also predicts well the relationship between the relative size of branch networks
and rates. We measure the network size by taking the ratio of the number of branches over the
average number of branches of competing banks. The estimated model reproduces well the fact
that consumers dealing with large-network banks pay higher rates on average. In the model,
this is entirely due to the fact that consumers start their search with their home bank, and face
large search costs on average. Column (4) shows that after controlling for the search decision of
consumers, the effect of network size on rates is zero.
The model tends to over-predict the impact of the log number of competitors on rates. One
likely cause is the correlation between consumers’ unobserved characteristics and the number of
competitors in each local market. Indeed, controlling for location (FSA) fixed-effects in column
(1) lowers the competition coefficient by a factor of three. This suggests that our estimates suffer
from a simultaneity bias, which biases downward our estimate of σu ; the parameter measuring the
strength of competition across lenders. Since this parameter determines the size of profit margins,
it implies that our estimates provide a lower bound of the amount of market power.27
The reduced-form regressions reveal that the model also over-estimates by a significant margin the premium that loyal consumers pay (i.e. 8 bps versus 36.8 bps). This is despite the fact
that the model incorporates measurement error in the identity of the home bank. In the baseline
27
Incorporating location fixed-effects in the structural model could solve this problem, but would lead to an incidental
parameters problem.

29

specification, we estimate that about 5% of borrowers report this variable with error. Column (3)
shows that incorporating measurement error helps bring this coefficient closer to the data. Using
the true prior-relationship variable, the model predicts that loyal borrowers pay on average 45 bps
more than switchers. Column (4) shows that this is mostly due to the fact that searchers are more
likely to switch. Conditional on searching, loyal consumers pay about 22 bps more than switchers.
This suggests that the model over-estimates the average discount that switchers receive because
“switching” is strongly associated with “searching”; more so than in the data. This link could
be relaxed somewhat by introducing heterogeneity in the timing of search across consumers, or
by incorporating “multi-homing” in the model. We chose a more parsimonious model in part
because our data contain limited information on search and prior experiences of consumers, and
because those changes would increase the computational burden of the model.

6

Counter-Factual Analysis

In this section, we use the estimated model to simulate a counter-factual equilibrium with zero
search costs in order to quantify the effect of search frictions on consumer welfare. We also analyze the extent to which quality differentiation and the presence of a price ceiling can amplify or
attenuate the welfare cost of search frictions.
Then, in the following subsection, we explore the channels through which competition impacts
the adverse effects of search frictions. We perform this analysis by calculating the welfare cost of
search frictions in hypothetical markets of different sizes, and by simulating the effect of counterfactual mergers across increasingly competitive markets.

6.1

Quantifying the effect of search frictions

The presence of search costs lowers the welfare of consumers for three distinct reasons. First, it
imposes a direct burden on consumers searching for multiple quotes. Second, it can prevent nonsearching consumers from matching with the most efficient lender in their choice set (adjusting for
quality differences), thereby creating a misallocation of buyers and sellers. Lastly, it opens the door
to price discrimination, by allowing the initial lender to make relatively high offers to consumers
with poor outside options and/or high expected search costs. These factors can be identified by
decomposing the change in consumer surplus caused by the presence of search frictions:
∆CSi = λi 1(bi = h) − ci − pi − Si κi − λi 1(b0i = h) − c0i − p0i
|
{z
} |
{z
}
CS0i

CSi




= (λi 1{bi = h} − ci ) − λi 1{b0i = h} − c0i − mi − m0i − κSi
= ∆Vi − ∆mi − Si κi ,

(22)

30

Table 6: Decomposing the effect of search frictions on welfare
Consumer surplus change decomposition
Misallocation Discrimination Search cost
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Baseline environment
Zero changes (%)
79.7
67.5
35.8
Non-zero changes ($) P10
-63.18
-15.27
2.01
P50
-19.46
13.22
12.46
P90
-3.17
33.75
35.19
Cumulative changes
$
-5.36
3.21
10.34
%
28.4
17.0
54.7
Panel B: No differentiation
Zero changes (%)
77.95
75.38
24.85
Non-zero changes ($) P10
-72.24
-22.30
2.34
P50
-26.85
9.39
14.35
P90
-6.56
29.20
40.65
Cumulative changes
$
-7.23
1.32
13.60
%
32.7
6.0
61.4
Panel C: No price-ceiling
Zero changes (%)
81.51
68.51
31.12
Non-zero changes ($) P10
-65.24
-5.02
2.13
P50
-20.38
22.01
12.67
P90
-3.33
38.30
30.78
Cumulative changes
$
-5.36
5.80
10.31
%
25.0
27.0
48.0

∆ CS
(4)
3.6
-42.94
-16.24
-2.57
-18.91
100
0.29
-49.13
-18.60
-2.99
-22.15
100
0.00
-42.26
-18.90
-3.03
-21.46
100

Each entry corresponds to an average over 100 simulated samples. Each sample is equal to 5,000 consumers.
Averages in the first four lines are calculated using the samples of consumers facing non-zero changes. The fraction of
zero changes is computed over the samples of qualifying consumers. Cumulative changes are the sum of all changes
divided by the total number of simulated consumers, including non-qualifying consumers. The welfare decomposition
corresponds to: ∆CSi = ∆Vi − ∆mi − ∆κi Si = Misallocationi − Discriminationi − Search costi . The last row reports
the contribution of each component, in percentage of the cumulative change.

where the 0 superscript indicates the equilibrium outcomes without search cost, Vi = λi 1{bi =
h} − ci is the transaction surplus (excluding of the search cost), mi = pi − ci is the profit margin,
and Si is an indicator variable equal to one if the consumer rejects the initial offer.
We label the three components misallocation, discrimination, and search cost, respectively. The
first and third are standard frictions in the search literature, and lead to a decrease in total welfare. The elimination of the price discrimination incentive, on the other hand, may not be welfare
improving for all consumers.
We simulate the counter-factual experiments as follows. First, we randomly select a sample
of 5,000 households from the main data set. Second, for each simulated household, we randomly
sample the realization of their idiosyncratic shocks: (i) the identity of their home bank hi , (ii) the
common lending cost εi , (iii) the vector of idiosyncratic match values uij , and (iv) the private-value
search cost κi . Third, at each realization of these shocks, we solve the optimal initial offer and
search decision, and then store the endogenous outcomes. Fourth, we simulate the equilibrium
31

without search costs by using solely the competitive auction stage with a reserve price equal to
the posted-rate, holding fixed the realized shocks. Finally, we repeat steps two through four 100
times, and average the equilibrium outcomes across the realization of the idiosyncratic shocks.
Table 6 presents the main simulation results. Panel (A) corresponds to the baseline environment, and uses the observed distributions of posted-rates and loyalty premiums. The other two
panels report the simulation results in two counter-factual environments: (B) no differentiation
between lenders (i.e. λi = 0 for all i), and (C) no posted-rates.
Columns 1 through 3 show the change in the misallocation, discrimination and search cost
components respectively, while column 4 presents the total change in consumer surplus. To illustrate the heterogeneity across consumers, the first line of each panel reports the fraction of
simulated consumers experiencing zero changes, and the next three describe the conditional distribution of non-zero changes. To calculate the cumulative changes, we sum the changes across all
consumers qualifying for a loan, and divide by the number of simulated consumers (5,000).28 The
percentage shares of each component is expressed relative to the cumulative changes.
In the baseline environment, we estimate that the cumulative reduction in consumers surplus
associated with search frictions is equal to $18.91 per month. The largest component (55%) is
attributed to the sunk cost of searching, followed by the misallocation of contracts (28%), and
the increase in margins associated with price discrimination (17%). Over 96% of consumers are
affected, with the median consumer experiencing a $16 reduction in surplus.
We look first at the misallocation and search-cost components. The first row measures the
fraction of buyers and sellers that are matched efficiently and the fraction of non-searchers in the
presence of search frictions. In the baseline environment, search frictions cause 20% of transactions
to be misallocated, despite the fact that more than 35% of consumers are not searching (column
(3)). Note that this difference would be zero if firms had homogenous costs and willingness to pay.
Since banks’ fixed-effects are not highly dispersed, this difference results mostly from the fact that
consumers visit the highest expected surplus seller first, which reduces the fraction of inefficient
matches.
Panel B illustrates this point by removing differentiation.The home bank now makes the first
offer, but does not provide the highest expected transaction surplus. This inefficient sequencing
of quotes leads to an increase in search, from 64% to 75%, and therefore to an increase in search
costs, from $10.34/month to $13.60/month. Despite the increased search, the fraction of inefficient
matches increases by about two percentage points without quality differentiation, and the cumulative losses associated with misallocation increase by 35%, from -5.36 to -7.23. This reflects mostly
a direct loss in surplus associated with the reduction in willingness-to-pay for loyal consumers.
We next consider the change in consumer surplus associated with profit margins. Column (2)
28

Note that the cumulative effect differs from the average across qualifying consumers, since a fraction of consumers
fail to qualify for a loan when the posted-rate is present. On average we estimate that 5.4% of consumers in the baseline
environment are not able to qualify for a loan because of the posted rate (same in Panel B).

32

shows that the relatively small contribution of the price discrimination component (17% in the
baseline), is due largely to the fact that many consumers pay higher markups in the frictionless
market. In the baseline, the median change in profit margins is equal to $13.22 per month; slightly
more than the median increase in search cost. However, the 10th percentile consumer benefits
from a $15.27 reduction in profit margins, which brings the cumulative effect down to $3.21.
To understand this heterogeneity, it is important to note that the initial quote is used both as
a price discrimination tool, and as a price ceiling in the competition stage. The home-bank is in
monopoly position in the first stage, and can set individual prices based on consumers’ expected
outside options. This is analogous to first-degree price discrimination, and leads to strictly higher
expected profit margins.29 This adverse effect is weighed against the fact that the initial offer can
be recalled, and therefore protects consumers against excessive market power at the auction stage.
Notice that this factor is present only because consumers and banks are uncertain about the gains
from search. If firms had perfect information about the outcome of the auction, the initial offer
would not distort prices in the second stage.
Panel B shows that removing the loyalty premium forces the home bank to behave more competitively in the first stage, which reduces the price discrimination contribution to the welfare cost
of search frictions by close to 60%. This change is the result of a reduction in the home bank’s
markup, and an increase in the relative market power of competing lenders in the second stage.
The latter effect implies that a larger fraction of consumers experience a decrease in profit margins
following the elimination of search costs, and leads to an increase in the dispersion of the price discrimination component, relative to the baseline. Conditional on experiencing a non-zero change
in profit margins, the 10th percentile of the distribution of profit margin changes is $7 lower per
month. Therefore, while the market is overall more competitive without the loyalty premium, the
effect of search frictions on profit margins is more heterogenous.
Overall, the comparison between the baseline and no-loyalty environments can help us understand the role of product differentiation in search markets. When one seller offers a strictly higher
quality service, eliminating differentiation reduces its ability to price discriminate. Because this
increases the relative market power of competing firms, it does not offset the increases in misallocation and search costs that result from making products ex-ante homogenous. Therefore, the
cumulative welfare cost of search frictions increases by 17.5% when we remove differentiation.
The last panel simulates an environment with no price ceiling. Relative to the baseline, the
cumulative effect on surplus increases by 13.5%, implying that the posted rate attenuates the welfare cost of search frictions. As column (2) clearly shows, this is the result of a large increase (80%)
in the welfare contribution of price discrimination. This highlights the fact that the presence of
a price ceiling greatly limits the ability of the initial lender to price discriminate. In the baseline
simulation, we estimate that nearly 50% of initial quotes are constrained by the posted rate.
29

We use expected profits here because the outcome of the second stage is random, and the realized profit margins of
the home bank at the auction can be larger than the known margin in the first stage.

33

Notice also that the cumulative search and misallocation components are nearly identical with
or without a posted-rate. This is the result of two offsetting forces. On the one hand, eliminating
the posted rate raises substantially the initial quote, which in turn increases the search probability
for consumers qualifying for a loan from their home bank. On the other, by eliminating the price
ceiling, more consumers with relatively poor financial characteristics are able to get a quote from
their home bank, and therefore do not necessarily have to search for additional quotes (especially
those with high search costs). These two forces cancel each other out almost exactly.

6.2

Market structure and search frictions

In this section, we study the effect of market structure on consumer surplus and negotiated prices
by simulating a series of counter-factual experiments in which we vary the number of competitors. Specifically, we eliminate all systematic cost differences between lenders, and assume that
consumers start their search with the same home bank. Then, for each simulated consumer and
each realization of the idiosyncratic shocks, we solve the equilibrium outcomes by incrementally
changing the number of competitors in Ni , from 1 to 12. Importantly, at each step, we solve the
game holding fixed the match values of all existing lenders. Therefore, in the zero search-cost
environment, the expected transaction surplus is strictly increasing in N .
We use the results of these experiments to answer two questions. First, following on the analysis performed above, we evaluate to what extent competition attenuates the welfare cost of search
frictions. Second, we study directly the effect of competition on welfare and prices, by comparing
the equilibrium outcomes with search frictions across alternative market structures. This effectively creates twelve counter-factual “mergers”, which we use to study the effect of competition
of consumer welfare, search effort, and price dispersion.
Table 7 decomposes the effect of search frictions on consumer surplus in different market structures. Each row represents a different market structure, and the columns summarize the welfare
impact of introducing search frictions. Columns (1) to (3) present the percentage contribution of
each component, and the last column presents the cumulative change in consumer surplus, measured as before in $/month per simulated consumer.
Looking at the cumulative surplus changes, the results suggest that competition amplifies the
adverse effect of search frictions on welfare. In other words, by setting search costs to zero, we can
improve the welfare of consumers by a larger margin in competitive markets than in concentrated
markets. For instance, the surplus decrease is 76% larger (in absolute value) in markets with 13
lenders than in markets with two.
The decomposition exercise shows that this might not always be true, and depends on the
importance of market power. Indeed, as competition increases, the welfare loss contribution from
price discrimination shrinks very sharply from 42% to less than 8%. This is a direct consequence
of the improvement in consumer bargaining leverage, caused by the increase in the number of
34

Table 7: Welfare effects of search frictions in competitive and non-competitive markets
Nb. of
comp.
2
3
4
5
6
7
...
13

Search
Probability
(1)
0.46
0.53
0.57
0.59
0.61
0.63

Weflare change decomposition (%)
Misallocation Discrimination Search cost
(2)
(3)
(4)
12.97
42.03
45.00
18.89
32.77
48.35
23.34
26.28
50.38
26.50
21.53
51.97
28.72
17.83
53.45
30.17
15.04
54.79

0.72

31.22

7.60

61.19

∆ CS
($/month)
(5)
-12.13
-14.33
-15.72
-16.76
-17.62
-18.36
-21.39

Each entry corresponds to an average over 100 simulated samples. Each sample is equal to 5,000 consumers. The last column reports the cumulate change in consumer welfare divided by the total number
of simulated consumers, including non-qualifying consumers. The welfare decomposition corresponds to:
∆CSi = ∆Vi − ∆mi − ∆κi Si = Misallocationi − Discriminationi − Search costi . Columns (2)-(4) report the
percentage contribution of each component to the cumulative change.

competing lenders. However, in our simulations, this improvement comes at the cost of more
search effort and a greater misallocation of contracts.
The contribution of the search cost component increases because, in equilibrium, consumers
are more likely to search in more competitive markets. Column (1) shows that the fraction of
borrowers searching more than one bank increases from 46% in duopoly markets, to over 70%
in the most competitive market structures. Note that the model does not necessarily predict this
strict positive relationship for all parameter values. On the one hand, competition increases the
benefit of search, and therefore the probability of rejecting the initial offer (holding fixed the initial
offer). On the other hand, the initial quote is decreasing in N , which leads to a decrease in the
relative gain from search. Our simulation results show that the former effect dominates for most
consumers.
The contribution of the misallocation component also increases sharply with the number of
competitors, from 12% to more than 30%. While the fraction of misallocated contracts is not necessarily larger in more competitive markets (since the fraction of searchers is also larger), the
potential improvement in transaction surplus is much larger in competitive markets. Therefore,
eliminating search frictions corrects a larger market imperfection in markets with 13 lenders, relative to markets with only 2 lenders.
Next, we study directly the effect of concentration on welfare and prices in markets where
search costs are present. We can decompose the effect of losing a potential bargaining partner on
consumer surplus into three terms:
∆CSi = [Vi (N − 1) − Vi (N )] − [mi (N − 1) − mi (N )] − κi [Si (N − 1) − Si (N )]
= ∆Vi − ∆mi − ∆κi Si .

(23)

35

Table 8: Decomposing the effect of mergers on consumer welfare
Mergers

3 to 2
4 to 3
5 to 4
6 to 5
7 to 6
8 to 7
...
13 to 12
Cumulative effect

∆ Fraction
non-qualify
(1)
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.12

Welfare change decomposition ($/Month)
Misallocation Market power Search cost
(2)
(3)
(4)
-2.18
5.11
-0.72
-2.06
2.19
-0.40
-2.01
1.05
-0.36
-1.95
0.54
-0.38
-1.87
0.28
-0.39
-1.81
0.13
-0.40
-1.45
-19.83

-0.03
9.26

-0.34
-4.49

∆ CS
($/Month)
(5)
-6.57
-3.84
-2.70
-2.11
-1.77
-1.54
-1.07
-24.61

Each entry corresponds to an average over 100 simulated samples. Each sample is equal to 5,000 consumers. The
last column reports the cumulate changes in consumer welfare divided by the total number of simulated consumers, including non-qualifying consumers (5,000). The welfare decomposition corresponds to: ∆CSi = ∆Vi − ∆mi − ∆κi Si =
Misallocationi − Market poweri − Search costi . Columns (2)-(4) report the contribution value of each component (in
$/month).

The change in transaction surplus, ∆Vi , captures both the change in the allocation of consumers
across lenders, and the cost increases associated with each merger. The second component measures the change in market power caused by reducing the number of competitors, rather than
solely the elimination of the price discrimination opportunity. The last component measures the
cost saving that results from consumers searching less in more concentrated markets.
Table 8 shows the results of this decomposition exercise. The first column shows the evolution
of the change in the fraction of non-qualifying consumers as we increase the number of competitors. Similar to what we observed when the posted rate was eliminated, increasing the number of
competitors leads to a 12% expansion in the number of loans issued, from 84% in duopoly markets
to about 96% in the most competitive market. The adverse effect of mergers on the supply of loans
is mostly felt in highly concentrated markets.
The results also show that competition increases aggregate consumer surplus by a significant
margin. Although the effect of each merger is modest, the difference in consumer surplus between the most competitive market structure (13 lenders) and the least competitive (2) is larger in
magnitude than the effect of eliminating search frictions altogether ($24.6 vs $18.9 per month).
The welfare cost of each merger falls as the number of lenders in the market increases. The
largest change comes from the market power component: the effect of losing a competitor on profit
margins is decreasing in N . The same pattern exists, but is less pronounced, for misallocation.
Finally, the offsetting effect of the reduction in search costs is not large enough to compensate for
the misallocation and market-power effects of mergers. The reduction in search effort following
each merger reduces the cumulative search costs by less than $0.75/month in duopoly markets,
and by about $0.35/month in the most competitive markets.

36

Table 9: Decomposition of merger effects on negotiation rates
Mergers

3 to 2
4 to 3
5 to 4
6 to 5
7 to 6
8 to 7
...
13 to 12

Change in rates (bps)
Average 2nd-stage 1st-stage
(1)
(2)
(3)
9.26
11.89
5.04
6.01
7.73
2.93
4.62
5.83
1.86
3.84
4.70
1.24
3.35
3.98
0.86
2.98
3.42
0.60
2.04

2.08

Decomposition (%)
Comp. quote Initial quote
(4)
(5)
71.71
17.84
72.68
16.18
73.48
13.30
73.31
10.48
73.33
8.10
72.48
6.26

0.14

70.67

1.97

Search
(6)
10.44
11.14
13.22
16.21
18.57
21.26

Change
dispersion
(7)
-10.02
-5.81
-4.23
-3.32
-2.86
-2.46

27.35

-1.29

Each row corresponds to the simulation of a merger from N to N − 1. Columns (1) to (3) report the average change
in transaction rate, and in the second-stage and initial quotes. Columns (4) to (6) decompose the average rate change
into the contribution of searchers and non-searchers, and the contribution of consumers changing their search decisions.
The last column reports the change residual rate dispersion, measured using the inter-decile range.

Lastly, we focus our attention on the effect of mergers on the distribution of prices. While Table
8 clearly shows that the market power effect is rapidly decreasing in the number of competitors,
it hides the fact that this competitive effect differs enormously across consumers.
The effect of mergers on negotiated prices is heterogenous in part because it is passed through
differently to searchers and non-searchers. To see this, note that we can decompose the average
change in rates into a change in the competitive quote, a change in the initial quote, and a change
in rates for consumers adjusting their search effort post-merger:
h
i
h
i


E [∆ri ] = E ri∗ (N − 1) − ri∗ (N ) Si (N ) + E ri0 (N − 1) − ri0 (N ) (1 − Si (N ))
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Competitive quote (+)

Initial quote (+)

h


i
+ E ri∗ (N − 1) − ri0 (N − 1) Si (N − 1) − Si (N ) .
|
{z
}

(24)

Search ( +/–)

The first two terms are positive, while the third can, in theory, be positive or negative depending
on how the probability of search changes with N . As Table 7 shows, reducing the number of
lenders lowers the average probability of search, and therefore all three terms are positive in our
simulations.
Table 9 summarizes the results of this decomposition. The average effect of losing a competitor ranges from 9.26 bps in markets with three lenders, to 2 bps in markets with 13 lenders. The
decomposition reported in columns (4)-(6) shows that the bulk of the price increase (70%) is associated with consumers facing higher prices at the competition stage. In contrast, the contribution
of the initial quote is much smaller, and decreases towards zero for mergers in more competitive
markets. The fact that consumers adjust their search behavior to engage in less search following

37

the merger implies that the effect on rates is amplified by the presence of search frictions, but by a
small margin.
The small contribution from the initial stage arises mostly because the initial quote is less responsive to changes in market structure. Columns (2) and (3) compare changes in the competitive
and initial quotes for all simulated consumers, irrespective of search decisions. Systematically, the
change in the second stage offer is two to three times larger than the change in the initial quote.
This difference is explained in part by the presence of the posted rate, which constrains roughly
50% of initial quotes, and is independent of market structure. However, even absent the posted
rate, the model predicts larger changes in transaction prices at the auction stage following each
merger. Therefore, consumers with low search costs benefit more from increased competition,
than do consumers with high search costs.
This difference between searchers and non-searchers has implications for the relationship between market structure and price dispersion. In the last column of Table 9 we show that a decrease
in the number of competitor systematically leads to a decrease in residual price dispersion. This is
because as we increase the number of competitors in a market, the bottom of the price distribution
decreases faster than the top, which increases the dispersion of prices.
Figure 5a below illustrates this point by plotting the conditional average rate increases following a merger, against the percentiles of the residual rate distribution. Each line represents this
relationship for market structures ranging from 3 to 8 lenders. It is clear that it is consumers at the
bottom of the rate distribution that are most affected by the loss of a competitor. With 3 lenders, a
merger leads to a substantial increase in rates, over 20 bps, at the 10th percentile. Similarly, with
5 competitors, the effect of the merger at the 10th percentile is smaller, about 10 bps, but much
larger than at the 90th percentile.
Moreover, as Figure 5b shows, there exists a clear relationship between the percentiles of the
residual rate distribution and the contribution of each component. For individuals at the bottom
of the residual distribution, i.e. those paying the lowest price, any merger effect is coming from the
second-stage. At the top of the residual distribution are individuals who are less likely to search,
and therefore most of the merger effect comes through the initial quote. A similar relationship
exists for simulated mergers.
The model’s predictions about the relationship between market structure and both rates and
dispersion are corroborated by findings in Allen et al. (2013a). In it we study the effect of an actual
merger between lenders that occurred in the Canadian banking industry. Our results suggest that
following the merger there was a positive rate increase, but that only consumers at the bottom
and middle of the rate distribution were affected. As a consequence, price dispersion decreased
following the merger. Allen et al. (2013a) shows that search frictions alone can explain these observed patterns. It does so by estimating a semi-parametric version of the model presented in this
paper, in which information about search costs is assumed to be symmetric between lenders and

38

Figure 5: Effect of mergers across the pre-merger distribution of residual rates
(b) Decomposition at N=5
1

40

(a) Merger effects at different percentiles of the distribution
Pre-merger N

Competition
Discrimination

N=4

Search

Merger decomposition shares
.2
.4
.6
.8

N=3

Residual rate change (bps)
10
20
30

N=5
N=6
N=7

0

0

N=8

0

.2

.4

Percentiles

.6

.8

1

0

.2

.4

Percentiles

.6

.8

1

borrowers. In contrast, the objective of this paper is to quantity the consequences of search frictions by specifying a richer model that incorporates multiple sources of residual price dispersion.

6.3

Summary of counter-factual results

Our counter-factual results show that search frictions reduce consumer surplus by almost $20 per
month, with the biggest part of this loss associated with the direct cost of searching for multiple
quotes, and the remainder with price discrimination and inefficient matching.
Product differentiation, associated with the presence of switching costs or loyalty premium,
increases market power. Overall though, differentiation attenuates the effect of search frictions by
reducing direct search costs and improving allocation: there is a loyalty premium attached to the
initial lender, and it makes the first offer. As discussed formally in Weitzman (1979), the sequence
of search that we use is optimal only when the home bank offers the higher quality product.
The posted rate also attenuates the welfare cost of search frictions. Its impact comes mostly
through its effect on the ability of the home bank to discriminate: in its absence, lenders can increase the initial quote, which can increase the search probability of consumers. This is not to
say that the presence of a price ceiling is good overall for consumers. While the posted price
reduces the adverse effect of price discrimination, it also reduces access to credit. We estimate
that eliminating the posted rate would increase the number of mortgages issued by 5.4% on average. Furthermore, lowering the posted rate to reflect the average discount in the market would
increase the fraction of non-qualifying loan applications to nearly 20%.30 Therefore, while our
model cannot assign a value to increasing access to credit, it is important to note that a uniform
pricing policy in this market would not necessarily improve consumer welfare.
30

This result is available upon request.

39

The effect of concentration on welfare and prices in search markets is more ambiguous, as
pointed out by Janssen and Moraga-Gonzalez (2004). We find that while competition increases
costumer welfare overall, it also amplifies the welfare cost of search frictions. As the number of
firms in the market increases, the welfare loss from price discrimination shrinks, but the welfare
loss from misallocation and direct search costs increases. In addition, the presence of heterogenous search costs implies that the benefits of competition are not spread equally across consumers.
Specifically, we find consumers with low search costs benefit more from competition, and so eliminating a lender impacts rates paid by consumers at the bottom and middle of the rate distribution,
but has a smaller effect on consumers at the top. This leads to a positive relationship between number of competitors in a market, and the importance of residual price dispersion. This is consistent
with the empirical findings of Borenstein and Rose (1994), which suggest that an increase in competition lowers the prices paid by price-sensitive consumers, while leaving unchanged prices paid
by loyal consumers at the top of the price distribution.

7

Conclusion

The paper makes three main contributions. The first is to provide an empirical framework for
studying markets in which prices are negotiated. The second is to show that search frictions are
important and generate significant welfare losses for consumers that can be decomposed into
misallocation, price discrimination, and direct search cost components. We also show that the
welfare loss is mitigated by switching costs (loyalty premium) and posted prices, but amplified
by competition. The final contribution is to show that the role of competition is also important in
markets with search frictions, but that this effect is not spread equally across consumers.
Although the overall fit of our model is good, the goodness of fit analysis highlights several
caveats. First, reduced-form estimates using the data show that loyal consumers pay around 8
bps more, while the model predicts more than 35 bps. This difference is directly related to our
modeling assumptions: the timing and order of search are the same for all consumers, and all
consumers have a single home bank. These are simplifying assumptions that closely link search
and switching in the model.
Similarly, the model tends to over-estimate the impact of competition on rates. This likely
reflects the fact that that market structure is assumed to be independent of consumers’ unobserved
attributes, up to regional fixed-effects. If this is not the case, our estimates of firms’ cost differences,
which determine markup levels, would suffer from a attenuation bias, and therefore our results
would correspond to a lower bound on the size of profit margins in this market.
A related interpretation of the small reduced-form effect of competition on rates and discounts,
is that consumers face heterogenous consideration sets, conditional on being located in the same
postal-code area. This would create measurement error in the choice-set of consumers. Because

40

lenders are ex-ante heterogeneous, it is computationally prohibitive to incorporate this type of
measurement error in the model. Moreover, we do not have access to data on the set, or identity
of lenders considered by borrowers.
Finally, in order to keep the model tractable, we decided to focus only on branch-level transactions, and ignore contracts that are negotiated through brokers. Brokers, act as intermediaries
and can potentially lower the search cost of individuals by searching over a larger set of lenders.
Since brokers are used by approximately 25% of borrowers it would be important to understand
better the role they play in this environment. In an ongoing project we are working on modeling
the behavior of these intermediaries.

References
Allen, J., R. Clark, and J. F. Houde (2013a). The effect of mergers in search markets: Evidence from the
canadian mortgage industry. NBER working paper 19126.
Allen, J., R. Clark, and J. F. Houde (2013b). Price dispersion in mortgage markets. Forthcoming Journal of
Industrial Economics.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (2004, Feb). Differentiated products demand systems from a combination of micro and macro data: The new car market. The Journal of Political Economy 112(1), 68.
Bester, H. (1993). Bargaining versus price competition in markets with quality uncertainty. The American
Economic Review 83(1), 278–288.
Borenstein, S. and N. Rose (1994). Competition and price dispersion in the u.s. airline industry. Journal of
Political Economy 102(4), 653–683.
Brannan, L. and L. M. Froeb (2000, May). Mergers, cartels, set-asides, and bidding preferences in asymmetric oral auctions. The Review of Economic and Statistics 82(2), 283–290.
Busse, M., J. Silva-Risso, and F. Zettelmeyer (2006). $1,000 cash back: The pass-through of auto manufacturer promotions. The American Economic Review 96(4).
Chatterjee, K. and C. C. Lee (1998). Bargaining and search with incomplete information about outside
options. Games and Economic Bahavior 22, 203–237.
Crawford, G. and A. Yurukoglu (2011). The welfare effects of bundling in multichannel television.
Dafny, L. (2010). Are health insurance markets competitive? American Economic Review 100(4), 1399–1431.
De Los Santos, B., A. Hortacsu, and M. Wildenbeest (2011). Testing models of consumer search using
data on web browsing and purchasing behavior. American Economic Review (Forthcoming).
Dell’Ariccia, G., E. Friedman, and R. Marquez (1999). Adverse selection as a barrier to entry in the banking industry. RAND Journal of Economics 30, 515–534.
Dell’Ariccia, G. and R. Marquez (2004). Information and bank credit allocation. Journal of Financial Economics 72(185-214).
Dey, M. and C. Flynn (2005). An equilibrium model of health insurance provision and wage determination. Econometrica 73, 571–627.
Doornik, J. A. (2007). Ox - An Object-Oriented Matrix Programming Language. Timberlake Consultants
Press and Oxford.
Fudenberg, D. and M. Villas-Boas (2007). Behavior-based price discrimination and customer recognition.
In Economics and Information Systems, Volume 1. Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Gavazza, A. (2013, December). An empirical equilibrium model of a decentralized asset market. working
paper, LSE.

41

Goldberg, P. K. (1996). Dealer price discrimination in new car purchases: Evidence from the consumer
expenditure survey. Journal of Political Economy 104(3), 622–654.
Gowrisankaran, G., A. Nevo, and R. Town (2013). Mergers when prices are negotiated: Evidence from
the hospital industry. Mimeo.
Grennan, M. (2013). Price discrimination and bargaining: Empirical evidence from medical devices.
American Economic Review 103(1), 145–177.
Hall, R. E. and S. Woodward (2012, December). Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-optimal shopping effort: Theory and mortgage-market evidence. American economic Review 102(6).
Hong, H. and M. Shum (2006). Using price distributions to estimate search costs. RAND Journal of Economics 37(2), 257–275.
Honka, E. (2012, January). Quantifying search and switching costs in the u.s. auto insurance industry.
Working paper, University of Texas-Dallas.
Hortaçsu, A. and C. Syverson (2004). Product differentiation, search costs, and competition in the mututal fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 403–456.
Janssen, M. and J. Moraga-Gonzalez (2004). Strategic pricing, consumer search and the number of firms.
Review of Economic Studies 71, 1089–1118.
Langer, A. (2011, October). Demographic preferences and price discrimination in new vehicle sales.
working paper, University of Arizona.
Lewis, M. and K. Pflum (2013). Diagnosing hospital system bargaining power in managed care networks.
working paper, Ohio State University.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002). Equilibrium wage dispersion with worker and employer heterogeneity. Econometrica 70(2), 2295–2350.
Scott-Morton, F., F. Zettelmeyer, and J. Silva-Risso (2001). Internet car retailing. Journal of Industrial Economics 49(4), 501–519.
Sorensen, A. (2001, October). An empirical model of heterogeneous consumer search for retail prescription drugs. Working Paper 8548, NBER.
Weitzman, M. (1979, May). Optimal searh for the best alternative. Econometrica 47(3), 641–654.
Wildenbeest, M. R. (2011). An empirical model of search with vertically differentiated products. Rand
Journal of Economics 42(4). manuscript.
Wolinsky, A. (1987). Matching, search, and bargaining. Journal of Economic Theory 42, 311–333.

42

A

Data description

Our data-set consists of a 10% random sample of insured contracts from CMHC. It covers the period from
1992 to 2004. We restrict our analysis to the 1999-2002 period for two reasons. First, between 1992 and 1999,
the market transited from one with a larger fraction of posted-price transactions and loans originated by
trust companies, to a decentralized market dominated by large multi-product lenders. Our model is a better
description of the latter period. Second, between November 2002 and September 2003, TD-Canada Trust experimented with a new pricing scheme based on a “no-haggle” principle. Understanding the consequences
of this experiment is beyond the scope of this paper, and would violate our confidentiality agreement.
We also have access to data from Genworth Financial, but use these only to test for robustness, since we
are missing some key information for these contracts. We obtained the full set of contracts originated by
the 12 largest lenders and further sampled from these contracts to match Genworth’s annual market share.
Both insurers use the same guidelines for insuring mortgages. First, borrowers with less than 25%
equity must purchase insurance.31 Second, borrowers with monthly gross debt service (GDS) payments
that are more than 32% of gross income or a total debt service (TDS) ratio of more than 40% will almost
certainly be rejected. Crucial to the guidelines is that the TDS and GDS calculations are based on the posted
rate and not the discounted price. Otherwise, given that mortgages are insured, lenders might provide
larger discounts to borrowers above a TDS of 40 in order to lower their TDS below the cut-off. The mortgage
insurers charge the lenders an insurance premium, ranging from 1.75 to 3.75% of the value of the loan –
lenders pass this premium onto borrowers. Insurance qualifications (and premiums) are common across
lenders and based on the posted rate. Borrowers qualifying at one bank, therefore, know that they can
qualify at other institutions, given that the lender is protected in case of default.

31

This is, in fact, not a guideline, but a legal requirement for regulated lenders. After our sample period, the requirement was adjusted and today borrowers with less than 20% equity must purchase insurance.

43

Table 10: Definition of Household / Mortgage Characteristics
Name
FI
Source
Income
TDS
GDS
Duration
R-status
FSA
Market value
Applicant type
Dwelling type
Close
Loan amount
Premium
Purpose
LTV
Price
Term
Amortization
Interest type
CREDIT

Description
Type of lender
Identifies how lender generated the loan (branch, online, broker, etc)
Total amount of the borrower(s) salary, wages, and income from other sources
Total debt service ratio
Gross debt service
Length of the relationship between the borrower and FI
Borrowers residential status upon insurance application
Forward sortation area of the mortgaged property
Selling price or estimated market price if refinancing
Quartile of the borrowers risk of default
10 options that define the physical structure
Closing date of purchase or date of refinance
Dollar amount of the loan excluding the loan insurance premium
Loan insurance premium
Purpose of the loan (purchase, port, refinance, etc.)
Loan amount divided by lending value
Interest rate of the mortgage
Represents the term over which the interest rate applies to the loan
Represents the period the loan will be paid off
Fixed or adjustable rate
Summarized application credit score (minimum borrower credit score).

Some variables were only included by one of the mortgage insurers.

44

B

Robustness

Table 11: Summary statistics on mortgage contracts in the joint CMHC and Genworth sample

variable
loan
income
payment
spread
I(no discount)
switch
credit score
I(LTV=95)
previous owner

N
35,457
35,457
35,457
35,457
35,457
22,815
35,457
35,457
35,457

mean
140,015
69,535
974
1.26
22.6
26.7
668
36.9
24.3

sd
56,606
27,630
387
.63
41.8
24.2
72.1
48.2
42.9

p25
94,257
49,946
665
.82
0
0
650
0
0

p50
131,846
65,292
920
1.22
0
1
700
0
0

p75
177,548
83,232
1223
1.69
0
1
750
1
0

Table 1 provides summary statistics for the main data-set, which is based only on contracts insured by CMHC. For
robustness we also include estimate the model using contracts insured by Genworth Financial, even though there are
more missing observations. This table provides summary statistics of the full sample.

Table 12: MLE estimation results for alternative specifications32

Parameters

(1)

(2)

(3)

No Heterogeneity

W/ Genworth

ω = 100

0.288

0.290

0.247

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.124

0.156

0.155

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.003)

-1.080

-1.660

-1.275

(0.013)

(0.028)

(0.016)

0.576

0.143

(0.039)

(0.018)

0.326

0.820

(0.043)

(0.013)

-1.780

-1.973

-1.822

(0.011)

(0.008)

(0.005)

0.692

0.670

(0.004)

(0.002)

0.020

0.260

Common shock (σε )
Idiosyncratic shock (σu )
Avg. search cost:
κ̄0
κ̄inc
κ̄owner
Loyalty premium:
λ0
λinc
λowner
45

(0.003)

(0.002)

0.936

0.941

0.886

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.004)

3.510

3.871

3.430

(0.063)

(0.247)

(0.043)

0.610

0.580

0.629

(0.009)

(0.039)

(0.006)

0.035

0.083

0.077

(0.012)

(0.015)

(0.015)

-0.024

-0.214

-0.098

(0.025)

(0.030)

(0.028)

-0.078

-0.109

-0.077

(0.009)

(0.012)

(0.010)

-0.054

-0.046

-0.043

(0.006)

(0.007)

(0.005)

-0.501

-0.518

-0.463

(0.029)

(0.033)

(0.029)

0.060

0.060

0.053

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.004)

0.017

-0.008

-0.093

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.005)

43

47

47

-4.062

-4.279

-5.037

Likelihood-ratio test: 2 × (Lbase − L0 )

943.371

5274.540

20437.486

Sample size

29,000

35,457

29,000

Measurement error:
Cost function:
Intercept
Bond rate
Loan size
Income
Loan/Income
Other debt
FICO score
Max. LTV
Previous owner

Number of parameters
LLF/10,000

32

Average search cost function: log(κ̄i ) = κ0 + κinc Incomei + κowner Previous owneri . Home bank premium function:
log(λi ) = λ0 + λinc Incomei + λowner Previous owneri . Cost function: Ci = Li × (Zi β + εi − ui ). Units: $/100. All
specifications include year, market and bank fixed-effects. The likelihood ration test is calculated relative to the baseline
specification presented in Table 2.

46

