                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EFFICIENCY VERSUS EQUITY IN THE ALLOCATION OF MEDICAL SPECIALTY
                      TRAINING POSITIONS IN SPAIN:
     A HEALTH POLICY SIMULATION BASED ON A DISCRETE CHOICE MODEL

                                          Jeffrey E. Harris
                                     Beatriz G. López-Valcárcel
                                           Patricia Barber
                                           Vicente Ortún

                                        Working Paper 19896
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19896


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




This project was funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through Grant ECO2010–
21558 to BGLV as the principal investigator. The funder had no influence in the conduct of this study
or the drafting of this manuscript. We gratefully acknowledge the Ministry of Health, Social Services
and Equality, General Sub-Directorate on Professional Planning, Spain, for providing us the 2012
MIR registry data. We acknowledge the many medical students and MIR candidates who responded
to our 2011 and 2012 surveys. We thank Jaime Pinilla Domínguez for technical assistance. Finally,
we thank the participants in workshops and seminars that we have given concerning this research,
including: the Pontificia Universidad Católica, Chile (JEH), Universidad Pública de Navarra (BGLV),
Universidad de Vigo (BGLV), and the Grupo Evaluación de Políticas y Servicios de Salud, Asociación
de Economía de la Salud (EvaluAES), Valencia (VO). The opinions expressed in this paper are ours
and ours alone, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Jeffrey E. Harris, Beatriz G. López-Valcárcel, Patricia Barber, and Vicente Ortún. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Efficiency versus Equity in the Allocation of Medical Specialty Training Positions in Spain: A
Health Policy Simulation Based on a Discrete Choice Model
Jeffrey E. Harris, Beatriz G. López-Valcárcel, Patricia Barber, Vicente Ortún
NBER Working Paper No. 19896
February 2014
JEL No. C25,C78,D82,I11,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

Background. In Spain’s “MIR” system of allocating residency training positions, medical school
graduates are ranked according to their performance on a national exam and then sequentially
choose from the remaining available training slots. We studied how changes in the MIR system
might address the inadequate supply of practitioners of family and community medicine in that
country.

Data. Our data included: a registry of the actual residency positions chosen by medical school
graduates in the 2012 MIR cycle; a 2012 post-MIR survey in which graduates made counterfactual
choices as to what they would have chosen but for their position in the national rankings; and a 2011
survey of the relative importance of specialty attributes among final-year medical students in the
same cohort.

Methods. We modeled the MIR system as a one-sided matching mechanism based priority rankings,
also called “serial dictatorship.” Within this model, we developed a framework for evaluating the
tradeoff between the efficiency gains from increasing the supply of practitioners of family and
community medicine and the equity-related benefits of permitting the most talented medical students
to make their specialty choices first. We then applied our framework to real data on medical school
graduates’ specialty choices during 2012 MIR cycle. Our empirical analysis, based on the
multinomial logit model with random coefficients, took account of the endogeneity of choice sets
induced by the MIR scheme. We then used the parameter estimates to simulate various alternative
public policies, including random ranking of candidates, restrictions on the supply of training
positions, and policies designed to upgrade medical school graduates’ valuations of a career in
family and community medicine.

Results: Both random ranking and restrictions in supply resulted in a relatively small efficiency
gains from training more productive medical school graduates in family and community medicine,
but at the same time a substantial equity losses. Improvements in two key attributes of family and
community medicine – professional prestige and the proportion of income from private practice –
resulted in substantial gains in both equity and efficiency.

Conclusions: Policies designed to increase the prestige and remuneration of practitioners of family
and community medicine have the potential to be more efficient and equitable than other
alternatives.

Jeffrey E. Harris                                     Beatriz G. López-Valcárcel
Department of Economics, E18-258                      Department of Quantitative Methods
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                  in Economics and Management
Cambridge, MA 02139                                   University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
and NBER                                              Campus Tafira
jeffrey@mit.edu                                       Las Palmas, Gran Canaria, Spain
                                                      bvalcarcel@dmc.ulpgc.es
Patricia Barber
Department of Quantitative Methods
 in Economics and Management
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Campus Tafira
Las Palmas, Gran Canaria, Spain
pbarber@dmc.ulpgc.es

Vicente Ortún
Faculty of Economic and Business Sciences
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
vicente.ortun@upf.edu
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                        3-Feb-2014


1. Introduction
         Numerous authors in many countries have lamented the shortage of primary care
physicians, particularly the inadequate supply of practitioners of family and community medicine
(Bodenheimer 2006, Rosenblatt, Andrilla et al. 2006, Scott, Larson et al. 2006, Mariolis, Mihas
et al. 2007, Colwill, Cultice et al. 2008, Thistlethwaite, Leeder et al. 2008, Huibers, Giesen et al.
2009, Steinbrook 2009, Barber and Lopez-Valcarcel 2010). The roots of the shortage are
complex and varied, but undoubtedly include noncompetitive distortions in the relative prices of
primary, secondary and tertiary medical care, as well as undervalued external benefits of
preventive and other community-based services (Watts and Segal 2009, Cheng, Scott et al. 2011,
de Bakker, Struijs et al. 2012). Whatever the underlying causes, there has been a general
perception that the social value of training an additional primary care doctor exceeds the private
gains, and that the market has failed to take this divergence between private and social benefits
into account.
         A wide variety of corrective measures have been proposed, including changes in payment
mechanisms and physician compensation, improvements in working conditions, policies to
counter the low prestige of primary care medicine, and the training of non-physician practitioners
as substitutes (Dorsey, Jarjoura et al. 2003, Thornton and Esposto 2003, Gagne and Leger 2005,
Goroll, Berenson et al. 2007, Ortun, Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel et al. 2008, Krueger and Halperin
2010, Sivey, Scott et al. 2010, Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel and Barber Perez 2012). However,
there has been relatively little consideration of alternative policies focused at the critical point
where medical school graduates choose residency training positions. A growing body of
theoretical research on matching mechanisms ultimately led to the reengineering of the U.S.
residency matching program (Roth and Peranson 1999). Still, the principal focus of such
research – and its subsequent applications to public school assignment, housing, and other
matching problems (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1998, Ergin 2002, Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez
2003, Pathak 2011) – has been the development of algorithms that result in stable, Pareto-
efficient allocations. The design of matching mechanisms that correct for externalities and other
market failures has not been a priority.
         Our objective in this article is to evaluate policy alternatives to the current national
system for allocating residency training positions in Spain, widely known as “MIR.” We develop
a simple theoretical model of the MIR system as a one-sided matching mechanism based on

                                                                                                        3
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


priority rankings. The model incorporates the possibility of an external benefit from training a
doctor in family and community medicine. It also explicitly takes into account the tradeoff
between efficiency – in the sense of correcting for the undervaluing of primary care physicians –
and equity – in the vertical sense that the most talented medical students deserve to make their
specialty choices first. Within this theoretical model, we explore the properties of various
modifications of the MIR scheme. We then apply our conceptual models to real data on MIR
outcomes, and use our empirical estimates to simulate the effects of alternative policy
modifications of the MIR system.
         In the following section, we describe the institutional details of the MIR system of
allocating residency training positions. Section 3 presents our theoretical framework for
evaluating the tradeoff between equity and efficiency within the MIR context. In Section 4, we
present our data: a registry of the actual choices of medical school graduates in the 2012 MIR
cycle; a survey in which graduates made counterfactual choices as to what they would have
chosen but for their position in the queue; and a survey of the perceived attributes of each
specialty among final-year medical students carried out in 2011. Section 5 presents our model of
discrete choice, a logit model with random coefficients and endogenous constraints on
candidates’ choice sets imposed by the MIR allocation system.
         In Section 6, we present our strategy for simulating alternative policy scenarios. We
evaluate four different policies: (1) random assignment of candidates’ ranking in the priority
mechanism; (2) concentrated reduction of supply, eliminating training positions in small centers;
(3) generalized reduction of supply, reducing the number of positions in all centers
proportionately; and (4) policies designed to selectively increase the prestige and remuneration
of practitioners of family and community medicine.
         Section 7 presents the results of our discrete choice models, while Section 8 shows the
results of our policy simulations. We find that policies designed to increase the prestige and
remuneration in private practice of practitioners of family and community medicine have the
potential to be more efficient and equitable than other alternatives. Finally, in Section 9 we
discuss the limitations of our work and offer a roadmap for further research.




                                                                                                    4
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


2. The MIR System of Allocating Residency Training Positions in Spain
         The allocation of residency training positions in Spain is organized and regulated at the
national level by a system widely known as MIR, which stands for “médico interno residente,”
literally “resident medical intern.” On an annual basis, the central government’s Ministry of
Health authorizes postgraduate training programs in 47 specialties. The distribution of specialty
training programs and the number of training positions within each program are based on models
of population needs and physician supply (Barber and Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel 2010). To be
considered for a residency training position during a particular annual cycle, each “candidate”
must have an approved diploma from a Spanish or foreign medical school and take a national
examination. Candidates are then ranked on the basis of their MIR combined score, which is a
weighted average of their national exam score (90%) and medical school grade point average
(10%).
         Once all training positions are authorized and all candidates are nationally ranked, the
final phase of the annual MIR cycle functions essentially as a one-sided sequential allocation
mechanism or “serial dictatorship,” in which the training programs play only a passive role. The
top-ranked candidate chooses his preferred residency training position from the entire set of
nationally available training programs. Then the second-ranked candidate chooses from the
remaining available residency positions, and the process continues iteratively until all training
positions are exhausted or all candidates have elected positions.
         The national rank ordering is a critical element of the MIR allocation scheme, and in a
loose sense resembles a tournament where the prizes are highly valued residency training
positions in the most sought-after specialties. With each annual MIR cycle, the graduates of the
nation’s top medical schools consistently attain the highest combined scores and thus get to
choose their prizes first (Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel, Ortun et al. 2013, Lopez-Valcarcel, Ortun et
al. 2013). Figure 1 highlights the superior performance of the 213 graduates of the medical
school of the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, a university that has consistently produced top-
ranked candidates, among a total of 6,348 candidates in the 2013 MIR cycle.
         Year after year, the highest scoring candidates from the top universities consistently
choose such specialties as plastic surgery, dermatology and cardiology. At the bottom of the
national ranking, the residual claimants are left with a Hobson’s choice between enrolling in a
residency in family and community medicine or dropping out in order to retake the national

                                                                                                     5
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                3-Feb-2014


exam the following year (Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel, Barber Perez et al. 2011). In the 2002 MIR
cycle, as shown in Figure 2, only 200 candidates within the top-ranked 3,000 chose a residency
position in family and community medicine, and by the 2012 cycle, only 50 had done so.
         Figure 2 suggests that the declining status of family and community medicine may have
reached bottom in 2010 and, in fact, there is evidence of a minor reversal (Harris, Gonzalez
Lopez-Valcarcel et al. 2013). The critical factor appears to be job security. Until the financial
crisis erupted in late 2008, unemployment among Spanish physicians was a relatively rare
phenomenon, with most doctors obtaining long-term jobs as salaried employees of the Spanish
national health system. As the budgetary cutbacks began to hit the health departments of the
country’s autonomous communities, an increasing number of physicians came every month to
government unemployment offices looking for a job. In the face of rising unemployment,
practitioners of family and community medicine experienced fewer job losses than specialists
(Figure 3).
         The prospects for increased job security in family and community medicine, however,
may turn out to be short lived. Many recent graduates have been compelled to accept temporary
employment contracts under conditions substantially inferior than those prevailing before the
crisis. One sign of the increased turnover is the abrupt rise in the proportion of new employment
contracts that go to practitioners of family and community medicine (Figure 4).


3. Theoretical Framework
         We assume that there are N > 0 candidates for residency training positions. We denote

the set of candidates by C = {ci i = 1,…, N } . We further assume that there are M > 0 available


                                                                                        {
training positions, and denote the set of residency training positions by P = p j j = 1,…, M .            }
For simplicity, we assume that there are only two types of residency training programs: family
medicine (F), and a hospital-based specialty (H). Our results could readily be generalized to
more than two types of programs.1 Let M F and M H , respectively, denote the number of

training positions available in each of the two specialties, where M F + M H = M . We assume for


1 Formally, the specialty is known as “family and community medicine” (or “medicina familiar y comunitaria”), but
for brevity here we shall sometimes refer to it simply as “family medicine.”

                                                                                                                6
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                         3-Feb-2014


now that the number of training positions equals or exceeds the number of candidates, that is,
M ≥ N . Violations of this assumption are discussed below. We further assume that candidates

regard all positions within a specialty as interchangeable. The only characteristic of a residency
training program that matters to a candidate is the specialty. We can thus regard the set P of
training positions as having binary elements, equal to either 1 for family medicine or 0 for the
hospital-based specialty.
         We define an assignment as a single-valued mapping f from the set C of candidates

onto the set P of positions. Since we have assumed that M ≥ N , the mapping f assigns every

candidate to a residency position. Let fi denote the assigned specialty of candidate ci , where

fi = 1 if the candidate is assigned to family medicine, and fi = 0 otherwise. In the literature on

matching mechanisms, including the well-studied house allocation problem (Abdulkadiroglu and
Sonmez 1998), our candidates are called “agents,” our positions are called “houses,” and what
we describe as an assignment is called an “allocation.” The house allocation literature generally
assumes that the number of houses equals the number of agents. Here, we allow for the
possibility that the number of positions differs from the number of candidates.
         We further assume that each candidate ci attains cardinal utility uFi if assigned to family

medicine and cardinal utility u Hi if assigned to the hospital-based specialty. Given his

assignment fi , the utility attained by candidate ci can therefore be written as

ui = fi uFi + (1− fi ) u Hi . While the matching literature generally specifies ordinal preference

schemes, our use of cardinal utilities permits us to construct a social welfare function that
directly addresses the tradeoff between equity and efficiency. (For an exception, see (Kelso and
Crawford 1982).)
         Conforming to the institutional setup in Spain, we restrict our analysis to one-sided
matching systems. In contrast to two-sided matching mechanisms (Abdulkadiroglu, Pathak et al.
2009), the residency training positions in our framework are simply passive objects. They cannot
express specific preferences for candidates, nor do their preferences enter into our normative
analysis. One-sided mechanisms have also been studied in problems of school choice (Erdil and
Ergin 2008).


                                                                                                        7
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


         We define the private welfare function U as
                N
(1)	
   U = ∑ wi ui
               i=1


where the welfare weights wi > 0 attached to each candidate permit interpersonal comparisons

and thus capture equity considerations. We will have more to say about the construction of these
welfare weights below. Substituting our expression for each candidate’s attained utility into (1),
we get

         U = ∑ wi ( fi uFi + (1− fi ) u Hi ) = ∑ fi wi Δui + K
                N                                N
(2)	

               i=1                              i=1


               N
where K = ∑ wi u Hi is a constant term that does not depend on the assignment f . The
              i=1


differential utility Δui = uFi − u Hi is positive for a candidate who prefers family medicine and

negative for one who prefers the hospital-based specialty.
         Aside from its effects on private welfare, the assignment of candidates to training
positions generates external social benefits. Specifically, we assume that there is an external
social benefit to training a physician in family medicine, and that the magnitude of the externality
varies among candidates. We define the external benefit function V as
                N
(3)	
   V = ∑ ri fi
               i=1



where ri measures the external benefit of moving candidate ci from the hospital-based specialty

to family medicine. We shall term ri the productivity of candidate ci to capture the idea that it is

a characteristic intrinsic to each candidate but varies among candidates. The most productive
candidates generate positive externalities. However, we allow for negative ri to accommodate

the possibility that transferring the least productive candidates into family medicine may
generate negative externalities.
         We can now frame our problem as maximizing the external benefit V subject to a
constraint on private welfare U ≥ U 0 , where U 0 is a constant. This is equivalent to maximize a

social welfare function of the form


                                                                                                       8
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014




(4)	
   W = V + λU


where λ > 0 is a Lagrange multiplier. Substituting (2) and (3) into (4) gives the social welfare

function
                N
(5)	
   W = ∑ fi vi + W0
                i=1



where vi = ri + λ wi Δui and W0 = λ K . The term vi captures the net welfare effect of moving

candidate ci from the hospital-based specialty to family medicine.


First-Best Solution
         We can now characterize the first-best solution, that is, the assignment f : C → P that

maximizes the social welfare function W in (5).
         Intuitively, it might seem that we could maximize social welfare simply by assigning
those candidates with the highest values of vi to the M F positions available in family medicine.

In fact, it is optimal to work in both directions. First, identify those candidates with positive
values of vi , assigning those with the highest values to family medicine and stopping if all M F

positions in that specialty are filled. Second, identify all those candidates with negative values of
vi , assigning those with the algebraically lowest values to the available positions in the hospital-

based specialty, stopping when either there are no more candidates with negative values of vi or

when all M H hospital-based positions have been filled. Third, assign those remaining candidates

with the highest values of vi , even if some values are negative, to all remaining positions in

family medicine.
         More formally, we partition the set C of candidates into two mutually exclusive subsets

based on the sign of each candidate’s vi . We denote C+ = {ci vi > 0} and C− = {ci vi ≤ 0} , where




                                                                                                        9
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                         3-Feb-2014


C+ ∪ C− = C . Let N + = C+ and N − = C− denote, respectively, the numbers of candidates in

each subset, where N + + N − = N . Then proceed in three steps.

         Step 1.1. Assign those candidates ci ∈C+ with the highest values of vi to family

medicine. If this step fills all positions in that specialty (that is, if N + ≥ M F ), then the optimum

has been attained, and the assignment of the remaining candidates will not affect social welfare
W . Otherwise (that is, if N + < M F ), continue to Step 1.2.

         Step 1.2. Assign the remaining candidates ci ∈C− with the algebraically lowest values of

vi to the subset of hospital-based positions. If this step assigns all remaining candidates (that is,

N − ≤ M H ), then the optimum has been attained. Otherwise (that is, if N − > M H ), continue to

Step 1.3.
         Step 1.3. Assign the remaining candidates ci ∈C to fill all remaining positions in family

medicine.
         So long as N < M , this three-step procedure is superior to simply assigning candidates
with the highest values of vi to family medicine. Only when N = M (that is, the number of

candidates equals the number of positions) are the two solutions are equivalent. A trivial example
makes the point. Suppose that there are just N = 2 candidates with v1 = 1 and v2 = −1, and that

there are M = 4 positions with M F = M H = 2 . If we simply assigned the highest values of vi to

the two available positions in family medicine, then the social welfare (absent the constant term
                          2
W0 ) would be W = ∑ fi vi = 0 . But if we followed the above procedure, we would first assign
                         i=1



candidate c1 to family medicine (Step 1). Then we would assign candidate c2 to the hospital-

based specialty (Step 2). With all candidates assigned a specialty, Step 3 would unnecessary and
the social welfare (again, absent the constant term) would be W = 1 . Note that if instead we

began with only M = 2 positions with M F = M H = 1, the two procedures would indeed be

equivalent.



                                                                                                          10
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


         Figure 5 provides a richer example for a hypothetical set C of N = 90 candidates who
are to be assigned to a set P of 100 training positions, of which half are in family medicine and
half are in the hospital-based specialty, that is, M F = M H = 50 . Each candidate corresponds to a

point in the ( v, Δu ) plane, where the subscripts i have been dropped for clarity. We have

constructed the example so that N + = 35 candidates have strictly positive values of vi (that is, in

the upper right and lower right quadrants), while the remaining N − = 55 candidates with non-

positive values (the upper left and lower left quadrants). The crude correlation coefficient
between vi and Δui is –0.09.

         The red-filled points represent the 40 candidates assigned to family medicine as follows.
In Step 1.1, all N + = 35 candidates in C+ are first assigned to family medicine. Since this step

does not fill all M F = 50 positions in that specialty, we continue with Step 1.2, assigning those

points with the M H = 50 lowest values of vi (the open points if Figure 5) to the hospital-based

specialty. Since this step still leaves some candidates unassigned (that is, N − > M H ), we continue

to step 1.3, assigning the remaining N − − M H = 5 candidates in C− to family medicine. The

example of Figure 5 shows how a central planner could take advantage of the excess supply of
training positions to allow the hospital-based specialty to crowd out family medicine.
         A central planner can achieve the first-best solution only if he knows the values of vi of

each candidate. While the values of the components ri , wi and λ may be ascertainable,

knowledge of each candidate’s differential utility Δui is more problematic. Consider a candidate

ci who would prefer to be assigned to the hospital-based specialty, that is, Δui < 0 . If he has a

sufficiently high productivity ri , he may end up assigned to family medicine. While such a

candidate would want to reveal that he preferred the hospital-based specialty, he would
nonetheless have an incentive to reveal an exaggerated negative value of Δui . An analogous

argument shows that a low-productivity candidate who prefers family medicine would have an
incentive to reveal an exaggerated positive value of Δui . Accordingly, in the case where the


                                                                                                      11
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                          3-Feb-2014


central planner lacks information about the differential utilities Δui of the candidates, achieving

the first-best solution is not strategy proof (Satterthwaite and Sonnenschein 1981). The
breakdown of the strategy-proof characteristic in the case of cardinal utilities has been noted
previously (Pathak 2011).

Priority Mechanisms and Second-Best Solutions
         In the MIR system, each candidate is ranked according to his combined performance in
the nationwide exam and his medical school grade point average. The top-ranked candidate
elects a residency training position among all available positions, after which the second highest
ranked candidate elects a position among all the remaining positions, and the process continues
sequentially. The MIR system is thus an example of a priority mechanism, also called “serial
dictatorship” in the matching literature.
         Any priority mechanism, including the MIR system, will result in an assignment
f : C → P . The question here is whether there is a priority mechanism that achieves the first-best

optimum and, if not, what is the second-best optimum among all possible priority mechanisms.
         Formally, assume that the priority mechanism orders the set of candidates

C = {ci i = 1,…, N } so that candidate c1 chooses first, c2 chooses second, and so forth until cN

chooses last. Let Pi denote the subset of positions available to candidate ci in the priority

mechanism, where P1 = P . If candidate ci elects position fi , then the choice set available to

candidate ci+1 is Pi+1 = Pi − { fi } . If the choice set Pi consists solely of positions in only one of

the two specialties, then candidate ci and all remaining candidates {ci+1 ,…,cN } will have to

choose that specialty. Otherwise, candidate ci will choose fi = 1 if Δui ≥ 0 , and fi = 0

otherwise. To break ties, we’ve assumed that a candidate who is indifferent chooses family
medicine.
         It is a well-known result in the matching literature that a priority mechanism results in a
Pareto-efficient allocation, provided that agents have strict preference orderings (Erdil and Ergin
2008). In our setup here, Pareto efficiency would mean that there is no other assignment
f : C → P that increases one candidate’s utility without decreasing another’s. Pareto efficiency


                                                                                                          12
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014


would likewise prevail for any priority mechanism, except in cases where at least one candidate
is indifferent between specialties. To see why, suppose that there are only two candidates and two
positions (that is, N = M = 2 ) and that there is one available position in each specialty (that is,
M F = M H = 1). Assume further that Δu1 = 0 and Δu2 > 0 , that is, the first candidate is

indifferent while the second candidate strictly prefers family medicine. When candidate c1 goes

first, he breaks the tie and chooses family medicine, while candidate c2 will have to settle for the

hospital-based specialty. Yet reversing the order of the two candidates would increase the utility
of candidate c2 without decreasing the utility of candidate c1 .

         However, as soon as we introduce the externality V or the social welfare weights wi , we

cannot guarantee that any priority mechanism achieves the first-best optimum of the social
welfare function W . Just as we did for the first-best optimum, we characterize the second-best

optimum among all priority mechanisms as a three-step procedure.

         Step 2.1. Define CF = {ci Δui ≥ 0} as the subset of candidates who would prefer family

medicine. Define CF+ = CF ∩ C+ as the subset of candidates who would prefer family and

community medicine and have positive values of vi . Rank those candidates in ci ∈CF+ in

decreasing order of vi , so that the candidate with the highest value of vi is ranked first. If this

step does not fill all M F positions in family medicine, continue with step 2.2.

         Step 2.2. Define CH = C − CF = {ci Δui < 0} as the subset of candidates who would prefer

the hospital-based specialty. Place those candidates ci ∈CH with the algebraically lowest values

of vi next in the ranking order, directly behind those already ranked in step 2.1. Let them

continue to choose the hospital-based specialty, stopping when there are no more candidates (that
is, CH < M H ) or no more hospital-based training positions (that is, CH ≥ M H ).

         Step 2.3. The order of the remaining candidates is arbitrary. If step 2.2 exhausts all
candidates who would prefer the hospital-based specialty (that is, CH < M H ), then all remaining

candidates will belong to CF and elect family medicine. If step 2.2 exhausts all hospital-based



                                                                                                       13
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014


positions (that is, CH ≥ M H ), then all remaining candidates will have to choose family

medicine, regardless of their preferences.
         Note that in the case where CH ≥ M H , we have allowed the least socially valued

candidates belonging to CH to choose the hospital-based specialty until positions in that

specialty are exhausted. This forces the more socially valued candidates in CH to elect family

medicine by default.
         In a priority scheme, candidate ci will choose the specialty with the higher utility so long

as he has both types of training positions available to choose from. If training positions in only
one of the two specialties remain open, he will have no alternative but to choose the remaining
specialty. A priority scheme thus has two potential policy levers. It can identify candidates with
high values of vi who prefer family medicine and put them at the top of the ranking. It can also

identify candidates with high values of vi who would not choose family medicine and place

them far enough in the back of the ranking so that, when their turn to choose comes up, there are
no remaining slots in the other specialty to choose from.
         Figure 6 exploits that same example as in Figure 5 to illustrate the second-best solution
among all priority mechanisms. In Step 2.1, the 8 candidates in CF+ = CF ∩ C+ (the blue-filled

points in the upper right quadrant) are placed at the top of the ranking and choose family
medicine. In Step 2.2, all CH = 60 candidates who would prefer the hospital-based specialty are

ranked next, starting the candidate in CH with the algebraically lowest value of vi , who

corresponds to the points at the extreme lower left in the figure. This step fills up all M H = 50

positions in the hospital-based specialty, as represented by the open points in the figure (that is,
CH ≥ M H ). In Step 2.3, the remaining candidates (10 blue-filled points in the lower right

quadrant and 22 blue-filled points in the upper left quadrant) elect the remaining
90 − 8 − 50 = 32 positions in family medicine. Thus, the 10 candidates with the highest social
contribution are placed far enough back in the ranking that they are compelled to elect family
medicine, contrary to their preferences.


                                                                                                       14
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014


         In general, the second-best solution among priority schemes is not equivalent to the first-
best solution. A sufficient condition is that the both the sets CF− = CF ∩ C− and CH + = CH ∩ C+

be empty. In that case, all candidates with positive values of vi would prefer family medicine,

while all those with negative vi would prefer the hospital-based specialty. In the ( v, Δu ) plane in

Figures 5 and 6, there would be no points in the lower right or upper left quadrants. But this is
clearly not a necessary condition. For example, we can relax the condition that CH + = CH ∩ C+

(the lower right quadrant) is empty, making the additional assumption that

M H ≤ CH − = CH ∩ C− , that is, there are enough candidates in the lower left quadrant to cover

all the positions in the hospital-based specialty. In that case, we can first rank all candidates in
CF+ = CF ∩ C+ , who will all choose family medicine. In the second step, we rank the candidates

in CH − in increasing order of vi until the hospital-based positions are exhausted.

         Achieving the second-best assignment among all priority rankings is subject to the same
problems of revelation as the first-best assignment. If a central planner has to rely upon the
candidates to reveal their differential utilities Δui , then those low-productivity candidates who

prefer family medicine will have an incentive to exaggerate their positive values of Δui .

Similarly, those high-productivity candidates who prefer the hospital-based specialty will have
an incentive to exaggerate their negative values of Δui . Like the first best solution, the second-

best assignment is not strategy proof.

The MIR Priority Mechanism
         The MIR selection system is a specific example of a priority mechanism in which the
ranking of each candidate is based upon his combined score in the nationwide exam and his
medical school grade point average. The candidate with the highest combined score goes first,
while the candidate with the lowest score goes last.
         Historically, the design of MIR system was motivated by three key considerations. First,
the assignment mechanism was intentionally one-sided. This design element was imposed to
avoid favoritism and political connections that might arise if the residency training programs had
any say in the assignment of candidates. Second, the rank ordering of candidates was driven by a

                                                                                                       15
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                     3-Feb-2014


strong sense of vertical equity. Those who perform better should be allowed to choose first.
Third, the combined score on the national exam and medical school grade point average was a
regarded as a valid indicator of a candidate’s productivity.
           Within our conceptual framework, where the social value of candidate ci is

vi = ri + λ wi Δui , the MIR’s emphasis on vertical equity implies that a high-scoring candidate

merits a high welfare weighting wi . The MIR’s design further implies that a high-scoring

candidate has a high productivity. However, we see no convincing basis for the implicit
assumption that a high-scoring candidate who prefers a hospital-based specialty such as
neurosurgery would not be just as productive in family medicine. Thus, in our empirical
evaluation of the MIR scheme below, we shall assume that a high-scoring candidate similarly has
a high productivity ri in family medicine.

           But these are only secondary considerations. The fundamental problem with the MIR
scheme is that the most productive candidates have assiduously avoided choosing family
medicine. As noted in Figure 3, less than 2 percent of the top half of the ranking chose family
medicine. While high-scoring, high-ranked candidates may indeed have high values of ri and wi ,

they clearly have negative values of Δui .

           Figure 7 illustrates how a MIR priority mechanism would operate on the illustrative data
in Figures 5 and 6. For simplicity, we have calculated each candidate’s productivity as
ri = vi −Δui , assuming that λ = wi = 1 , and then ranked candidates according their imputed

values of ri . The resulting correlation coefficient between ri and Δui is –0.63.2 The blue-filled

points show the candidates assigned to family medicine, while the open points show those
assigned to the hospital-based specialty. The five top-ranked candidates are labeled 1 through 5,
while the five bottom-ranked candidates are labeled 86 through 90.
           All candidates in the right lower quadrant (that is, CH + = CH ∩ C+ ) are ranked high

enough that they can exercise their preference for the hospital-based specialty until that specialty
is filled. Moreover, all candidates in the upper quadrants (that is, CF ) get to exercise their


2   In our empirical analyses below, we will instead impute both ri and wi directly from the candidates’ scores.


                                                                                                                   16
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014


preference for family medicine. The remaining 10 candidates (the filled points in the left lower
quadrant) with low values of vi are forced to elect family medicine contrary to their preferences.

Thus, in contrast to the second-best priority mechanism, the MIR solution may assign the most
productive candidates to the hospital-based specialty, while the least productive may end up in
family medicine.

Supply Restriction
          Intuitively, it might seem that a selective reduction in the number of hospital-based
positions would increase welfare, as more candidates would be shunted into family medicine.
But this is not necessarily the case. In the implementation of the first-best solution or the second-
best priority mechanism, the hospital-based specialty essentially serves as a reservoir for
candidates with low values of vi . Selective restriction of the hospital-based specialty may reduce

the size of this reservoir, and thus reduce welfare. In the MIR priority mechanism, where the
highest scoring, most productive candidates are also the highest ranked, the selective restriction
of hospital-based training positions will not necessarily increase welfare either. Among those
candidates who would otherwise prefer the hospital-based specialty, the restriction will force
only the least productive into family medicine once the hospital-based specialty runs out of
places.
          Such supply restrictions operate only at the extensive margin. This point is illustrated in
Figure 8, which shows the effect of imposing supply restrictions upon the MIR solution. The
green filled points show the candidates assigned to family medicine under the MIR solution of
Figure 7. The additional 10 yellow filled points show those candidates whose assignments are
switched from the hospital-based specialty to family medicine when the number of hospital-
based positions is reduced from M H = 50 to M H = 40 .

          The supply restriction illustrated in Figure 8 resulted in a reduction in the total number of
positions M from 100 to 90. As a result, the total number of positions equaled the total number

N of candidates. More severe supply restrictions, which result in fewer positions than candidates
(that is, N > M ), can also be incorporated into our conceptual framework. Appendix A provides
the details.



                                                                                                        17
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014


Random Ordering
         In contrast to supply restrictions, random ordering of candidates will operate at the
intensive margin. This is illustrated in Figure 9, which is based on the same illustrative data as in
the previous Figures 5 through 8.
         If we regard the MIR priority mechanism as our point of reference, a policy of random
ordering can entail a considerable loss of private welfare. In our illustrative analyses of the MIR
system in Figure 7 and the MIR system with supply restrictions in Figure 8, we set the welfare
weights wi = 1 for simplicity. But in practice, the MIR system was motivated by the vertical

equity notion that the highest performing candidates deserved to choose first. This would imply a
strong correlation between the productivity ri and the welfare weights wi , which would amplify

the private welfare losses resulting from random assignment.
         The notion of vertical equity that underlies the MIR ordering based on a candidate’s
combined score is closely related to the concept of “justified envy” (Pathak 2011). Suppose that
candidate c1 gets to choose a training position before candidate c2 does. We say that candidate

c1 has “justified envy” of candidate c2 if the candidate c1 would derive higher utility from the

other candidate’s assignment f2 than his own assignment f1 . For all priority mechanisms, there

are no such pairs of candidates that exhibit “justified envy.” However, if we maintain the MIR
ranking as our point of reference and then change the ranking to random ordering, then the new
assignment does exhibit justified envy with respect to the original MIR ranking. In other words,
if candidate c1 got to choose a training program before candidate c2 under the original MIR

ranking and, as a result of a random ordering policy, candidate c1 would derive higher utility

from the other candidate’s assignment f2 than his own assignment f1 , then there is justified envy

with respect to the original MIR ranking. Our use of welfare weights that reflect the original
ranking capture this notion.

Policies to Change Utilities
         Consider a public policy variable X that influences candidates’ preferences for different
specialties but not their productivity. Without loss of generality, we assume that uFi ( X ) is strictly




                                                                                                     18
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                         3-Feb-2014


increasing function of X , while u Hi does not depend on X . As a result, Δui ( X ) is also an

increasing function of X . We can therefore write the total social welfare function as


                     N
(6)	
    W ( X ) = ∑ fi ( X ) vi ( X ) + W0 − C ( X )
                     i=1



where vi ( X ) = ri + λ wi Δui ( X ) and C ( X ) is the cost of implementation as a function of X . In

contrast to policies to restrict supply, changes in X operate at the intensive margin, affecting the

differential utility values Δui of all candidates. We write fi ( X ) because changing attributes will

change the choices of some candidates under a priority mechanism.
         Even if the differential utility Δui ( X ) is an increasing function of X , it is nonetheless

possible that an increase in X could make some candidates worse off. Again, consider the MIR
ranking with specific values X = X0 to be the reference case. Suppose that the top-ranked

candidate c1 elects a hospital-based specialty (that is, Δu1 ( X0 ) < 0 ). This choice leaves a

position open in family medicine for a lower-ranked candidate ci , who in fact prefers that

specialty (that is, Δui ( X0 ) > 0 ). With a sufficiently large increase in X , the top-ranked candidate

c1 switches to family medicine, thus excluding the lower ranked candidate ci from that specialty

and forcing him instead to choose the hospital-based specialty. As a result of the increased
attractiveness of family medicine, the higher ranked candidates crowd out the lower ranked
candidates, who wanted residencies in family medicine in the first place.


4. Data
         Our principal database consisted of the individual assignments to residency training
programs for all candidates participating in the 2011–2012 MIR nationwide competition (for
short, the “2012 MIR registry”). This database was provided by Spain’s Ministry of Health,
Social Services and Equality. For each candidate, the registry contained: the candidate’s national
ranking (an ordinal number ranging from 1 up to the total number of participants); the residency
program chosen (including medical specialty and training center); the candidate’s residential

                                                                                                         19
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                 3-Feb-2014


postal code, sex, nationality, grade point average in medical school, and medical school attended,
including foreign medical schools.
         In the 2012 MIR competition, a total of 231 training centers offered residency positions
in one or more of 44 specialties.3 For hospital-based specialties, such as cardiology, neurology
and urology, these training centers were located in 181 different hospitals. For non-hospital based
specialties, such as family and community medicine, occupational medicine, public health, and
some psychiatry training programs, we grouped the training centers according to 50 provinces
throughout the country.
         Together, these training centers offered a total of 2,527 distinct residency training
programs, classified by specialty and center. With each residency training program offering
multiple positions, there was a grand total of 6,555 available residency positions nationwide.
Among these, 1,860 (28.4%) were residency positions in the specialty of family medicine.
Initially, a total of 11,713 medical graduates passed the MIR exam in order to be eligible to opt
for one of the 6,555 training positions. Of these candidates, 5,158 (44.0%) withdrew from the
competition without choosing a residency, in many cases because their test score was so low that
they had no chance of choosing their desired specialty or training center. That left 6,555
candidates for exactly as many training positions. A total of 1,716 (26.2%) of these participating
candidates were foreign nationals.
         We supplemented the 2012 MIR registry with additional data on the characteristics of the
231 training centers. These included information on hospitals’ bed capacity and high-technology
facilities, derived from the official National Catalog of Hospitals of Spain 2011. We also used
Google Maps to create a 50 × 50 matrix of travel times between the capital of a candidate’s
province of residence and the capital of the province in which each training center was located.
         We matched the 2012 MIR registry database with two cross-sectional surveys specifically
constructed for this research project. The first was a survey of students in their final semester of
medical school in Spain, administered in April 2011 (Harris, Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel et al.
2013). This survey provided us with the perceived values of seven key attributes of each


3 While the Ministry of Health authorizes a total of 47 specialties, we excluded the school-based specialties of
forensic medicine, sports medicine, and medical hydrology, which together accounted for only 149 candidates in the
2012 MIR competition. Rather than receiving salaries as medical residents, trainees in these three specialties pay
tuitions to attend a professional school. They ranked at the bottom in the MIR competition.

                                                                                                                20
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


specialty, as described in Appendix B, Table B1. These included: the probability of obtaining
employment (X1), favorable working hours and working conditions (X2), recognition by patients
(X3), prestige and recognition by colleagues (X4), possibilities for advancement and professional
development (X5), average annual remuneration (X6), and percentage of income derived from
private practice (X7). Among these attributes, we placed particular emphasis on professional
prestige (X4) and outside income from private practice (X7). There is good evidence that
professional prestige is an important driver of the decision not to pursue a career in primary care
medicine, independent of income (Kolstad 2013). Moreover, in a nationalized healthcare system
such as Spain, where employed physicians receive salaries negotiated through collective
bargaining, the extent to which a physician can engage in outside private practice is a superior
proxy for earnings (Harris, Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel et al. 2013). As a measure of earnings,
outside income is more orthogonal to the other specialty characteristics than total earnings.
          The second cross-sectional survey (for short, the “2012 post-MIR survey”) was
performed in May 2012 on those candidates who had just been assigned to residency positions in
the 2012 MIR competition. These candidates belonged to the same cohort that answered the first
survey as medical students in 2011. We asked them not only about their actual specialty/center
selection, but also about their preferred choice if they had been ranked first in the competition.
We refer to the latter as a candidate’s counterfactual choice. This survey also included questions
on gender, medical school, distance from home to the assigned residency training center,
previous participation in prior MIR competitions, as well as respondents’ motivations for their
current specialty/center selection. With our assurance of anonymity, respondents to this survey
voluntarily provided their e-mail addresses, which permitted us to merge their responses with the
principal database. We thus had additional data from this survey on 3,432 (or 52.4%) of the
6,555 candidates in the 2012 MIR registry. In our econometric models, to be described in Section
5 below, we dropped observations with missing values, leaving an estimation sample of 6,254
MIR candidates, of whom 3,189 could be matched with the survey database. Of these, a total of
3,117 had also answered the counterfactual question on their preferred specialty and training
center.
          Table 1 displays comparative statistics for the 2012 MIR registry and the 2012 post-MIR
survey, including tests for comparison of group means. While there were no significant
differences according to Spanish nationality or gender, those candidates responding to the post-

                                                                                                     21
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


MIR survey performed better on the national exam and tended to choose positions closer to their
residence.
         For the 3,117 candidates with complete data in both databases, Table 2 compares the their
actual specialty choices in the MIR competition with their counterfactual ones. For a highly
preferred specialty with a limited number of training positions, such as plastic surgery, only a
small fraction of candidates were assigned to their preferred choices. By contrast, virtually every
one of the candidates who preferred family medicine was assigned to his top choice. Those
candidates who preferred cardiology, dermatology and plastic surgery tended to have high MIR
rankings, so that few ended up assigned to family medicine.
         In our analysis of the 2012 MIR registry, the dependent variable was the training program
actually chosen by each candidate. In the 2012 post-MIR survey, the dependent variable was the
training program that the candidate would have made if he had been top ranked (the
counterfactual choice). In both analyses, the explanatory variables included the seven key
attributes of the specialty; the characteristics of the training center (number of beds, and
availability of positron emission tomography (PET) in the affiliated hospital); the characteristics
of the candidate (gender, MIR ranking and nationality) interacted with the seven specialty
attributes; the distance from the candidate’s residence to the training center, measured in minutes
of travel time between provincial capitals; and an indicator variable equal to 1 if the candidate’s
residence and the training center were located in the same province. The complete list of
explanatory variables is shown in Appendix Table C1.


5. Discrete Choice Modeling
         Our estimation strategy was based upon a conditional logit model with random
parameters, also called the “mixed logit model” (McFadden and Train 2000, Train 2009). To
analyze the data from the 2012 MIR registry, we modified the model specifically to take into
account the endogeneity of the choice set available to each candidate as his turn came up in the
MIR sequence. We used the results of this model to simulate the policy options described in
Section 6.
         We also applied the mixed logit model to our 2012 post-MIR cross-sectional survey. In
that case, respondents were asked to designate their preferred specialty under the counterfactual
assumption that they had been ranked first, and therefore all candidates had the same, complete


                                                                                                   22
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                          3-Feb-2014


choice set. We used the results of this model to test the validity of the axiom of Independence of
Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA), as described below.

                                                                      {                }
         Generalizing the notation of Section 3 above, we let P = p j j = 1,…, M denote the set

of distinct residency training programs, each identified by a particular specialty and location, and
let m j denote the total number of training positions available in program p j . Let

C = {ci i = 1,…, N } denote the set of candidates participating in the MIR sequential assignment

process.
         We first consider estimation of the mixed logit model with an endogenous choice set. We
assume that the candidates are already ordered so that candidate c1 is first to elect a training

program, while candidate cN is last. Let Pi denote the set of distinct residency training programs

available to candidate ci when it is his turn to elect a program, and let mij denote the number of

remaining unassigned positions in training program p j available to candidate ci when his turn

comes up. Since the top-ranked candidate c1 can choose any program, we have P1 = P and

m1 j = m j . If candidate ci chooses a position in training program p j , the number of positions

available in that training program is decremented by 1, that is, mi+1, j = mij − 1, while the number

of positions available in all other training programs remains unchanged, that is, mi+1,k = mik for

all k ≠ j . If candidate ci chooses the last available slot in training program p j , that is, mij = 1 ,

                   { }
then Pi+1 = Pi − p j and that training program is dropped from the choice sets Pi+1 , Pi+2 ,… of all

remaining candidates.
         Let yi denote the training program chosen by candidate ci . Given the unobserved

parameter vector β , the probability that candidate ci choses training program yi = p j ∈Pi is

given by the logit model




                                                                                                           23
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                             3-Feb-2014


                                              Xij β

(7)	
            {
            Pr yi = p j Xij , β =} ∑e     e
                                                 Xik β
                                                           = Lij ( β )
                                       pk ∈Pi




where Xij is a vector of observed characteristics that candidate ci associates with program p j .

Some elements of Xij may depend only on the specific training program and not on the

candidate, such as the particular specialty or the facilities of the training center. Other elements
may depend on both the program and the candidate, such as the distance of the candidate’s home
province from the training center. Included in the latter category are interactions between a
candidate’s characteristics (e.g., gender, nationality) and a program’s characteristics.
            We further assume that the vector of unobserved parameters β has a multivariate normal

distribution β µ, Σ ~ N ( µ, Σ ) with density function φ ( β µ, Σ ) . To simplify the notation, we let

θ = ( µ, Σ ) . Conditional on θ , the probability that candidate ci choses training program

yi = p j ∈Pi is therefore given by4

(8)	
            {              }
            Pr yi = p j Xij ,θ = ∫ Lij ( β )φ ( β θ ) d β = Lij (θ )

            As noted by (Train 2009) and others, the parameters θ = ( µ, Σ ) can be estimated by

maximum likelihood, where the integral in (9) can be computed by simulation. Let θˆ denote the

maximum likelihood estimate of θ , and consider a specific candidate ci . Given his selected

program yi , the characteristics Xij , and the estimate θˆ , the posterior density of β is given by


              (                    )
            g β yi = p j , Xij ,θˆ =
                                       Lij ( β )φ β θˆ      ( )
                                                           ()
(9)	

                                             L θˆ     ij




4   In (7) and (8), we have intentionally overloaded the notation Lij ( ⋅) , where Lij ( β ) refers to the logit probability

conditional on β , while Lij (θ ) refers to the probability conditional on θ .


                                                                                                                               24
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014


          We employed the mixlogit routine in Stata to estimate θˆ via maximum likelihood

(StataCorp 2013). We imposed the additional restriction that covariance matrix Σ take the

diagonal form Σ = diag (σ 12 ,…,σ K2 ,0,…,0 ) , where the only first K elements of β were assumed

to be random. In our subsequent simulations, to be described in the next section, we used the
mixlbeta post-estimation routine (Hole 2007) to compute for each candidate ci the posterior

mean value of β in (10), which we denote by β̂i .

          To analyze the 2012 post-MIR survey data, we assumed that each respondent made his
counterfactual choice of preferred residency training program from the entire choice set

      {                 }
P = p j j = 1,…, M . Given the unobserved parameter β , the probability that candidate ci

preferred training program yi = p j ∈P is given by the logit model

                                         Xij β

(10)	
     {                 } ∑e
          Pr yi = p j Xij , β =
                                     e
                                            Xik β
                                                    = Lij ( β )
                                   pk ∈P




Given θ = ( µ, Σ ) , the probability that candidate ci preferred training program yi = p j ∈P is

given by the same mixture of conditional probabilities shown in (8).
          Application of the mixed logit model to the two different databases – the 2012 MIR
registry and the 2012 post-MIR survey – permitted us to test the axiom of Independence of
Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA) that is implicit in the logit model (8). In particular, for the 3,117

candidates who were represented in both databases, we compared the estimates θˆ derived from

the 2012 MIR registry with those derived from the 2012 post-MIR survey. In the former case, the
estimates are based on restricted choice sets Pi dictated by the candidates’ MIR ranking, while in

the latter case, the estimates are based on the complete choice set P of all training programs.


6. Simulation Strategies
          In order to compare the impact of alternative public policies on private and social
welfare, we used a simulation strategy based on the mixed logit model estimated from the entire


                                                                                                      25
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


2012 MIR database. In each of the following scenarios, we used the estimated model parameters

β̂i for each candidate ci to predict his choice of training program from set of available programs

Pi , proceeding sequentially from the first-ranked candidate c1 to the last candidate cN . In effect,

each simulation constitutes a realization of the MIR sequential selection process under different
conditions, as determined by alternative public policies.
         Scenario 0 (Baseline): We simulated the MIR sequence based upon the original 2012
ranking, as determined by candidates’ combined scores on the nationwide exam and medical
school grade point average. We left the supply of training positions and candidates’ preferences
unchanged. This baseline case served as our reference for comparison.
         Scenario 1 (Random Assignment): We simulated the MIR sequence based upon the
random ranking of candidates, rather than the actual 2012 ranking, leaving the supply of training
positions and candidates’ preferences unchanged. Specifically, we drew a pseudo-random
number from a uniform distribution for each candidate, and then assigned to each candidate his
resulting rank order statistic. We then ran 100 simulations of the MIR selection process, each
time drawing a new random ordering of candidates.
         Scenario 2A (Concentrated Reduction in Supply): We maintained the original MIR
ranking as well as the candidates’ preferences, but reduced the total number of training positions
by 20%, eliminating those training programs p j with the fewest number of training positions

m j . This case was entirely deterministic with no random component, and was thus simulated

once.
         Scenario 2B (Generalized Reduction in Supply): We maintained the original MIR ranking
and candidates’ preferences, but reduced the total number of training positions by 20%,
eliminating positions at random from all training centers. To that end, we assigned to each
training position a pseudo-random number from a uniform distribution, and then eliminated
those training positions in the lowest 20% of the distribution. We then ran 100 simulations of the
MIR selection process, each time randomly eliminating a different subset of training positions.
         Scenario 3 (Upgrading Family and Community Medicine): We maintained both the
original MIR rank ordering and the supply of training positions, but varied the prestige and
remuneration of family medicine as a specialty. Specifically, we repeatedly simulated the MIR


                                                                                                   26
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                        3-Feb-2014


selection process for an array of different values of X4 (professional prestige) ranging from 0 to
10 in increments of 0.5, and of X7 (percentage of compensation derived from private practice)
ranging in value from 0 to 100 in increments of 5. As noted in Appendix Table B1, the baseline
valuations of these attributes for family and community medicine were X 4 = 3.92 on a 10-point

scale and X7 = 13.2 on a percentage scale. For all remaining specialties combined, the

corresponding baseline valuations were X 4 = 6.30 and X7 = 39.3 .

         We refer to scenario 0 as the baseline scenario, while the remaining four scenarios as
alternative policy scenarios.
         For each of the above scenarios, including the baseline scenario, we computed an

                                      1 N
external benefit function, V =          ∑ ri fi , normalized by the number N of candidates, where
                                      N i=1

fi = 1 if and only if candidate ci is assigned to family medicine, and where the candidate’s

productivity ri was computed as a linear function of a candidate’s MIR ranking. Specifically, let

the candidate ci with the highest MIR score have rank Ri = 1 , while the candidate with the

lowest score has rank Ri = N . We specified ri = RN − Ri + 1 , so that the top-ranked candidate has

a productivity of r1 = RN while the lowest ranked candidate has a productivity of rN = 1 .

         For each scenario, including the baseline scenario, we also computed two private welfare

functions, U =
                   1 N
                     ∑i i
                   N i=1
                         r u and U =
                                     1 N
                                       ∑ r ui , where ui = max
                                     N i=1                  j
                                                               uij { } represents the maximum
utility attained by candidate ci among all training programs p j available in his choice set. In

our formulation of U , we adhered to the notion of vertical equity inherent in the MIR scheme

and set the welfare weights equal to the candidate’s productivity, that is, wi = ri for all

i = 1,..., N . By contrast, in our formulation of U , we assumed equal welfare weights wi = r ,

              1 N
where r =       ∑ ri is the mean productivity. We shall call the former productivity-driven weights
              N i=1

and the latter homogenous weights.

                                                                                                     27
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                          3-Feb-2014


         For each alternative policy scenario s = 1, 2A, 2B, 3 , we then computed the differences

ΔV( s ) = V( s ) − V( 0 ) , ΔU( s ) = U( s ) − U( 0 ) , and ΔU( s ) = U( s ) − U( 0 ) , where the subscripts in parentheses

refer to scenarios and where the subscript ( 0 ) refers to the baseline scenario.

         Finally, we displayed the results of simulations as scatterplots, in which each individual
candidate ci corresponded to a single point in the plane. For each scenario s = 0,1, 2A, 2B, 3 ,

including the baseline scenario, we graphed the candidate’s maximum attained utility ui( s ) versus

his original MIR ranking Ri . Then, for each alternative policy scenario s = 1, 2A, 2B, 3 , we

graphed the change in the candidate’s utility Δui( s ) = ui( s ) − ui( 0 ) from the baseline versus his

original MIR ranking Ri .


7. Results: Discrete Choice Models
         We estimated discrete choice three models, which we designate as I, II and III,
respectively. The complete results are reported in Appendix Table C1. Model I covered the 6,254
candidates in the 2012 MIR registry who had complete data for all variables. The dependent
variable was the training program actually chosen by each candidate in the 2012 MIR
competition, while each candidate’s choice set consisted of those training programs still available
when his turn came up in the MIR sequence. Model II was a replication of Model I restricted to
the subsample of 3,117 candidates who fully responded to the 2012 post-MIR survey. Model III
covered the same subsample of 3,117 respondents to the 2012 post-MIR survey, but with the
counterfactual dependent variable – namely, the training program each candidate would have
chosen if he had been ranked first. Each candidate’s choice set consisted of all available training
programs.
         In each of the three models, we permitted only a subset of the explanatory variables to
have random coefficients. The estimated mean values of the coefficients of all explanatory
variables are listed in the upper portion of Table C1 under the heading “Mean ( µ ) ,” while the




                                                                                                                          28
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                 3-Feb-2014


estimated standard deviations for those explanatory variables with random coefficients are listed
in the lower portion under the heading “Standard Deviation (σ ) .” 5


Model I: 2012 MIR Registry
         Model I correctly predicted 34 percent of the specialty choices of the 6,254 candidates.
However, with respect to the choice of family and community medicine, the concordance
between observed and predicted was 90 percent. In Model I, all location-related variables and
hospital characteristics were highly significant and had the expected signs. Distance thus imposes
a cost that candidates took into account in their decisions, while remaining in one’s province of
residence conferred an additional positive component to a candidate’s utility.
         In Model I, all specialty attributes had significant coefficients except for annual
remuneration (X6). When normalized by their sample standard deviations, three attributes had the
largest quantitative effects: the probability of obtaining employment (X1), prestige among
colleagues (X7), and the percent of compensation earned in private practice (X7). Moreover, three
attributes displayed significant variability among candidates, as indicated by their estimated
standard deviations: the probability of obtaining employment (X1), the recognition by patients
(X3) and the percent of compensation earned in private practice (X7).
         With respect to interactions between specialty attributes and the characteristics of the
candidates, Spanish nationals valued the probability of obtaining employment (X1) more than
foreign candidates. Higher-ranked candidates (with lower absolute values of Ri ) valued this

attribute more than lower-ranked candidates. Women, foreign candidates and lower-ranked
candidates placed more value on prestige among colleagues (X4) than their counterparts. Women,
Spanish nationals and higher-ranked candidates attached more value to income from private
practice (X7) than their respective counterparts.

Models II and III: The 2012 Post-MIR Survey
         In Appendix Table C1, none of the estimated coefficients of Model II differed
significantly from those of Model I, a finding that points to the absence of selection bias among


5The decision as to which explanatory variables had random coefficients was empirically based. We first estimated a
more general model in which all explanatory variables had random coefficients, and then restricted the random
coefficients of the explanatory variables to those with significant standard deviations at the 5% level.

                                                                                                                29
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                          3-Feb-2014


those who responded to the 2012 post-MIR survey.6 Both Models II and III correctly predicted
31 percent of the specialty choices of the 3,711 candidates. With respect to the choice of family
and community medicine, the concordance between observed and predicted was 87 and 98
percent for Models II and III, respectively.
           In Model III, each candidate’s choice set corresponded to all available training positions
nationwide. In Model II, by contrast, each candidate’s choice set was restricted to those training
positions available when his turn came up in the MIR competition. Comparison of the parameter
estimates of the two models thus constitutes a test of the axiom of the Independence of Irrelevant
Alternatives.
           In Appendix Table C1, 25 out of the 33 estimated coefficients showed no significant
difference between Models II and III. Among the 8 coefficients with significant differences, two
notable instances were the number of positions available in the training program, and the
interaction between Spanish nationality and the probability of obtaining employment (X1). While
the size of the training program had a positive effect in both Models II and III, it mattered even
more when a candidate’s choices were restricted by his rank ordering in the MIR scheme (Model
II). For Spanish medical graduates, job security likewise mattered significantly more when a
candidate’s choices were restricted (Model II).
           In Table 3, we compare the coefficient estimates derived from Models II and III for all
interactions between the seven medical specialty attributes (X1 through X7) and the candidate’s
MIR ranking. In Model III, where there were no restrictions on choice, a candidate’s ranking in
the MIR scheme functioned solely as a proxy for his skill and productivity. In our econometric
model, MIR ranking was defined so that lower ranked candidates with inferior national exam
scores and poor medical school grades had higher values of Ri , while the top-ranked candidate

had a MIR ranking of R1 = 1 . Accordingly, the primarily negative signs of the coefficients in

Model III imply that the more qualified candidates actually attached greater value than their less
productive counterparts to all specialty characteristics except recognition by patients (X4).




    Comparison of coefficients was based on the Z-statistic: Z = ( bI − bII )   s I + s II , where bI and bII are the
                                                                                 2    2
6


estimated parameters from the two models, while s I and s II are their respective standard errors.


                                                                                                                        30
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                             3-Feb-2014


         In Model II, where a candidate’s MIR ranking served not only as a proxy for a
candidate’s qualifications but also as a determinant of his choice set, the coefficients of the
interaction terms were generally reduced in absolute value or even lost statistical significance. In
the case of prestige among colleagues (X7), the coefficient was actually reversed. Less qualified
candidates, once they were compelled to choose among the slim pickings available to those at the
bottom of the MIR rankings, valued prestige among their colleagues even more than their top
ranked counterparts.


8. Results: Simulations
         Table 4 summarizes the main results of our simulations, including the criterion functions
ΔV , ΔU , and ΔU . In addition, for each scenario s = 0,1, 2A, 2B, 3 , including the baseline

scenario, Figures D1–D5 in Appendix D plot the maximum utility ui( s ) attained by each of the

6,255 MIR candidates in relation his original MIR ranking Ri . For each alternative policy

scenario s = 1, 2A, 2B, 3 , Figures 10–13 plot the change in utility Δui( s ) = ui( s ) − ui( 0 ) from the

baseline in relation to the candidate’s original MIR ranking Ri . For scenarios 1 and 2B, which

required multiple replications, we plot the results of one of the draws as an illustration.
         For each of the alternative policy scenarios s = 1, 2A, 2B, 3 , Table 4 shows an

improvement in the external benefit V( s ) compared to its baseline value V( 0 ) . The improvement

was largest for policy scenario 3 (Upgrading Family and Community Medicine).
         In Table 4, random assignment of candidates (scenario 1) improved the welfare criterion
U so long as we used homogeneous weights. With the use of productivity-driven weights,
however, the criterion function U diminished markedly. In Figure 10, the bottom ranked

candidates with high values of Ri experienced utility gains, while the top ranked candidates with

low values of Ri experienced utility losses. As indicated by the blue points in the figure, a large

proportion of these top ranked candidates were compelled to elect family medicine when they
were randomly placed at the back of the queue. Accordingly, when interpersonal comparisons are
based on the notion that the most talented medical students deserve to make their specialty


                                                                                                             31
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                           3-Feb-2014


choices first, the random assignment policy results in a substantial offsetting equity loss. The
narrow credibility intervals of the criterion functions for this policy indicate that variations in the
specific random ordering of candidates would not alter this conclusion.
         Policies intended to reduce the supply of training positions (scenarios 2A and 2B)
resulted in modest improvements in the external benefit indicator V , but substantial welfare

losses for both the homogeneous (U ) and productivity-driven (U ) criterion functions. As shown

in Figures 11 and 12, all candidates incurred losses in utility as a result of restrictions in their
available choices, while those candidates who were excluded from any training position incurred
a substantial utility losses. The improvements in V arose from the fact that some candidates at

the margin were compelled to choose family medicine. In Table 4, the narrow credibility
intervals in the row corresponding to alternative policy 2B indicate that variations in the specific
training positions to be excluded would not alter these conclusions.
         Upgrading family and community medicine (scenario 3) was the only policy with the
potential for improvements in both equity and efficiency. Table 4 shows the effects of a policy
that would increase both X4 (prestige among colleagues) and X7 (proportion of income earned in
private practice) from the current mean values for family medicine to the mean values of all
other specialties. Figure 13 shows improvements in utility among top ranked candidates who
have now elected family and community medicine for its superior attributes. In the figure, 11
percent of the candidates experienced a net loss in utility compared to the baseline scenario, that
is, Δui( 3) = ui( 3) − ui( 0 ) < 0 . Nearly all of these candidates had chosen family medicine in the

baseline scenario. They were deprived of their preferred specialty choice – or, in a few cases,
their preferred training location – once family medicine became more attractive to the top ranked
candidates.
         Figures 14 and 15 plot the simulation results for different combinations of X4 and X7. The
yellow-filled point in each figure corresponds to X4 = 6.30 on a 10-point scale and X7 = 39.3 on a
percentage scale, which were assumed in Table 4, while the intersection of the solid horizontal
and vertical lines corresponds to the status quo, where ΔV( 3) = ΔU( 3) = 0 . The figures illustrate

the tradeoffs between the two attributes in attracting candidates to family and community



                                                                                                        32
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014


medicine. For example, to achieve approximately the same external benefit criterion ΔV( 3) = 859

and the same productivity-driven welfare criterion ΔU( 3) = 3835 as in Table 4, we could have

selected the alternative values X4 = 7.4 and X7 = 25 percent. This gives a local marginal rate of
transformation equal to − ( 25 − 39.3) ( 7.4 − 6.3) = 13 percentage points of income from private

practice for every 1 point on a 10-point scale of prestige among colleagues.


9. Discussion and Conclusions
         We modeled Spain’s MIR system of assigning residency training positions as a one-sided
matching mechanism based on priority rankings, also called “serial dictatorship.” Within this
theoretical framework, we formulated a social welfare criterion that explicitly took account of
the tradeoff between two key components: the external social benefit of having highly productive
candidates elect a residency in family and community medicine; and the vertical equity gains
from permitting the most productive candidates to have the highest priority in choosing a training
program. We compared the MIR system to the optimal allocation of residency positions, as well
as the second-best among all sequential allocation mechanisms. We theoretically characterized
alternative policies for improving the MIR allocation, including random ranking of candidates,
restrictions on the supply of residency positions, and improvements in the perceived attributes of
family and community medicine.
         We then applied our theoretical framework to real data. We formulated and estimated a
multinomial logit model with random coefficients to capture the preferences of candidates
participating in the 2012 MIR competition. We then used the estimated parameters of this model
to simulate the effects of alternative public policies. We found that random ranking of candidates
(policy scenario 1) resulted in a relatively small increase in the external social benefit of training
highly productive candidates in family medicine, but at the same time a substantial equity loss.
Moreover, policies aimed at reducing the number of training positions (scenarios 2A and 2B)
improved the external social benefit at the extensive margin, but likewise resulted in a substantial
loss of welfare, as candidates at the bottom of the MIR ranking were locked out of any training
position at all. By contrast, policies that increased two key attributes of family medicine –




                                                                                                     33
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014


professional prestige and compensation from private practice – increased the external social
benefit at the intensive margin without any countervailing loss of welfare.
         The four scenarios that we considered do not necessarily cover the full range of available
policy options, but they do reflect realistic choices given current political constraints in Spain.
We selected policies scenarios 2A and 2B, in particular, because the Spanish government has
already made a decision to reduce the total number of residency training positions as part of
cutbacks in response to the financial crisis. We chose policy scenario 3 to capture a range of
recent proposals to fundamentally change the nature of work of primary care physicians in Spain
(Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel, Barber Perez et al. 2011). In modeling fundamental changes in the
perception of family and community medicine, we focused on two key attributes: prestige among
colleagues (X4), and the proportion of income derived from private practice (X7). In addition to
job security (X1), these factors had been identified as critical in medical school students’
assessments of careers in alternative specialties (Harris, Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel et al. 2013).
         We chose policy scenario 1 (random ranking of candidates) not because it is currently
politically feasible, but because it serves as an important theoretical benchmark. Our empirical
finding that random ranking resulted in a substantial equity loss serves as a cautionary note to the
general perception that “random serial dictatorship” and its variants necessarily result in fair
allocations (Budish, Che et al. 2013). Random assignment may be regarded as extremely unfair
when there is a strong perception that rankings should be based on merit, performance or similar
criteria.
         Among the policy alternatives that we did not consider is a secondary market, where
subsets of candidates could mutually trade residency positions after the completion of the formal
assignment process. This possibility is related to Gale’s “top trading cycles” algorithm (Shapley
and Scarf 1974). Even more radical would be a pre-MIR market, in which candidates with high
exam scores could sell their rankings to those at the bottom and then take the national exam the
following year. This practice – which we might call “I sell my turn” – bears a resemblance to the
decision to give up one’s reserved seat on an airline flight in return for compensation and a later
reservation.
         For the subset of MIR candidates who responded to our 2012 post-MIR survey, we
compared the results of a multinomial logit model with constrained choice sets (Model II) to the
same model specification with unconstrained choice sets (Model III). This comparison allowed

                                                                                                      34
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014


us to test for violations of the axiom of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives in a manner
different from that described by Berry and colleagues, who had data on consumers’ first and
second choices of automobiles (Berry, Levinsohn et al. 2004). Our approach of restricting choice
sets resembles that of Machado and colleagues, who used the revealed preferences of MIR
candidates to make inferences about the relative quality of hospitals’ training programs in Spain
(Machado, Mora et al. 2012). It differs from that of Timmins and Murdock, who addressed the
problem of congestion in travel cost models by modifying the specification of the utility function
(Timmins and Murdock 2007).
         We found, in particular, that the interaction between MIR ranking and prestige among
colleagues (X4) reversed sign in the counterfactual scenario, while the interaction with the
proportion of income from private practice (X7) did not (Table 3). Under the constraints of the
MIR system, those candidates near the bottom of the ranking attached more importance to
prestige, while in a counterfactual world without such constraints, those near the top attached
more importance to this attribute. In the real world where the highest scorers go first,
professional prestige becomes a marker of exclusivity that is desired by those with fewer options.
In a counterfactual world without any restrictions on choice, professional prestige is desired
solely by those with the best qualifications. In essence, restricting choice creates an externality in
which those at the bottom, who have fewer choices, want what those at the top already have
(Bikhchandani, Hirschleifer et al. 1992).
         The possibility that a candidate’s ranking in MIR priority mechanism itself influences his
underlying preferences would complicate our analysis of public policies such as random ranking.
In effect, our simulations are designed to capture local effects, in which policies do not change
candidate’s underlying preferences, as embodied in the parameters β , but only the explanatory

variables ( X, Z ) in our choice model (equation 7). It is conceivable that changes, for example, in

the organization of family and community medicine may result in global changes in candidates’
preferences.
         Our study has a number of important limitations. First, we measured the two key
components of our social welfare criterion, namely, the external benefit V and the private
welfare U . But we had no obvious strategy for identifying the multiplier λ in the overall social

welfare W = V + λU . Rather than speculating about alternative values of λ , we chose simply to

                                                                                                    35
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                                 3-Feb-2014


display the two key components separately (Table 4). Nonetheless, we believe that the
comparisons are so stark that efforts to identify λ through surveys of physicians and

policymakers would add little.
           In our calculations of the welfare effects of restrictions in supply (policy scenarios 2A
and 2B), we arbitrarily assigned a utility ui = 0 to each candidate who was excluded from any

residency training program. This assumption of “no life outside MIR” ignores any residual utility
from serving as a non-physician. Nor does it account for the possibility that an excluded
candidate could again apply for a residency position the following year. Again, we believe that
our comparisons in Table 4 are so stark that efforts to identify the residual utility are unlikely to
influence our conclusions.

           In our simulations, we used the posterior mean values of the coefficients β̂i , based on the

posterior density function given in equation (9) above. In a simulation study of school choice,
Hastings and colleagues adopted a similar strategy (Hastings, Kane et al. 2010). Since we did not
simulated repeated draws from the posterior density, the results reported in Table 5 understate the
degree of uncertainty in our results. 7
           In our simulations, we used each candidate’s ranking as a proxy for his productivity ri . It

is arguable that scores on a national exam and performance in medical school are unreliable
indicators of long-run productivity, and therefore don’t merit inclusion in our calculation of the
external benefit V from assigning candidates to family and community medicine. The available

evidence, however, suggests that one’s score on a national exam taken during medical school is a
stable, reliable indicator of productivity over the long run (Epstein, Nicholson et al. 2013).
           In our analysis of policies to upgrade family and community medicine, we focused
sharply on prestige among colleagues (X4) and the proportion of income from private practice
(X7). We ignored total remuneration (X6), which in fact had a borderline significant negative sign
in Model I (Table C1, P = 0.075). Spanish medical students appear to have limited quantitative


7   We did not adopt the procedure suggested by Revelt and Train (2000), where the conditional density of β given

the selected program yi , the characteristics X ij , and the estimate θˆ can be approximated by repeatedly drawing β
                                                                                                                     r




                                                                                          ( ) ∑ L (β ).
from the multivariate normal distribution N ( µ̂ , Σ̂ ) and then weighting its value by Lij β
                                                                                                r
                                                                                                              ik
                                                                                                                   r


                                                                                                    p k ∈Pi




                                                                                                                              36
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014


knowledge of the earnings of different specialties 10–15 years out of medical school, a
phenomenon that has also been observed in the U.S. (Nicholson 2005). In a national system
where nearly all physicians are employees, the proportion of earnings from private practice
appears to a superior indicator of earnings that is more orthogonal to other specialty
characteristics (Harris, Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel et al. 2013). Similar problems in identifying
the orthogonal component of earnings have been encountered in studies of predominantly fee-
for-service payment systems (Gagne and Leger 2005).
         Our welfare analysis did not take into account the costs of implementation of alternative
policies, as reflected in the term C ( X ) in equation (6) above. This drawback is especially

important for scenario 3, where we studied policies aimed at enhancing the professional prestige
and remuneration of practitioners of family and community medicine. Improving the
professional prestige of family doctors will likely entail the creation of top-level teaching
positions in medical schools, as well as the redirection of research and development funds
toward the study of primary care. At present, only a small minority of family doctors have their
own private practices or receive compensation for being on-call at private hospitals. New
incentives may be necessary to stimulate the formation of physician-owned health centers that
would eventually assume responsibility for the primary care of the general population under
contract with the Spain’s National Health Service. To the extent that income from private
practice served as a proxy for total compensation, our results suggest that increased salaries of
family doctors may be an effective means to attract the most productive young physicians to
family medicine. In the long term, enhancement of professional prestige and increased
opportunities for remuneration from private practice may require a reformulation of the nature of
work of the family physician, as well as the role of community health centers not only in Spain,
but also in other healthcare systems.
         We conclude that policies designed to increase the prestige and remuneration of
practitioners of family and community medicine have the potential to be more efficient and
equitable than other alternatives. Other policies that we studied here resulted in moderate
improvements in the number of productive practitioners of family medicine, but at substantial
costs in terms of equity.




                                                                                                    37
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                  3-Feb-2014


Funding
         This project was funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through
Grant ECO2010–21558 to BGLV as the principal investigator. The funder had no influence in the
conduct of this study or the drafting of this manuscript.


Acknowledgments
         We gratefully acknowledge the Ministry of Health, Social Services and Equality, General
Sub-Directorate on Professional Planning, Spain, for providing us the 2012 MIR registry data.
We acknowledge the many medical students and MIR candidates who responded to our 2011 and
2012 surveys. We thank Jaime Pinilla Domínguez for technical assistance. Finally, we thank the
participants in workshops and seminars that we have given concerning this research, including:
the Pontificia Universidad Católica, Chile (JEH), Universidad Pública de Navarra (BGLV),
Universidad de Vigo (BGLV), and the Grupo Evaluación de Políticas y Servicios de Salud,
Asociación de Economía de la Salud (EvaluAES), Valencia (VO). The opinions expressed in this
paper are ours and ours alone.


Conflicts of Interest
         We have none to report.


Author Contributions
         All authors (JEH, BGLV, PB, VO) participated in the conceptualization and the design of
the study, as well as the analysis and interpretation of the data. JEH and BGLV were principally
responsible for writing the manuscript. All authors have reviewed and approved the final draft of
this working paper.




                                                                                                 38
	
             	



References
         Abdulkadiroglu, A., P. A. Pathak and A. E. Roth (2009). "Strategy-proofness versus
Efficiency in Matching with Indifferences: Redesigning the NYC High School Match." American
Economic Review 99(5): 1954-1978.
         Abdulkadiroglu, A. and T. Sonmez (1998). "Random Serial Dictatorship and the Core
from Random Endowments in House Allocation Problems." Econometrica 66(3): 689-701.
         Abdulkadiroğlu, A. and T. Sönmez (1998). "Random serial dictatorship and the core from
random endowments in house allocation problems." Econometrica 66(3): 689-701.
         Abdulkadiroğlu, A. and T. Sönmez (2003). "School choice: A mechanism design
approach." American economic review: 729-747.
         Barber, P. and B. Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel (2010). "Forecasting the need for medical
specialists in Spain: application of a system dynamics model." Human Resources for Health
8(24).
         Barber, P. and B. G. Lopez-Valcarcel (2010). "Forecasting the need for medical
specialists in Spain: application of a system dynamics model." Hum Resour Health 8: 24.
         Berry, S., J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes (2004). "Differentiated Products Demand Systems
from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market." Journal of Political
Economy 112(1): 68-105.
         Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirschleifer and I. Welch (1992). "A Theory of Fads, Fashion,
Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades." Journal of Political Economy 100(5):
992-1026.
         Bodenheimer, T. (2006). "Primary care--will it survive?" N Engl J Med 355(9): 861-864.
         Budish, E., Y.-K. Che, F. Kojima and P. Milgrom (2013). "Designing Random Allocation
Mechanisms: Theory and Applications." American Economic Review 103(2): 585–623.
         Cheng, T. C., A. Scott, S. H. Jeon, G. Kalb, J. Humphreys and C. Joyce (2011). "What
Factors Influence the Earnings of General Practitioners and Medical Specialists? Evidence from
the Medicine in Australia: Balancing Employment and Life Survey." Health Econ.
         Colwill, J. M., J. M. Cultice and R. L. Kruse (2008). "Will generalist physician supply
meet demands of an increasing and aging population?" Health Aff (Millwood) 27(3): w232-241.




	
             	

Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014


         de Bakker, D. H., J. N. Struijs, C. B. Baan, J. Raams, J. E. de Wildt, H. J. Vrijhoef and F.
T. Schut (2012). "Early results from adoption of bundled payment for diabetes care in the
Netherlands show improvement in care coordination." Health Aff (Millwood) 31(2): 426-433.
         Dorsey, E. R., D. Jarjoura and G. W. Rutecki (2003). "Influence of controllable lifestyle
on recent trends in specialty choice by US medical students." JAMA 290(9): 1173-1178.
         Epstein, A. j., S. Nicholson and D. A. Asch (2013). The Production of and Market for
New Physicians' Skill, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 18678,
January.
         Erdil, A. and H. Ergin (2008). "What's the Matter with Tie-Breaking? Improving
Efficiency in School Choice." American Economic Review 98(3): 669-689.
         Ergin, H. I. (2002). "Efficient resource allocation on the basis of priorities." Econometrica
70(6): 2489-2497.
         Gagne, R. and P. T. Leger (2005). "Determinants of physicians' decisions to specialize."
Health Econ 14(7): 721-735.
         Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel, B. and P. Barber Perez (2012). "[Health workforce planning
and training, with emphasis on primary care. SESPAS Report 2012]." Gac Sanit 26 Suppl 1:
46-51.
         Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel, B., P. Barber Perez and V. Ortun Rubio (2011). ¿Por qué los
médicos huyen y rehúyen la Medicina de Familia? Datos y claves sobre el problema en busca de
soluciones. La refundación de la Atención Primaria. V. Ortún. Madrid, Springer Healthcare.
         Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel, B., V. Ortun, P. Barber and J. E. Harris (2013). "[Important
differences between faculties of medicine. Implications for family and community medicine.]."
Aten Primaria.
         Goroll, A. H., R. A. Berenson, S. C. Schoenbaum and L. B. Gardner (2007).
"Fundamental reform of payment for adult primary care: comprehensive payment for
comprehensive care." Journal of General Internal Medicine 22(3): 410-415.
         Harris, J. E., B. Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel, V. Ortun and P. Barber (2013). "Specialty
choice in times of economic crisis: a cross-sectional survey of Spanish medical students." BMJ
Open 3(2).




                                                                                                     40
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                    3-Feb-2014


         Hastings, J. S., T. J. Kane and D. O. Staiger (2010). Heterogeneous Preferences and the
Efficacy of Public School Choice, New Haven CT, Yale University Department of Economics,
Working Paper.
         Hole, A. (2007). "Fitting mixed logit models by using maximum simulated likelihood."
The Stata Journal 7(3): 388-401.
         Huibers, L., P. Giesen, M. Wensing and R. Grol (2009). "Out-of-hours care in western
countries: assessment of different organizational models." BMC Health Serv Res 9: 105.
         Kelso, A. S., Jr., and V. P. Crawford (1982). "Job matching, coalition formation, and gross
substitutes." Econometrica 50(6): 1483-1504.
         Kolstad, J. T. (2013). Information and Quality when Motivation is Intrinsic: Evidence
from Surgeon Report Cards, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 18804,
February.
         Krueger, K. J. and E. C. Halperin (2010). "Perspective: Paying physicians to be on call: a
challenge for academic medicine." Acad Med 85(12): 1840-1844.
         Lopez-Valcarcel, B. G., V. Ortun, P. Barber, J. E. Harris and B. Garcia (2013). "Ranking
Spain's Medical Schools by their performance in the national residency examination." Rev Clin
Esp 213(9): 428-434.
         Machado, M. P., R. Mora and A. Romero-Medina (2012). "Can We Infer Hospital Quality
from Medical Graduates’ Residency Choices?" Journal of the European Economic Association
10(6): 1400–1424.
         Mariolis, A., C. Mihas, A. Alevizos, V. Gizlis, T. Mariolis, K. Marayiannis, Y. Tountas, C.
Stefanadis, A. Philalithis and G. Creatsas (2007). "General Practice as a career choice among
undergraduate medical students in Greece." BMC Med Educ 7: 15.
         McFadden, D. and K. Train (2000). "Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Response."
Journal of Applied Econometrics 15: 447-470.
         Nicholson, S. (2005). "How Much Do Medical Students Know about Physician Income?"
Journal of Human Resources 40(1): 100-114.
         Ortun, V., B. Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel and P. Barber Perez (2008). "[Determinants of
physician compensation]." Med Clin (Barc) 131(5): 180-183.
         Pathak, P. A. (2011). "The Mechanism Design Approach to Student Assignment." Annual
Reviews of Economics 3(1): 513-536.

                                                                                                   41
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                    3-Feb-2014


         Rosenblatt, R. A., C. H. Andrilla, T. Curtin and L. G. Hart (2006). "Shortages of medical
personnel at community health centers: implications for planned expansion." JAMA 295(9):
1042-1049.
         Roth, A. E. and E. Peranson (1999). "The Redesign of the Matching Market for American
Physicians: Some Engineering Aspects of Economic Design." American Economic Review
89(4): 748-780.
         Satterthwaite, M. A. and H. Sonnenschein (1981). "Strategy-Proof Allocation
Mechanisms at Differentiable Points." Review of Economic Studies 48(4): 587-597.
         Scott, J., A. Larson, F. Jefferies and B. Veenendaal (2006). "Small-area estimates of
general practice workforce shortage in rural and remote Western Australia." Aust J Rural Health
14(5): 209-213.
         Servicio Público de Empleo Estatal (SEPE) (2013). Información mensual de mercado de
trabajo de titulados universitarios. Madrid, Monthly Reports.
         Shapley, L. and H. Scarf (1974). "On Cores and Indivisibility." Journal of Mathematical
Economics, 1: 23-37.
         Sivey, P. M., A. Scott, J. Witt, J. Humphreys and C. Joyce (2010). "Why Junior Doctors
Don t Want to Become General Practitioners: A Discrete Choice Experiment from the MABEL
Longitudinal Study of Doctors." SSRN eLibrary.
         StataCorp (2013). Stata 13 Base Reference Manual. College Station TX, Stata Press.
         Steinbrook, R. (2009). "Easing the shortage in adult primary care—is it all about
money?" New England Journal of Medicine 360(26): 2696-2699.
         Thistlethwaite, J. E., S. R. Leeder, M. R. Kidd and T. Shaw (2008). "Addressing general
practice workforce shortages: policy options." Med J Aust 189(2): 118-121.
         Thornton, J. and F. Esposto (2003). "How important are economic factors in choice of
medical specialty?" Health Econ 12(1): 67-73.
         Timmins, C. and J. Murdock (2007). "A revealed preference approach to the
measurement of congestion in travel cost models." Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 53: 230–249.
         Train, K. (2009). Discrete Choice Methods With Simulation, 2nd Edition. New York,
Cambridge University Press.



                                                                                                   42
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014


         Watts, J. J. and L. Segal (2009). "Market failure, policy failure and other distortions in
chronic disease markets." BMC Health Serv Res 9: 102.




                                                                                                      43
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                3-Feb-2014


     Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for the 2012 MIR Registry and the 2012 Post-MIR Survey

                                                         2012 MIR    2012 Post-MIR    P-value a
                                                          Registry          Survey

 Sample size                                                6,254            3,177

 Spanish nationality b                                      77.8%           77.3%          0.58

 Women b                                                    66.0%           67.1%          0.29

 MIR Ranking c                                               3,307           3,049         0.00
                                                           (1,929)         (1,899)

 Distance from home to the                                   153.3           138.9         0.05
 training center (minutes) c                               (334.5)         (321.5)

 Home and training center in                                52.6%           56.4%          0.00
 the same province b

a. For binary variables (Spanish nationality, women, and home/training center in same province),
   P-value based two-group two tailed comparison test of proportions. For other variables (MIR
   ranking, distance from home to training center), P-value based on one-way ANOVA mean
   comparison test.
b. Mean values of binary variables.
c. Mean values with standard deviations in parentheses. The highest ranked candidate had a MIR
   ranking of 1.




                                                                                              44
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014


                 Table 2. Preferred Specialties Reported in the 2012 Post-MIR Survey a

 Preferred Specialty                  Number of          Assigned to Preferred   Assigned to Family
                                     Respondents                Specialty (%)        Medicine (%) c

 Cardiology                                      160            76     47.5%          18     11.2%

 Plastic Surgery                                 110            13     11.8%          15    13.6%

 Dermatology                                     193            50     25.9%          33    17.5%

 FCM                                             234           229     97.9%         229    97.9%

 Internal Medicine                               147           105     71.4%          37    25.2%

 Obstetrics & Gynecology                         226           124     54.9%          60    26.6%

 Pediatrics                                      396           231     58.3%         106    26.8%

 Other Specialties                            1,651          1,042     63.1%         278    16.8%

 Total(b)                                     3,117          1,870     60.0%         776    24.9%

a. Based upon the question: “If you could choose specialty without regard to your score on the
   exam, what specialty would you have chosen?”




                                                                                                      45
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                           3-Feb-2014


Table 3. Comparison of Selected Coefficients in Models II and III: Tests of Deviations from the
Hypothesis of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives a

                        Explanatory Variable b                        Model II c           Model III d

 Probability of obtaining employment (X1) × Ranking                    –0.291                –0.505
 in MIR                                                                (0.216)               (0.163)

 Favorable lifestyle and work hours (X2) × Ranking in                   0.192                –0.465
 MIR                                                                   (0.246)               (0.205)

 Recognition by patients (X3) × Ranking in MIR                          0.322                 1.605
                                                                       (0.183)               (0.150)

 Prestige among colleagues (X4) × Ranking in MIR                        0.702                –3.734
                                                                       (0.347)               (0.299)

 Opportunity for professional development (X5) ×                       –0.728                –1.479
 Ranking in MIR                                                        (0.313)               (0.299)

 Annual remuneration with 10–15 years experience                        0.147                –0.018
 (X6) × Ranking in MIR                                                 (0.032)               (0.026)

 Proportion of compensation from private practice (X7)                  -1.973                -2.337
 × Ranking in MIR                                                      (0.319)               (0.230)

a. Complete results in Appendix C, Table C1. All estimated coefficients and standard errors (in
   parentheses) have been multiplied by 104. Parameter estimates in boldface correspond to
   significant differences between Models II and III at the 5% level, based on Z-statistic:
   Z = ( bII − bIII )     sII2 + sIII
                                  2
                                      , where bII and bIII are the estimated parameters from the two
  models, while sII and sIII are their respective standard errors.
b. The highest ranked candidate had a MIR ranking of R1 = 1 , while lower-ranked candidates had
  higher values of Ri .
c. 2012 MIR Registry restricted to the 3,117 candidates who also responded to the 2012 Post-
   MIR Survey. The dependent variable was the actual training program elected by the candidate.
   Each candidate’s choice set was restricted to those training programs still available when his
   turn came up in the MIR sequence.
d. 2012 Post-MIR Survey of the same 3,117 candidates in Model II. The dependent variable was
   the candidate’s preferred training program if he were ranked first. Each candidate’s choice set
   was the entire set of all training programs.




                                                                                                         46
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                   3-Feb-2014


Table 4. Welfare Analysis a

           Policy Scenario                           ΔV            ΔU                  ΔU

 1 (Random Assignment) b                            370            567              –2235
                                                 [349, 393]     [528, 608]      [–2339, –2148]

 2A (Concentrated Reduction in                       146          –9720              –2881
 Supply)

 2B (Generalized Reduction in                        100          –9596             –2806
 Supply) b                                        [94, 105]   [–9685, –9518]    [–2852, –2769]

 3 (Upgrading Family and                             859          3192                3835
 Community Medicine) c

a. For definitions of alternative policy scenarios and the criterion functions ΔV , ΔU , and ΔU ,
   see Section 6. Simulation Strategies.
b. 95% credibility intervals in brackets.
c. The results for policy scenario 3 are for the specific values X4 = 6.30 on a 10-point scale and
   X7 = 39.3 on a percentage scale, which correspond to the valuations of these characteristics for
   all specialties other than family medicine.




                                                                                                 47
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                 3-Feb-2014




                                    600
                                    500
           Score on National Exam
                                    400
                                    300
                                    200




                                          1               2                3     4
                                                    Grade Point Average
                                                     (logarithmic scale)

Figure 1. Scatterplot of each candidate’s score on the national exam versus his medical school
grade point average in the 2013 MIR cycle. Each point is one of 6,348 candidates. Black points
represent 213 graduates of the medical school of the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. The
correlation coefficient between the national exam score and grade point average was +0.443.




                                                                                                 48
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                        3-Feb-2014




                                               250
           Number of Candidates Choosing FCM

                                               200
               Within Top Ranked 3000
                                               150
                                               100
                                               50
                                               0




                                                     2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
                                                                              Year

Figure 2. Number of candidates choosing family and community medicine (FCM) within the top
ranked 3,000 candidates in each MIR cycle, 2002–2012. In each year, the total number of
candidates exceeded 6,000.




                                                                                                                     49
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                 3-Feb-2014




             3
             2.5
             2
             1.5
             1
             .5
             0




Figure 3. Monthly crude unemployment rate among Spanish physicians in family and
community medicine (yellow points) and other specialties (dark gray filled points). No seasonal
adjustment has been performed. Source: (Servicio Público de Empleo Estatal (SEPE) 2013)




                                                                                              50
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                             3-Feb-2014




                                              35
                                              30
         Percentage of New Contracts in FCM
                                              25
                                              20
                                              15
                                              10
                                              5
                                              0




                                                         Month-Year

Figure 4. Monthly data on the percentage of new contracts in family and community medicine
(FCM). Source: (Servicio Público de Empleo Estatal (SEPE) 2013)




                                                                                             51
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                      3-Feb-2014



                                                         u

                                                             First Best




                                                                                       v




Figure 5. First best solution for a hypothetical set of N = 90 candidates and M = 100 training
positions, of which M F = 50 are in family medicine and M H = 50 are in the other hospital-

based specialty. Each candidate corresponds to a point in the ( v, Δu ) plane. At the first best

optimum, a total of 40 candidates (red filled points) are assigned to family medicine, while the
remaining 50 candidates (open points) are assigned to the hospital-based specialty.




                                                                                                   52
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                   3-Feb-2014




                                                         u

                                                             Second Best




                                                                                   v




Figure 6. Second best solution among all priority mechanisms for the same hypothetical set of
N = 90 candidates and M = 100 training positions shown in Figure 5. At the second best

optimum, a total of 40 candidates (blue filled points) are assigned to family medicine, while the
remaining 50 candidates (open points) are assigned to the hospital-based specialty.




                                                                                                    53
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                    3-Feb-2014




                                                         u

                                                             MIR Solution
               90        89
                              87   86

                    88

                                                                                    v

                                                                           5
                                                                   3
                                                               4               1
                                                                       2



Figure 7. MIR solution for the same hypothetical set of N = 90 candidates and M = 100 training

positions shown in Figures 5 and 6. A total of 40 candidates (green filled points) are assigned to
family medicine, while the remaining 50 candidates (open points) are assigned to the hospital-
based specialty. The five top-ranked candidates are labeled 1 through 5, while the five bottom-
ranked candidates are labeled 86 through 90.




                                                                                                  54
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                  3-Feb-2014




                                                         u

                                                             MIR Solution with
                                                             Supply Restriction



                                                                                   v




Figure 8. The MIR solution with a supply restriction. The green filled points show the candidates
assigned to family medicine in the MIR solution of Figure 7. The 10 yellow points show the
additional candidates assigned to family medicine if the number of positions in the hospital-
based specialty is reduced from M H = 50 to M H = 40 .




                                                                                                55
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                               3-Feb-2014




                                                         u

                                                             Random Ranking




                                                                                v




Figure 9. Priority mechanism with random ranking of candidates. The orange filled points show
the 40 candidates assigned to family and community medicine.




                                                                                            56
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                 3-Feb-2014




                            FCM
                            Others
           U




                                                         Ranking


                                                         (         )
Figure 10. Change in Maximum Attained Utility Δui(1) = ui(1) − ui( 0 ) versus Original MIR

Ranking ( Ri ) for the Random Assignment Policy Scenario (1). The blue points represent those

candidates who were predicted to choose family and community medicine (FCM).




                                                                                                57
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014




           U




                           FCM
                           Others




                                                         Ranking


                                                         (              )
Figure 11. Change in Maximum Attained Utility Δui( 2 A) = ui( 2 A) − ui( 0 ) versus Original MIR

Ranking ( Ri ) for the Concentrated Reduction in Supply Policy Scenario (2A). The blue points

represent those candidates who were predicted to choose family and community medicine
(FCM).




                                                                                                   58
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                     3-Feb-2014




           U




                            FCM
                            Others




                                                         Ranking


                                                         (              )
Figure 12. Change in Maximum Attained Utility Δui( 2 B) = ui( 2 B) − ui( 0 ) versus Original MIR

Ranking ( Ri ) for the Generalized Reduction in Supply Policy Scenario (2B). The blue points

represent those candidates who were predicted to choose family and community medicine
(FCM).




                                                                                                   59
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                    3-Feb-2014




                                                                                 FCM
           U                                                                     Others




                                                         Ranking


                                                         (           )
Figure 13. Change in Maximum Attained Utility Δui( 3) = ui( 3) − ui( 0 ) versus Original MIR

Ranking ( Ri ) for the Upgrading Family and Community Medicine Policy Scenario (3). The blue

points represent those candidates who were predicted to choose family and community medicine
(FCM). The plot reflects an improvement in prestige among colleagues (X4) from 3.92 to 6.30 on
a 10-point scale and an increase in the proportion of income from private practice (X7) from 13.2
to 39.3 on a percentage scale.




                                                                                                 60
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014




                                          X 4 = 10
           V




                                                                     X4 = 0




                               Percentage of Compensation from Private Practice ( X 7 )

Figure 14. Simulations of Scenario 3 (Upgrading Family and Community Medicine) for
Different Values of Prestige among Colleagues (X4) and Percentage of Compensation from
Private Practice (X7). The vertical axis represents the change in the external benefit criterion
ΔV( 3) = V( 3) − V( 0 ) . The horizontal axis measures X7, scaled in percentage terms from 0 to 100. The

relative darkness of shade of each curve represents the level of X4. The yellow point represents
the specific values of X4 and X7 assumed in Table 5. The solid vertical line is set at X7 = 13.2%,
which represents the value, in combination with X4 = 3.92, at which the criterion ΔV = 0 .




                                                                                                      61
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                       3-Feb-2014




                                                         X 4 = 10
           U




                                                                           X4 = 0




                               Percentage of Compensation from Private Practice ( X 7 )

Figure 15. Simulations of Scenario 3 (Upgrading Family and Community Medicine) for
Different Values of Prestige among Colleagues (X4) and Percentage of Compensation from
Private Practice (X7). The vertical axis represents the change in the welfare criterion
ΔU( 3) = U( 3) − U( 0 ) . The horizontal axis measures X7, scaled in percentage terms from 0 to 100.

The relative darkness of shade of each curve represents the level of X4. The yellow point
represents the specific values of X4 and X7 assumed in Table 5. The solid vertical line is set at X7
= 13.2%, which represents the value, in combination with X4 = 3.92, at which the criterion
ΔU = 0 .




                                                                                                       62
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                   3-Feb-2014


Appendix A. Optimal and Second-Best Assignment Mechanisms with Supply Restrictions
         In the main text, we assumed that the number of positions equaled or exceeded the
number of candidates, that is, N ≤ M . Here, we consider supply restrictions that result in fewer
positions than candidates, that is, N > M .
         If there are fewer positions than candidates, then N − M > 0 candidates will have to end

up with a null position ( O ). Let O denote a set of N − M such null positions. Then an
assignment becomes a mapping between C and P ∪ O.

         We now let an assignment map each candidate ci into an ordered pair of binary numbers

( fi1, fi 2 ) . When ( fi1, fi 2 ) = (1,0 ) , the candidate is assigned to family and community medicine.
When ( fi1 , fi 2 ) = ( 0,0 ) , the candidate is assigned to the hospital-based specialty, and when

( fi1, fi 2 ) = ( 0,1) , he is assigned to the null specialty. No candidate receives the assignment
( fi1, fi 2 ) = (1,1) . In effect,   fi is a two-bit indicator where the first bit fi1 indicates whether the

candidate was assigned to family and community medicine. The second bit fi 2 indicates whether

a candidate who has not been assigned to family and community has instead by assigned to the
null specialty.
         A candidate’s attained utility is now ui = fi1uiF + fi 2uiO + (1− fi1 − fi 2 ) uiH , where uiO is the

utility attained from the null specialty. It is natural to assume that every candidate would prefer
some specialty assignment over the null specialty, that is, uiF > uiO and uiH > uiO .8 We can rewrite

this attained utility as ui = fi1Δui1 + fi 2 Δui 2 + uiH , where Δui1 = uiF − uiH and Δui 2 = uiO − uiH , and

where we have assumed that Δui 2 < 0 and Δui1 > Δui 2 . The social welfare function can then be

formulated as

                 N
(A1)	
 W = ∑ ( fi1vi1 + fi 2 vi 2 ) + W0 ,
                 i=1




8In reality, some candidates withdraw from the MIR competition when there are still available training positions.
Most plan to retake the national exam the following year in the hope of attaining a higher ranking.

                                                                                                                    63
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                           3-Feb-2014


where vi1 = ri + λ wi Δui1 , vi 2 = λ wi Δui 2 , and W0 is defined in (5).

         In (A1), the contribution to social welfare of a candidate assigned to family and
community medicine is still vi1 . But if the candidate is not assigned to that specialty and is

instead assigned to the null specialty, then his contribution is vi 2 , which is necessarily negative

as the result of the loss of utility for having been excluded.
         It may appear that the extension of the set of positions from P to P ∪ O constitutes

nothing more than the addition of a third specialty. But this is not exactly the case. We have
assumed that no candidate would choose the null specialty when his turn comes up, that is,
uiF > uiO and uiH > uiO . Accordingly, in a priority mechanism, the only candidates who end up

with the null specialty are those at the bottom of the ranking when positions in the two other
specialties (F and H) have already run out.
         Consider a priority mechanism. In the first step (2.1), we rank candidates with vi1 > 0 and

Δui1 ≥ 0 at the top of the ordering, and they elect family and community medicine, just as before.

Assuming that this step does not exhaust all positions in family and community medicine, we
continue with the second step (2.2), ranking candidates with Δui1 < 0 and the algebraically

lowest values of vi1 . Let’s assume that this step exhausts all hospital-based positions. What

remains is a set of candidates with values of vi1 and vi 2 , all of whom will have to elect family

and community medicine or end up excluded. In step 2.3, we now rank the remaining candidates
in decreasing order of vi1 − vi 2 = ri + λ wi ( uiF − uiO ) . That’s because the effect on social welfare of

moving a candidate from a null position to a position in family and community medicine is
vi1 − vi 2 . If step 2.2 does not exhaust all hospital-based positions, then we have left a subset of

candidates with negative values of vi1 and positive values of Δui1 . In step 2.3, we rank these

candidates in decreasing order of vi1 until the set of positions in family and community medicine

runs out. Then, with only positions in the hospital-based specialty or the null specialty available,
we rank the remaining candidates in increasing order of vi 2 , which is the effect on social welfare

of moving a candidate from the null position to a hospital-based position.

                                                                                                          64
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                                         3-Feb-2014


Appendix B. Attributes of Medical Specialties
Table B1. Estimated Valuations of Seven Attributes for Each of 44 Medical Specialties a,b,c


     Specialty         X1. Probability       X2.         X3. Recognition   X4. Prestige     X5. Opportunity         X6.            X7.
                        of Obtaining     Lifestyle &       by Patients       among          for Professional     Annual       Proportion of
                        Employment       Work Hours                        Colleagues         Development      Remuneration   Compensation
                                                                                                                with 10–15     from Private
                                                                                                                   Years         Practice
                                                                                                                Experience

 Allergy                          5.48            8.28              5.50             4.74               6.47            73              4.42


 Clinical Analysis &              5.59            8.13              2.38             3.29               5.74            71              3.83
 Laboratory
 Medicine


 Anatomy &                        5.86            8.46              2.41             4.00               6.12            67              2.67
 Pathology


 Anesthesiology                   7.92            6.32              4.29             6.48               6.83            93              3.89


 Vascular Surgery                 6.42            5.25              8.17             8.69               8.42            103             4.52


 Gastroenterology                 6.68            6.51              7.08             6.69               7.25            83              3.87


 Biochemistry                     4.88            8.14              1.77             2.97               6.15            61              2.77


 Cardiology                       7.18            5.86              8.65             8.67               8.17            97              4.49


 Cardiovascular                   6.78            5.00              9.13             9.04               8.32            104             4.35
 Surgery


 General Surgery                  6.88            4.85              8.27             7.79               7.78            93              3.85


 Oral &                           6.37            5.44              7.95             7.57               7.27            114             5.68
 Maxillofacial
 Surgery


 Traumatology                     7.57            5.52              7.59             6.88               7.93            95              4.65


 Pediatric Surgery                6.60            5.49              8.60             8.37               8.12            96              4.14


 Plastic Surgery                  7.45            6.99              8.63             8.05               8.50            135             7.07


 Thoracic Surgery                 6.03            5.87              8.11             8.08               7.48            100             4.29


 Dermatology                      7.63            9.13              7.05             7.38               7.38            103             5.89


 Endocrinology                    7.16            8.09              7.07             6.84               7.69            81              4.51


 Pharmacology                     4.51            8.25              2.48             2.79               6.30            69              1.87


 Geriatrics                       7.53            7.83              6.23             4.24               5.67            72              3.17


 Hematology                       5.64            6.84              6.44             6.24               7.46            79              2.84


 Immunology                       4.23            7.84              3.28             4.07               8.27            69              2.45


 Occupational                     5.21            8.34              4.23             3.57               4.03            62              5.09
 Medicine




                                                                                                                                          65
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                                       3-Feb-2014


     Specialty       X1. Probability       X2.         X3. Recognition   X4. Prestige     X5. Opportunity         X6.            X7.
                      of Obtaining     Lifestyle &       by Patients       among          for Professional     Annual       Proportion of
                      Employment       Work Hours                        Colleagues         Development      Remuneration   Compensation
                                                                                                              with 10–15     from Private
                                                                                                                 Years         Practice
                                                                                                              Experience

 Family &                       8.39            7.76              5.92             3.92               5.11            56              1.32
 Community
 Medicine


 Rehabilitation                 5.77            8.49              6.52             4.72               6.28            73              4.42
 Medicine


 Intensive Care                 6.49            4.74              7.11             7.04               7.15            82              2.31
 Medicine


 Internal Medicine              6.64            5.64              6.72             6.59               6.43            80              2.92


 Nuclear Medicine               6.50            7.91              4.25             4.56               7.54            82              3.57


 Preventive                     5.60            8.79              3.35             4.19               6.47            63              2.09
 Medicine & Public
 Health


 Microbiology                   5.46            8.27              2.27             3.18               5.83            70              1.88


 Nephrology                     5.72            6.82              6.49             5.91               6.59            80              2.94


 Pulmonology                    6.04            7.19              6.68             6.16               6.59            82              3.35


 Neurosurgery                   6.62            5.03              8.48             8.70               8.89            100             4.11


 Clinical                       4.23            7.18              3.71             3.83               6.60            77              2.59
 Neurophysiology


 Neurosurgery                   6.08            6.42              7.36             7.73               8.27            92              4.06


 Obstetrics &                   7.23            4.95              7.09             6.82               7.31            96              4.92
 Gynecology


 Ophthalmology                  6.76            7.81              7.25             6.90               7.29            108             6.03


 Medical Oncology               7.07            6.53              7.99             7.30               8.76            83              3.33


 Radiotherapy                   6.56            6.79              6.84             6.39               8.27            80              2.46
 Oncology


 Otolaryngology                 6.89            6.86              7.32             7.11               7.80            87              4.94


 Pediatrics                     7.97            6.67              7.65             7.20               7.40            80              4.21


 Psychiatry                     6.42            7.10              5.49             5.01               6.00            85              4.37


 Radiology                      7.34            7.75              3.36             5.26               7.38            90              3.99


 Rheumatology                   5.54            7.20              5.80             5.64               6.79            76              3.34


 Urology                        6.36            6.63              6.77             6.47               7.00            92              4.13




                                                                                                                                        66
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                         3-Feb-2014


Notes to Table B1:

a. Source: 2011 survey to 978 final-year students in Spanish medical schools (Harris, Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel et
   al. 2013). The introductory survey text was, “In this section, you’ll define your profile of some medical
   specialties, including the one that you’ve just chosen as your first choice as well as others chosen at random.
   Think about your perceptions and expectations concerning each specialty.”. The preamble to the two questions on
   attributes 6 and 7 was: “The following questions are about compensation. To facilitate your responses, recall that
   the average annual gross income of a full-time specialist in Family & Community Medicine with 10–15 years
   experience is currently about 60,000 euros.”

b. The survey questions concerning each specific attribute were as follows:
    X1. Probability of Obtaining Employment. “How would you rate the probability of obtaining work in the next
three years, whether in the public or private sector, for an individual who became certified in this specialty today? (0
to 100 percent)” It has been rescaled to 0-10
       X2. Lifestyle & Work Hours. “Work hours, working conditions, and the ability to reconcile work with family
life. (0 to 10, 0 = very bad, 10 = very good)”
       X3. Recognition by Patients. “Recognition of professional work on the part of patients. (0 to 10)”
       X4. Prestige among Colleagues. “Prestige and recognition among colleagues as well as social recognition. (0 to
10)”
       X5. Opportunity for Professional Development. “Possibility of promotion or future professional development
within the specialty (new fields, new techniques, scientific advances). (0 to 10)”
       X6. Annual Remuneration with 10–15 Years Experience. “Estimate the current average annual gross
remuneration (public and private combined) of a specialist with 10–15 years of experience. (Thousands of euros)”
       X7. Proportion of Compensation from Private Practice. “What percentage of this remuneration (including
public and private) do you believe comes from private practice? (0 to 100 percent)” It has been rescaled to 0-10.


c. The valuations corresponded to the predicted values from the following model: Yijk = µ + θ jk + υ i + ε ijk , where Yijk
  is the reported assessment by medical student i of attribute j for specialty k , µ and θ jk are unknown

  parameters, and υ i and ε ijk are error terms.




                                                                                                                         67
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                 3-Feb-2014


Appendix C. Detailed Model Results


Table C1. Parameter Estimates for Models I, II and III

                                              Model I a        Model II b       Model III c

Mean ( µ ) 	
            	



Distance (minutes) from home                     -0.0031 ***      -0.0029 ***      -0.0024 ***
province to training center                     (0.0001)         (0.0002)         (0.0002)
PET scan available in training                     0.040            0.054           -0.011
center hospital                                  (0.035)          (0.048)          (0.050)
Training center in same province                   2.601 ***        2.759 ***        2.721 ***
as candidate’s residence
                                                 (0.048)          (0.069)          (0.065)
Number of hospital beds in                      0.00007          0.00007          -0.00009 *
training center                                (0.00004)        (0.00006)        (0.00005)
Number of positions available in                  0.0118 ***       0.0117 ***       0.0074 ***
training program                                (0.0003)         (0.0004)         (0.0004)
Favorable lifestyle and work                       0.214 ***        0.209 **        -0.040
hours (X2)                                       (0.074)          (0.100)          (0.083)
Prestige among colleagues (X4)                     0.978 ***        1.022 ***        1.267 ***
                                                 (0.115)          (0.158)          (0.139)
Opportunity for professional                       0.236 **         0.131            0.185
development (X5)                                 (0.100)          (0.136)          (0.138)
Annual Remuneration with 10–15                    -0.018 *         -0.016           -0.016
years experience (X6)                            (0.010)          (0.014)          (0.011)
Probability of obtaining                           0.066            0.058            0.033
employment (X1) × Female                         (0.046)          (0.064)          (0.049)
gender
Favorable lifestyle and work                       0.071            0.171 ***        0.131 **
hours (X2) × Female gender                       (0.048)          (0.065)          (0.056)
Recognition by patients (X3) ×                    -0.042           -0.054           -0.044
Female gender                                    (0.037)          (0.050)          (0.046)
Prestige among colleagues (X4) ×                   0.265 ***        0.314 ***        0.247 ***
Female gender                                    (0.072)          (0.099)          (0.093)
Opportunity for professional                      -0.139           -0.097           -0.033
development (X5) × Female                        (0.064)          (0.088)          (0.092)
gender


                                                                                                 68
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                 3-Feb-2014


                                              Model I a        Model II b       Model III c
Annual Remuneration with 10–15                    -0.041 ***       -0.037 ***       -0.033 ***
years experience (X6) × Female                   (0.006)          (0.088)          (0.008)
gender
Proportion of compensation from                    0.223 ***        0.163 **         0.152 **
private practice (X7) × Female                   (0.060)          (0.084)          (0.072)
gender
Probability of obtaining                           0.364 ***        0.326 ***        0.119 **
employment (X1) × Spanish                        (0.055)          (0.075)          (0.057)
nationality
Favorable lifestyle and work                      -0.281 ***       -0.333 ***       -0.271 ***
hours (X2) × Spanish nationality                 (0.062)          (0.084)          (0.069)
Recognition by patients (X3) ×                     0.265 ***        0.202 ***        0.093 ***
Spanish nationality                              (0.044)          (0.060)          (0.054)
Prestige among colleagues (X4) ×                  -0.617 ***       -0.639 ***       -0.328 ***
Spanish nationality                              (0.091)          (0.125)          (0.112)
Opportunity for professional                     -0.1802 **       -0.1578 *         0.0002
development (X5) × Spanish                      (0.0750)         (0.1010)         (0.1074)
nationality
Annual Remuneration with 10–15                     0.003           -0.005           -0.015 *
years experience (X6) × Spanish                  (0.008)          (0.011)          (0.009)
nationality
Proportion of compensation from                   -0.248 ***       -0.206 **         0.071
private practice (X7) × Spanish                  (0.072)          (0.100)          (0.084)
nationality
Probability of obtaining                        -0.00005 ***    -0.00003          -0.00005 ***
employment (X1) × Ranking in                   (0.00002)        (0.00002)        (0.00002)
MIR d
Favorable lifestyle and work                    0.00003 *        0.00002          -0.00005 **
hours (X2) × Ranking in MIR d                  (0.00002)        (0.00003)        (0.00002)
Recognition by patients (X3) ×                  0.00002 *        0.00003          0.00016 ***
Ranking in MIR d                               (0.00001)        (0.00002)        (0.00002)
Prestige among Colleagues (X4) ×                0.00010 ***      0.00007 **       -0.00037 ***
Ranking in MIR d                               (0.00003)        (0.00003)        (0.00003)
Opportunity for professional                    -0.00012 ***    -0.00007 **       -0.00015 ***
development (X5) × Ranking in                  (0.00002)        (0.00003)        (0.00003)
MIR d
Annual Remuneration with 10–15                 0.000019 ***     0.000015 ***     0.000002
years experience (X6) × Ranking              (0.000002)        (0.000003)       (0.000003)
in MIR d


                                                                                                 69
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                                     3-Feb-2014


                                                   Model I a            Model II b                 Model III c
Proportion of compensation from                     -0.00022 ***          -0.00020 ***               -0.00023 ***
private practice (X7) × Ranking in                 (0.00002)             (0.00003)                  (0.00002)
MIR d
Probability of obtaining                               0.510 ***             0.505 ***                   0.438 ***
employment (X1)                                       (0.074)              (0.100)                     (0.079)
Recognition by patients (X3)                          -0.247 ***            -0.242 ***                  -0.609 ***
                                                      (0.065)              (0.089)                     (0.071)
Proportion of compensation from                        0.919 ***             0.932 ***                   0.819 ***
private practice (X7)                                 (0.110)              (0.148)                     (0.116)
Standard Deviation    (σ̂ ) 	
     	
      	



Probability of obtaining                               0.703 ***             0.664 ***                 0.0003
employment (X1)                                       (0.044)              (0.061)                     (0.074)
Recognition by patients (X3)                           0.278 ***             0.246 ***                 0.0003
                                                      (0.035)              (0.053)                     (0.027)
Proportion of compensation from                        0.416 ***             0.396 ***                   0.002
private practice (X7)                                 (0.051)              (0.076)                     (0.056)
Total number of choices                            6,884,904             3,775,333                  7,876,659
Number of candidates                                   6,254                 3,117                       3,117

a. 2012 MIR Registry for all 6,254 candidates. The dependent variable was the actual training program elected by
   the candidate. Each candidate’s choice set was restricted to those training programs still available when his turn
   came up in the MIR sequence.
b. 2012 MIR Registry restricted to the 3,117 candidates who also responded to the 2012 Post-MIR Survey. The
   dependent variable was the actual training program elected by the candidate. Each candidate’s choice set was
   restricted to those training programs still available when his turn came up in the MIR sequence.
c. 2012 Post-MIR Survey of the same 3,117 candidates in Model II. The dependent variable was the candidate’s
   preferred training program if he were ranked first. Each candidate’s choice set was the entire set of all training
   programs.
d. The highest ranked candidate had a MIR ranking of R1 = 1 , while lower ranked candidates had higher values of
   Ri .




                                                                                                                     70
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                    3-Feb-2014


Appendix D. Plots of Maximum Attained Utility versus Original MIR Ranking for each
Policy Scenario


                  30

                                                                                 FCM
                                                                                 Others
                  20
           Umax
                  10
                  0




                       0        1000         2000        3000    4000   5000   6000
                                                           Ranking

Figure D1. Maximum Attained Utility ( ui ) versus MIR Ranking ( Ri ) in the Baseline Scenario

(0). The blue points represent those candidates who were predicted to choose family and
community medicine (FCM).




                                                                                                 71
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                3-Feb-2014




                  30
                           FMC
                           Others
                  20
           Umax
                  10
                  0




                       0        1000         2000        3000    4000   5000   6000
                                                           Ranking

Figure D2. Maximum Attained Utility ( ui ) versus MIR Ranking ( Ri ) in the Random

Assignment Policy Scenario (1). The blue points represent those candidates who were predicted
to choose family and community medicine (FCM).




                                                                                             72
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                  3-Feb-2014




                  30
                                                                               FCM
                                                                               Others
                  20
           Umax

                  10
                  0




                       0        1000         2000        3000    4000   5000   6000
                                                           Ranking

Figure D3. Maximum Attained Utility ( ui ) versus MIR Ranking ( Ri ) in the Concentrated

Reduction in Supply Policy Scenario (2A). The blue points represent those candidates who were
predicted to choose family and community medicine (FCM).




                                                                                               73
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                   3-Feb-2014




                 30
                                                                                FCM
                 20                                                             Others
          Umax

                 10
                 0




                      0         1000         2000        3000    4000   5000   6000
                                                           Ranking

Figure D4. Maximum Attained Utility ( ui ) versus MIR Ranking ( Ri ) in the Generalized

Reduction in Supply Policy Scenario (2B). The blue points represent those candidates who were
predicted to choose family and community medicine (FCM).




                                                                                                74
Allocation of Specialty Training Positions in Spain	
                                   3-Feb-2014




                  30
                                                                                FCM
                                                                                Others
                  20
           Umax

                  10
                  0




                       0        1000         2000        3000    4000   5000   6000
                                                           Ranking

Figure D5. Maximum Attained Utility ( ui ) versus MIR Ranking ( Ri ) in the Upgrading Family

and Community Medicine Policy Scenario (3). The blue points represent those candidates who
were predicted to choose family and community medicine (FCM). Prestige among colleagues
(X4) was increased from 3.92 to 6.30 on a 10-point scale, while the proportion of income from
private practice (X7) was increased from 13.2 to 39.3 on a percentage scale.




                                                                                                75
