NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCALE AND SKILL IN ACTIVE MANAGEMENT
Lubos Pastor
Robert F. Stambaugh
Lucian A. Taylor
Working Paper 19891
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19891

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

We are grateful for comments from Jonathan Berk, Mark Grinblatt, Leonid Kogan, Juhani Linnainmaa,
Tim Simin (discussant), Scott Yonker (discussant), and the audiences at the 2013 AIM Investment
Center Conference on Institutional Investment at the University of Texas at Austin, 2013 Inquire-Europe
conference in Munich, 2013 NFA conference in Quebec City, 2014 Jackson Hole Finance Conference,
as well as the universities of Houston, Melbourne, Notre Dame, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania (Wharton),
Queensland, Rice, Rochester, Stockholm, Toronto, Western Australia, and WU Vienna. We are also
grateful to Yeguang Chi for superb research assistance. This research was funded in part by the Initiative
on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Jacobs Levy Equity
Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research, and the Terker Family Research Fellowship.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Scale and Skill in Active Management
Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 19891
February 2014
JEL No. G10,G23,J24
ABSTRACT
We empirically analyze the nature of returns to scale in active mutual fund management. We find
strong evidence of decreasing returns at the industry level: As the size of the active mutual fund industry
increases, a fund's ability to outperform passive benchmarks declines. At the fund level, all methods
considered indicate decreasing returns, but estimates that avoid econometric biases are insignificant.
We also find that the active management industry has become more skilled over time. This upward
trend in skill coincides with industry growth, which precludes the skill improvement from boosting
fund performance. Finally, we find that performance deteriorates over a typical fund's lifetime. This
result can also be explained by industry-level decreasing returns to scale.

Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu

Lucian A. Taylor
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
lucian.taylor@gmail.com

1.

Introduction

The performance of active mutual funds has been of long-standing interest to financial
economists.1 The extent to which an active fund can outperform its passive benchmark
depends not only on the fund’s raw skill in identifying investment opportunities but also
on various constraints faced by the fund. One constraint discussed prominently in recent
literature is decreasing returns to scale. If scale impacts performance, skill and scale interact:
for example, a more skilled large fund can underperform a less skilled small fund. Therefore,
to learn about skill, we must understand the effects of scale.
What is the nature of returns to scale in active management? The literature has advanced
two hypotheses. The first one is fund-level decreasing returns to scale: as the size of an
active fund increases, the fund’s ability to outperform its benchmark declines (e.g., Perold
and Solomon, 1991, and Berk and Green, 2004). The second hypothesis is industry-level
decreasing returns to scale: as the size of the active mutual fund industry increases, the ability
of any given fund to outperform declines (Pástor and Stambaugh, 2012). Both hypotheses
have been motivated by liquidity constraints. At the fund level, a larger fund’s trades have a
larger impact on asset prices, eroding the fund’s performance. At the industry level, as more
money chases opportunities to outperform, prices move, making such opportunities more
elusive. Consistent with such liquidity constraints, there is mounting evidence that trading
by mutual funds is capable of exerting meaningful price pressure in equity markets.2
Whether returns to scale operate at the fund level or the industry level, or both or
neither, is not clear a priori. At one extreme, if all funds were to follow exactly the same
strategy, their performance would more likely depend on their combined size than on their
individual sizes. At the other extreme, if they were to follow completely unrelated strategies,
the opposite would be true. The relative merits of the two hypotheses must be evaluated
empirically. The fund-level hypothesis has been tested in a number of recent studies, with
mixed results.3 We provide the first evidence regarding the industry-level hypothesis, to
our knowledge. We also reexamine the fund-level hypothesis by using cleaner data and
econometric techniques that avoid inherent biases.
1

See, for example, Jensen (1968), Ferson and Schadt (1996), Carhart (1997), Daniel et al. (1997), Wermers
(2000), Pástor and Stambaugh (2002), Cohen, Coval, and Pástor (2005), Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng
(2005, 2008), Kosowski et al. (2006), Barras, Scaillet, and Wermers (2010), Fama and French (2010), etc.
2
For example, Edelen and Warner (2001) find that aggregate flow into equity mutual funds has an
aggregate impact on market returns. Wermers (2003), Coval and Stafford (2007), Khan, Kogan, and Serafeim
(2012), and Lou (2012) also find significant price impact associated with mutual fund trading. Edelen, Evans,
and Kadlec (2007) report that trading costs are a major source of diseconomies of scale for mutual funds.
3
See, for example, Chen et al. (2004), Pollet and Wilson (2008), Yan (2008), Ferreira et al. (2013a,b),
and Reuter and Zitzewitz (2013). We discuss this evidence in more detail later in the introduction.

1

One of the challenges in estimating the effect of fund size on performance is the endogeneity of fund size. If size were randomly assigned to funds, one could simply run a panel
regression of funds’ benchmark-adjusted returns on lagged fund size, and the OLS slope estimate would correctly measure the effect of size on performance. Alas, size is unlikely to be
randomly paired with funds; for example, larger funds might be run by managers with higher
skill (e.g., Berk and Green, 2004). Skill might be correlated with both size and performance,
yet we cannot control for skill as it is unobservable. As a result, the simple OLS estimate of
the size-performance relation is likely to suffer from an omitted-variable bias.
The omitted-variable bias can be eliminated by including fund fixed effects in the regression model. These fixed effects absorb the cross-sectional variation in performance that
is due to differences in skill across funds. Unfortunately, while adding fund fixed effects
removes one bias, it introduces another. This second bias results from the positive contemporaneous correlation between changes in fund size and unexpected fund returns. In general,
a nonzero correlation between a regressor’s innovations and the regression disturbances introduces a finite-sample bias in OLS estimates (Stambaugh, 1999), and this bias extends to
the fixed-effects setting (Hjalmarsson, 2010).
To address the second bias, we develop a recursive demeaning procedure that closely
builds on the methods of Moon and Phillips (2000) and Hjalmarsson (2010). This procedure
runs a panel regression of forward-demeaned returns on forward-demeaned fund size, while
instrumenting for the latter quantity by its backward-demeaned counterpart. The resulting
estimator eliminates the bias, as proved by Hjalmarsson and confirmed in our simulation
analysis. Our simulations also highlight the bias in both OLS estimators, with and without
fund fixed effects. In addition to being biased, the OLS estimators heavily overreject the
null hypothesis of no returns to scale even when this hypothesis is true.
Our empirical analysis relies on a cross-validated dataset of actively managed U.S. equity
mutual funds. We reconcile the key data items in the CRSP and Morningstar databases,
building on the work of Berk and Binsbergen (2012). Our dataset covers 3,126 funds from
1979 through 2011, a period during which the mutual fund industry grew dramatically.
We begin our analysis by using panel data to estimate the slope coefficient of fund
performance regressed on lagged fund size. OLS regressions both with and without fund
fixed effects deliver negative estimates that, while statistically significant, appear small in
magnitude. Moreover, both estimates are likely to be biased, as noted earlier. To avoid the
biases in OLS, we apply the recursive demeaning procedure. The estimates of fund-level
returns to scale are again negative but they become statistically insignificant. Overall, we

2

find mixed evidence of decreasing returns to scale at the fund level.
In contrast, we consistently find evidence of decreasing returns to scale at the industry
level. Using the same panel regressions, we find a negative relation between industry size
and fund performance. When we include both fund size and industry size in the regression,
fund size is insignificant in the bias-free specification, whereas industry size is negative and
significant. In addition, we find that the negative relation between industry size and fund
performance is stronger for funds with higher turnover, higher volatility, as well as small-cap
funds. These results seem sensible since funds that are aggressive in their trading, as well
as funds that trade illiquid assets, will see their high trading costs reap smaller profits when
competing in a more crowded industry.
The evidence of industry-level decreasing returns to scale has important implications for
our assessment of fund skill. We measure skill by the estimated fund fixed effect from our
panel regression. This fixed effect is essentially equal to the average benchmark-adjusted
gross fund return (i.e., the usual gross alpha) that is further adjusted for any potential fundlevel and industry-level returns to scale. We find that the average fund’s skill has increased
substantially over time, from 24 basis points (bp) per month in 1979 to 42 bp per month
in 2011. The improvement in skill is steeper among the better-skilled funds: e.g., the 90th
percentile of the cross-sectional distribution of skill grows from 98 bp to 123 bp per month.
In short, active funds have become more skilled over time.
This improvement in skill has failed to boost fund performance, though, judging by
the non-trending average benchmark-adjusted gross fund return. How can we reconcile the
upward trend in skill with no trend in performance? Our explanation combines industrylevel decreasing returns to scale with the observed steady growth in industry size. We argue
that the growing industry size makes it harder for fund managers to outperform despite their
improving skill. The active management industry today is bigger and more competitive than
it was 30 years ago, so it takes more skill just to keep up with the rest of the pack.
The upward trend in skill mentioned above cannot be driven by rising skill within funds,
because our measure of a fund’s skill is constant over the fund’s lifetime. Instead, the trend
suggests that the new funds entering the industry are more skilled, on average, than the
existing funds. Consistent with this interpretation, we find that younger funds outperform
older funds in a typical month. We sort funds into portfolios based on their age and find that
funds aged up to three years outperform those aged more than 10 years by a statistically
significant 0.9% per year, based on gross benchmark-adjusted returns. Funds aged between
three and six years also outperform the oldest funds. The young-minus-old portfolio differ-

3

ences are smaller when measured in net returns, suggesting that the younger funds capture
a portion of their higher skill by charging higher fees.
The negative age-performance relation holds not only across funds but also within funds.
We find that performance deteriorates over a typical fund’s lifetime. This result does not
seem to be due to the incubation bias (Evans, 2010) because the performance decline continues well beyond the first few years of the fund’s existence. Instead, this erosion in fund
performance seems to be driven by industry growth during the fund’s lifetime. As the fund
ages, the industry keeps growing, and the sustained entry of skilled competitors hurts the
fund’s performance. Consistent with this argument, we find that the negative relation between a fund’s age and its performance disappears after we control for industry size.
In fact, after controlling for industry size, the within-fund age-performance relation turns
positive. This result, which is only marginally statistically significant, suggests that skill
might improve as funds grow older, perhaps because fund managers learn on the job. Such
learning, if present, mitigates the performance erosion associated with growing industry size.
When we modify our skill measure to allow for learning on the job, we find an upward trend
in skill that is even steeper than before, reinforcing our prior conclusions.
Taken together, our results are consistent with the following narrative. New funds entering the industry tend to be more skilled than the incumbent funds, perhaps due to better
education or greater command of new technology. As a result of their superior skill, the new
funds tend to outperform their benchmarks as well as older funds. As these funds grow older,
though, their performance suffers as a result of the continued growth in industry size, which
is associated with steady arrival of skilled competition. Learning on the job might alleviate
the negative impact of growing industry size on performance, but it does not eliminate it.
Our measure of a fund’s skill is the gross alpha earned on the first dollar invested in the
fund, with no other funds present in the industry. We seek to measure the fund’s ability
to identify profitable investment opportunities before they are eroded by decreasing returns
to scale. In contrast, traditional measures of skill such as alpha or the Sharpe ratio do not
separate the effects of scale. Fund size does play a role in the measure of Berk and Binsbergen
(2012) but that measure quantifies a different dimension of skill—dollar value added by the
fund—whereas we attempt to measure the fund’s expected benchmark-adjusted return while
taking into account the adverse effects of scale.
While our focus on industry-level returns to scale is novel, others have investigated returns
to scale at the fund level. Chen et al. (2004) find a negative relation between fund return
and lagged fund size, consistent with fund-level decreasing returns. The negative relation
4

is strongest among small-cap funds, leading the authors to conclude that the adverse scale
effects are related to liquidity. Yan (2008) reaches the same conclusion based on more direct
measures of liquidity—bid-ask spread and market impact. Yan finds a stronger negative sizeperformance relation for funds that hold less liquid portfolios, as well as for growth funds
and high-turnover funds, which tend to demand immediacy. Further support for liquidityrelated diminishing returns comes from Bris et al. (2007), who analyze mutual funds that
have closed to new investment, and from Pollet and Wilson (2008), who examine the response
of mutual funds to asset growth.4
The prior evidence of fund-level decreasing returns to scale is not pervasive across funds.
Ferreira et al. (2013a) analyze the performance of active equity mutual funds in 27 countries.
They find diseconomies of scale for U.S. funds but not for non-U.S. funds; in fact, the
latter funds seem to exhibit increasing returns to scale. Even in the U.S., the negative sizeperformance relation seems to obtain only for the subset of funds most affected by illiquidity.
For example, Chen et al. (2004) find that this relation is significantly negative only for smallcap funds. Yan (2008) finds the negative relation only among funds with the least liquid
holdings, while Bris et al. (2007) find it only among funds with large inflows.
The finding of fund-level diminishing returns is also not universal among prior studies.
Early evidence from Grinblatt and Titman (1989) is mixed, depending on how one measures
fund returns. More recently, Reuter and Zitzewitz (2013) recognize the endogeneity of fund
size and the resulting difficulty in identifying the causal impact of size on performance. To
generate exogenous variation in size, these authors exploit a discontinuity in fund flows across
Morningstar star ratings. They note that small differences in fund performance can cause
discrete changes in Morningstar ratings, which then produce sharp changes in fund size.
After applying their regression discontinuity approach to U.S. funds, they find no evidence
of fund-level diseconomies of scale. We address the endogeneity of fund size in a different
way, namely, by including fund fixed effects to account for heterogeneity in skill. We also
show how to obtain unbiased estimates of the size-performance relation in such a setting.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2. discusses the econometric biases associated
with estimating the size-performance relation at the fund level. It also presents a biasfree recursive demeaning procedure and evaluates its effectiveness in simulations. Section 3.
describes our mutual fund dataset. Section 4. presents our empirical results. We first analyze
the nature of returns to scale (fund-level vs industry-level), followed by the determinants of
4

There is also some evidence of decreasing returns to scale outside open-end mutual funds. For example,
Kaplan and Schoar (2005) report such evidence in venture capital and leveraged buyout investing, Fung et
al. (2008) in the hedge fund industry, and Wu, Wermers, and Zechner (2013) in closed-end funds.

5

the size-performance relation. We then examine the evolution of fund skill as well as the
relation between fund performance and fund age. Section 5. concludes.

2.

Methodology

Estimating the effect of fund size on performance is a challenge because size is determined
endogenously. The next subsection explains why the simple regression approach taken in
a number of studies is likely to deliver biased estimates, and why adding fund fixed effects
removes this bias while introducing another one. Section 2.2. presents a recursive-demeaning
(RD) estimator that eliminates both biases. Section 2.3. uses simulations to illustrate the
bias in OLS estimators, as well as the RD estimator’s ability to avoid the bias.

2.1.

Biases in OLS estimators

Let Rit denote the benchmark-adjusted return of fund i in period t, and let qit−1 denote the
fund’s size at the end of period t − 1. A simple approach to investigating returns to scale is
to use panel data across funds and periods to estimate the regression model
Rit = a + βqit−1 + εit .

(1)

If size were random across funds, independent of manager skill, the OLS estimate of β would
successfully identify the effect of size on performance. Specifically, a negative estimate of
β would indicate decreasing returns to scale. However, independence of fund size and skill
is unlikely. For example, larger funds might be paired with higher-skill managers if such
managers perform better and attract more flow, or if larger funds can afford to hire better
managers. Skill is thus likely to be related to both Rit and qit−1 , causing an omitted-variable
bias in the pooled regression (1). If the correlation between skill and fund size is positive,
omitting skill from the regression imparts a positive bias in the estimate of β; if the correlation
is negative, so is the bias.5 Given the potential bias, we prefer not to base inference about the
size-performance relation on the regression (1), while recognizing that previous studies have
nevertheless done so. For example, Ferreira et al. (2013a,b) estimate a pooled OLS panel
regression of fund performance on size, as in equation (1), while Chen et al. (2004) and Yan
(2008) estimate the same pooled model using the Fama-MacBeth approach. Those studies
include control variables, but such controls necessarily omit skill, which is unobservable.
5

This bias has been noted in the literature (e.g., Chen et al. (2004) and Reuter and Zitzewitz (2013)).
Applying the omitted-variable bias formula (e.g., Angrist and Pischke, 2009), the bias is equal to the effect
of skill on performance (which is positive) times the slope of skill on fund size.

6

Fortunately, the omitted-variable bias can be eliminated by including a fund fixed effect,
denoted by ai , so that equation (1) is replaced by
Rit = ai + βqit−1 + εit .

(2)

The fund fixed effects soak up any variation in performance due to cross-sectional differences
in fund skill, as long as that skill is constant over time. Identification in the fixed-effect (FE)
model comes from variation over time within a fund, not from variation across funds.
The simple regression model in equation (2) can be motivated, for example, by the
model of Berk and Green (2004). That model assumes fund-level diseconomies of scale,
which imply β < 0 in equation (2). Note that this implication does not contradict Berk and
Green’s result that fund size should not predict performance from the real-time perspective
of investors. While Berk and Green’s investors perceive no relation between fund size and the
fund’s expected return in real time, the true relation—one examined by an econometrician
analyzing historical data—is negative. This difference between the objective and subjective
size-performance relations stems from the unobservability of fund skill. As investors update
their beliefs about skill, their perception of skill fluctuates even though true skill is timeinvariant. Changes in perceived skill lead to changes in fund size, which negatively impact
the true expected fund return due to diseconomies of scale. For example, when a fund’s
perceived skill exceeds its true skill, the fund exceeds its optimal size and its expected future
return is lower. Conversely, when perceived skill is below true skill, the fund is smaller and
its expected return is higher.6
Unfortunately, eliminating the omitted-variable bias associated with equation (1) by
including fixed effects as in equation (2) introduces a second bias if the latter specification
is estimated with OLS. The omitted-variable bias exists even in large samples, whereas this
second bias arises in finite samples through the channel discussed by Stambaugh (1999). To
understand the latter bias in the OLS fixed-effects estimator βbF E , consider first the OLS
estimator β̂i, the estimator of β in equation (2) using the data for just a single fund i. As
shown by Stambaugh (1999), β̂i in that simple predictive regression is downward biased when
the regression disturbance εit in equation (2) is positively correlated with the innovation in
qit. This positive correlation arises in our setting for two reasons. The first is a mechanical
link between εit and qit: a high fund return in period t corresponds to an increase in the
6

This point has not been fully appreciated in the literature. For example, Elton, Gruber, and Blake
(2012) write that “Berk and Green (2004) argue that there is no predictability” (p. 38), and that fund size
could predict returns only if Berk and Green’s investors were slow to move capital in response to returns
(p. 33). Reuter and Zitzewitz (2013) argue that the Berk-Green model implies that “fund size will be
uncorrelated with future returns, thereby frustrating standard approaches to estimate diseconomies of scale”
(p. 2). Both studies interpret no predictability as an empirical implication, rather than a statement about
investor expectations.

7

fund’s asset values and thus to a higher fund size at the end of that period. The second is
the performance-flow relation—a high return during period t attracts new money into the
fund, also contributing to a higher fund size at the end of that period.
To see intuitively why β̂i is negatively biased, suppose ai = β = 0 and we have a twoperiod sample (t = 1, 2) with no net flow. Given the positive correlation between εit and qit,
we have qi1 < qi0 if εi1 < 0, and qi1 > qi0 if εi1 > 0. Since in either scenario εi2 is zero on
average, the higher of the two qi,t−1’s will tend to precede the lower of the two εit ’s (which are
equal to the Rit ’s since ai = β = 0). In other words, a fund that outperforms by chance (i.e.,
εi1 > 0) will grow in size (i.e., qi1 > qi0), but its future performance is expected to be worse
(because E(εi2 ) = 0). Conversely, a fund that underperforms by chance will shrink in size,
but its future performance is expected to be better. This effect produces a spurious negative
relation between changes in fund size and future fund performance. This is a small-sample
problem because the tendency for a sample’s highest qi,t−1’s to precede its lowest Rit ’s even
when β = 0 is strongest in small samples. As sample length grows, a given level of qi,t−1
eventually gets paired with as many high values as low values of Rit .
Now consider the OLS estimator βbF E . It is straightforward to show that βbF E =
PN

PN

i=1

wi β̂i,

where i=1 wi = 1 and the wi ’s are positive.7 Thus, the negative bias in βbF E is essentially
just the weighted average of the negative biases in each of the β̂i ’s. As a result of this
negative bias, the OLS fixed-effects estimator can “detect” decreasing returns to scale even
when there are none.

2.2.

Recursive demeaning

Fortunately, there is an estimator that allows fund fixed effects while avoiding the finitesample bias. To understand this estimator, it is useful to begin with an alternative explanation of the source of the bias in the OLS FE estimator. This explanation as well as our
implementation of the estimator that avoids the bias largely follow Hjalmarsson (2010).
The OLS estimator of β in equation (2) is equivalent to the OLS estimator for the dee = β qe
e , qe
eit, where R
eit are equal to Rit , qit−1 , and εit minus
meaned model R
it
it−1 + ε
it
it−1 , and ε
P

their full-sample time-series means at the fund level. That is, βbF E = (

and thus

βbF E − β =


X

q̃ 2

i,t−1

t,i

2
−1 P
t,i q̃i,t−1 ) ( t,i q̃i,t−1 R̃it ),

−1 

X
 
q̃i,t−1 ε̃it .

(3)

t,i

7

2
See, for example, Juhl and Lugovskyy (2010). Specifically, wi = Ti σ̂qi
/
2
number of observations for fund i and σ̂qi is the sample variance of qit .

8

PN

2
j=1 Tj σ̂qj ,

where Ti is the

The bias in βbF E arises because, even though qi,t−1 and εit have zero correlation, q̃i,t−1 and

ε̃it do not, as a result of which the second factor in equation (3) has nonzero expectation.
Because a fund’s full-sample time-series mean is subtracted when computing the demeaned
series, the value of q̃i,t−1 depends on observations after period t−1. In particular, a high value
of qit increases the time-series mean, which decreases q̃i,t−1 . Therefore, q̃i,t−1 is negatively
correlated with the innovation in qit, which in turn is positively correlated with εit. Recall
that the latter correlation is the source of the bias. The effect of that correlation in the
context of equation (3) is a negative correlation between q̃i,t−1 and εeit, which produces a

negative expectation for the second factor, resulting in the negative bias in βbF E .

If qi,t−1 were instead backward-demeaned by a mean computed using only fund i’s observations prior to period t − 1, rather than the fund’s full-sample mean, then that demeaned
value of qi,t−1 would be uncorrelated with εit . Such backward demeaning, applied recursively
through time, forms the basis for the instrumental variable estimator we employ to eliminate
the bias. While demeaning in a recursive fashion adds noise compared to demeaning with a
fund’s less noisy full-sample mean, applying such an approach in a panel setting nevertheless
yields reliable inferences by aggregating information across a large cross section of funds.
In applying the recursive demeaning (RD) estimator, we expand the FE model to include
a vector of regressors, xit−1 , that potentially include lagged size, qit−1 :
Rit = ai + β 0xit−1 + εit .

(4)

Following the notation of Moon and Phillips (2000), we define the recursively backwarddemeaned regressors, xit−1 , for t = 2, . . . , Ti , as
xit−1

t−1
1 X
= xit−1 −
xis−1 .
t − 1 s=1

(5)

Similarly, recursively forward-demeaned variables are
xit−1

Ti
X
1
= xit−1 −
xis−1
Ti − t + 1 s=t

Rit = Rit −

Ti
X
1
Ris .
Ti − t + 1 s=t

(6)
(7)

Substituting these definitions into equation (4) makes the fixed effects ai drop out:
Rit = β 0xit−1 + εit ,
where εit is defined in a manner analogous to Rit .
9

(8)

We estimate regression (8) by using the instrumental variables (IV) approach. When xit−1
includes fund size (qit−1 ), we instrument for qit−1 by using q it−1 . We treat the elements of xit−1
other than fund size, such as industry size or fund turnover, as exogenous regressors, since
their innovations are not plausibly correlated with the fund’s benchmark-adjusted return.
When x only includes fund size, the IV estimator of regression (8) is simply
βbRD =


Ti
n X
X

q
i=1 t=2

0
it−1 q it−1

−1 
Ti
n X
X
 
Ritq 0
i=1 t=2

it−1




.

(9)

This estimator is the same as Hjalmarsson’s (2010), except that we backward-demean our
instrument. (This backward-demeaning is necessary in our setting because, unlike the regressor in Hjalmarsson’s setting, our regressor, fund size, does not have zero mean.) Since
the estimator in equation (9) is an IV estimator, we can implement it via two-stage least
squares. We first regress q it−1 on q it−1 , and then we regress Rit on the fitted values from the
first-stage regression. Neither regression includes an intercept.
To be a valid instrument for q it−1 , qit−1 must satisfy the relevance and exclusion conditions (e.g., Roberts and Whited, 2012). The relevance condition requires that qit−1 and
qit−1 be significantly related in the first-stage regression. Since qit−1 and qit−1 are both derived from qit−1 (see equations (5) and (6)), they indeed tend to be closely related.8 The
h

i

exclusion condition requires that E εit |q it−1 = 0, meaning the instrument is unrelated to
the innovation in the dependent variable. This condition is likely to hold as well, since the
backward-looking information in qit−1 is unlikely to be helpful in predicting the forwardlooking return information in εit. In contrast, E [εeit |qeit−1] 6= 0 in the OLS FE estimator, as
discussed above. This distinction is the reason why βbRD eliminates the bias in βbF E .

2.3.

Simulation exercise

We use simulations to illustrate the bias in the OLS estimators, with and without fixed
effects, as well as the unbiased nature of the RD estimator. After simulating data in which
8

For most funds in our data, q it−1 and q it−1 are positively related in the first-stage regression. Some
funds, however, exhibit a negative relation when we fit this regression through the origin, due to trends in
their size. We exclude a small number of these trending funds—less than 2% of observations in Table 3,
for example—to prevent them from weakening the first-stage relation. Specifically, we run two regressions
for each fund: we regress q it−1 on q it−1 , both with and without an intercept. We exclude funds that have
both a negative slope in the first regression and an intercept in the second regression whose absolute value
is above a threshold. We choose this threshold in each model to exclude as few funds as possible while
delivering a positive first-stage relation as well as a first-stage Angrist-Pischke (2009) F -statistic above 10.
Stock, Wright, and Yogo (2002) show that the bias from weak instruments is small when the F -statistic is
above 10. We apply this procedure to all variables that depend on qit−1 when we implement RD.

10

we know the true relation between returns and fund size, we check whether the estimators
are able to recover the true relation. To gauge the estimators’ size and power, we simulate
data both with and without decreasing returns to scale.
The first step is to simulate panel data on funds’ returns and size. Our simulations
include the two correlations that make the OLS and OLS FE estimators biased: one between
size and skill across funds, and another between size and returns over time. We simulate
benchmark-adjusted fund returns from equation (2). We simulate fund size as follows:
qit
− 1 = c + γRit + vit .
(10)
qit−1
Parameter γ > 0 captures the positive time-series correlation between returns and fund size,
which induces a bias in the OLS FE estimator. Equations (2) and (10) imply that higherability funds tend to grow larger due to their higher average returns. The resulting positive
cross-sectional correlation between skill and size leads to a bias in the OLS estimator.
To obtain some guidance regarding the parameter values, we run the regression (10) on
our data, which we describe later in Section 3. We choose c = 0.0039 and Std(v) = 0.0566,
which are the OLS estimates of these parameters. The point estimate of γ is 0.92; we
consider three different values, γ = 0.8, 0.9, and 1.0. We consider four plausible values of
β: 0, −1 × 10−5 , −3 × 10−5 , and −10 × 10−5 . These values produce a wide dispersion in
the simulated outcomes. The value of β = −1 × 10−5 implies that a $100 million increase
in fund size decreases expected returns by 0.1% per month. We set Std(ε) = 0.0225, which
is the estimate obtained from (2) by using the OLS FE estimator. We simulate ai , εit , and
vit as independent draws from normal distributions. We draw each fund’s skill ai from a
normal distribution with mean 0.2% per month and standard deviation 0.5% per month;
these values are close to those we estimate later in the paper. We set funds’ starting size to
$250 million, roughly our sample median. We construct 10,000 samples of simulated panel
data for 300 funds over 100 months.9 In each sample, we estimate βbOLS , βbF E , and βbRD .
Table 1 shows the estimation results. Panels A and B show the means and medians
of the β estimates across simulated samples. As expected, the simple OLS estimates tend
to be too high, while the OLS FE estimates tend to be too low. For example, even when
the simulated data exhibit no returns to scale (i.e., the true β = 0), simple OLS estimates
indicate increasing returns to scale, while the OLS FE estimates indicate decreasing returns
to scale. Bias is typically more severe for simple OLS than for OLS FE. Bias in the OLS FE
estimates is typically larger when the contemporaneous relation between returns and size
9

We simulate uncorrelated benchmark-adjusted fund returns, whereas there is some cross-sectional dependence in our actual data, as noted in Section 3. Therefore, we simulate data on fewer funds than in our
actual sample, so that the simulated and actual data exhibit similar amounts of independent variation.

11

(γ) is stronger, as expected. The RD estimator produces essentially no bias. For instance,
when β = 0, both the mean and median RD estimates round to 0.00 for all three values of
γ. For β 6= 0, the mean and median RD estimates are also very close to the true values.
Panel C of Table 1 shows the fraction of simulations in which we reject the null hypothesis,
β = 0, at the 5% confidence level. Both the OLS and OLS FE estimators almost always
produce false positives, rejecting the null in 98 to 100% of simulations when the null is
actually true. In contrast, the RD estimator has approximately the right size, rejecting a
true null 6% of the time in the 5% test. The RD estimator also possesses nontrivial power
to reject the null when the null is false. For example, when β = −3 × 10−5 , RD rejects the
null of β = 0 about 20% of the time. The OLS estimators reject the same null almost 100%
of the time, but they do so regardless of whether the null is true or not.
To summarize, both OLS estimators are biased and much too eager to reject the null of
no returns to scale even when the null is true. In contrast, the RD estimator has virtually
no bias, nontrivial power, and approximately the right size.

3.

Data

The data come from CRSP and Morningstar. The sample contains 3,126 actively managed
domestic equity-only mutual funds from the United States between 1979 and 2011. A 34-page
Data Appendix on the authors’ websites supplements the information below.
We require that funds appear in both CRSP and Morningstar, which offers several benefits. First, it allows us to check data accuracy by comparing the two databases, as detailed
below. Second, Morningstar assigns each fund a category (e.g., large growth, Japan stock,
muni California intermediate), which helps us classify funds. Finally, Morningstar designates
a benchmark portfolio to each fund category and provides benchmark returns. Since Morningstar chooses benchmarks based on funds’ holdings rather than their reported objective,
the Morningstar benchmark does not suffer from the cherry-picking bias of Sensoy (2009).
We start the sample in 1979, the first year in which Morningstar provides benchmark returns.
We merge CRSP and Morningstar using funds’ tickers, CUSIPs, and names. We check the
accuracy of each match by comparing assets and returns across the two databases.
We use keywords in the Morningstar Category variable to exclude bond funds, money
market funds, international funds, funds of funds, industry funds, real estate funds, target
retirement funds, and other non-equity funds. We also exclude funds identified by CRSP

12

or Morningstar as index funds, as well as funds whose name contains “index.” We exclude
fund/month observations with expense ratios below 0.1% per year, since it is extremely
unlikely that any actively managed funds would charge such low fees. Finally, we exclude
fund/month observations with lagged fund size below $15 million in 2011 dollars. A $15
million minimum is also used by Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2001), Chen et al (2004), Yan
(2008), and others.
Berk and Binsbergen (2012, hereafter “BB”) carry out a major data project to address
problems with the CRSP mutual fund data. We apply many of BB’s data-cleaning steps,
stopping short of steps that require manual searches of data from Bloomberg or the SEC.
To be conservative, we require that CRSP and Morningstar agree closely on the two key
variables in our analysis, returns and fund size. First, we follow BB in reconciling return
data between CRSP and Morningstar. Returns differ across the two databases by at least 10
bp per month in 3.1% of observations. By applying BB’s algorithm we reduce the discrepancy
rate to 0.6%. We set the remaining return discrepancies to missing. Similarly, total assets
under management (AUM) differ between CRSP and Morningstar in 7.3% of observations,
even allowing for rounding errors.10 The average of these discrepancies is $12.3 million.
AUM differs by at least $100,000 and 5% across databases in 1.0% percent of observations;
we set these AUM values to missing, otherwise we use CRSP’s value.
We depart from BB’s sample construction somewhat, since we use different Morningstar
data. BB purchase every monthly data update from Morningstar starting in January 1995,
whereas we use Morningstar’s most recent historical file, which includes data back to 1924.
While BB use the union of CRSP and Morningstar, we use the intersection, which allows us to
cross-check all observations’ accuracy across the two sources. Besides being significantly less
expensive, our Morningstar data include useful additional variables such as CUSIP (which
we use to merge CRSP and Morningstar), Category (which we use to categorize funds and
assign benchmarks), and FundID (which we use to aggregate share classes).11
We now define the variables used in our analysis. Summary statistics are in Table 2.
Our measure of fund performance is GrossR, the fund’s monthly benchmark-adjusted
gross return. We use gross rather than net returns because our goal is to measure a manager’s
10

BB report a discrepancy rate of 16%. One potential reason for their higher rate is that BB use monthly
data updates from Morningstar, whereas we use Morningstar’s single historical database. It is possible that
Morningstar corrected errors from the monthly updates when compiling them into the historical database.
11
Many mutual funds offer multiple share classes, which represent claims on the same underlying assets but
have different fee structures. Different share classes of the same fund have the same Morningstar FundID. We
aggregate all share classes of the same fund. Specifically, we compute a fund’s AUM by summing AUM across
the fund’s share classes, and we compute the fund’s returns, expense ratios, and turnover by asset-weighting
across share classes. We take the fund’s age to be the maximum age across the fund’s share classes.

13

ability to outperform a benchmark, not the value delivered to clients after fees.

GrossR

equals the fund’s net return plus its monthly expense ratio minus the return on the benchmark index portfolio designated by Morningstar. We take expense ratios from CRSP because
Morningstar is ambiguous about their timing. The average of GrossR is +5 bp per month,
whereas the average benchmark-adjusted net return is −5 bp per month.
As noted above, the benchmark against which we judge a fund’s performance is the
index portfolio selected for each fund category by Morningstar. For example, for largecap growth funds, the benchmark is the Russell 1000 Growth Index. Such an index-based
adjustment is likely to adjust for fund style and risk more precisely than the commonly-used
loadings on the three Fama-French factors. The Fama-French factors are popular in mutual
fund studies because their returns are freely available, unlike the Morningstar benchmark
index data. Yet the Fama-French factors are not obvious benchmark choices since they are
long-short portfolios whose returns cannot be costlessly achieved by mutual fund managers.
In addition, Cremers, Petajisto, and Zitzewitz (2013) argue that the Fama-French model
produces biased assessments of fund performance. The same authors recommend using
index-based benchmarks, and find that such benchmarks better explain the cross-section of
mutual fund returns. We follow this advice.
We construct GrossR by subtracting the index benchmark return from the fund’s gross
return, effectively assuming that the fund’s benchmark beta is equal to one. This simple
approach, which judges an active fund by its ability to beat its benchmark, is very popular
in investment practice. In addition, this approach circumvents the need to address the
estimation error in mutual fund betas. This error is modest for most but not all funds. In
standard benchmark regressions for all funds in our sample, the mean standard error of OLS
beta estimates is 0.05, and the 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles are 0.08, 0.14, and 0.38,
respectively. That is, for 5% of all funds, the 95% confidence interval for beta is more than
0.56 wide (± two standard errors), which is rather imprecise. A natural way to deal with
estimation error is Bayesian shrinkage, in which the OLS estimate is “shrunk” toward its
prior mean.12 Instead of implementing formal shrinkage, we consider its two polar cases,
for simplicity. First, we set all fund betas equal to one, a natural shrinkage target since
the average mutual fund beta is close to one. Second, we set fund betas equal to their
OLS estimates. To avoid using very imprecise beta estimates for short-lived funds under the
second approach, we replace OLS betas of funds with track records shorter than 24 months
by the average beta of funds in the respective Morningstar category. We report the former
set of results in detail but find that the latter results lead to the same conclusions.13
12
13

Examples of beta shrinkage include Vasicek (1973) and Pástor and Stambaugh (1999, 2002).
In fact, our main results, including those in Tables 3 and 7, are stronger in the unreported beta-adjusted

14

The average pairwise correlation in GrossR between funds belonging to the same Morningstar Category is 0.15. To account for these cross-sectional correlations in our subsequent
regressions, we cluster standard errors by Morningstar Category × month. The average
correlation between funds from different categories is only 0.04; therefore, we do not cluster
by month to avoid adding noise to standard errors. In our RD specifications we also cluster
by fund since recursive demeaning can potentially induce serial correlation within funds.
F undSize corresponds to qit−1 in the previous section.

F undSize equals the fund’s

AUM at the end of the previous month, inflated to December 2011 dollars by using the ratio
of the total market value of all CRSP stocks in December 2011 to its value at the end of
the previous month. The advantage of this inflator is that it makes F undSize capture the
size of the fund relative to the universe of stocks that the fund can buy, a reasonable way
to measure the limitations on a fund due to its size. There is considerable dispersion in
F undSize: the inner-quartile range is $84 million to $921 million.
The top panel of Figure 1 shows the number of funds in our sample over time. The number
of funds with non-missing returns increases from 145 in 1979 to 1,574 in 2011. Comparing the
black and blue lines, we see that we lose some observations because of missing expense ratios
or benchmark returns. The sawtooth pattern in the red line shows that many funds report
AUM only quarterly or yearly before March 1993, which we denote with a vertical dashed
line. The middle panel shows another change around March 1993: CRSP and Morningstar
report similar expense ratios starting in 1993, whereas they often disagree before then. We
also see large jumps in expense ratios in both databases before 1993. Overall, the data
appear to be more reliable starting in March 1993. For this reason, we use the period from
March 1993 to December 2011 as our main sample. We also report results from the extended
sample that begins in January 1979. Since there are fewer funds and more missing values
before 1993, extending the sample back to 1979 increases its size by only 11%.
IndustrySize is the sum of AUM across all funds in our sample, divided by the total
market value of all stocks (i.e., the sum of F undSize across all sample funds, up to a constant). It is the fraction of total stock market capitalization that the sample’s mutual funds
own at that time. When computing IndustrySize, we fill in missing values of F undSize by
taking the fund’s most recent reported size and updating it by using interim realized total
fund returns.14 The red line in the top panel of Figure 1 shows that without this adjustment,
results. We also find very similar results when we set the benchmark betas of all funds equal to 0.92, which
is the betas’ cross-sectional mean (their median is 0.94). The results are also very similar when we use the
Fama-French three-factor model as a benchmark. All of these results are available upon request.
14
We assume no flows in or out of the fund since its last reported AUM. For example, if the fund’s size
was $100 a month ago and the fund then experiences a 10% total return, we impute the current size of $110.

15

we would obtain a downward-biased, sawtooth pattern in IndustrySize before March 1993.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots IndustrySize over time. It starts at 2.4% in January
1979, peaks at 18.6% in July 2008, and finishes at 16.8% in December 2011.
The variables defined above—GrossR, F undSize, and IndustrySize—are the main variables used in our empirical analysis of returns to scale. The remaining variables from Table
2 are defined later, in Section 4., as soon as they are first introduced.

4.

Empirical results

4.1.

Fund-level returns to scale?

To investigate whether there are returns to scale at the fund level, we run panel regressions
of fund i’s benchmark-adjusted gross return in month t, GrossR(i, t), on the fund’s size at
the end of the previous month, F undSize(i, t − 1). We consider three regression approaches:
plain OLS, OLS with fund fixed effects (OLS FE), and recursive demeaning (RD). All three
approaches are discussed in detail in Section 2.: simple OLS corresponds to equation (1),
OLS FE to equation (2), and RD to equation (9). We report the results in the first three
columns of Table 3. Panel A reports the results from our main sample (1993–2011), whereas
Panel B focuses on the extended sample (1979–2011).
In the pooled OLS specification, the estimated coefficients on F undSize are negative,
with t-statistics around −2, but the coefficient values are economically small in both the
main and extended samples. Consider a $100 million increase in fund size, which is substantial as it represents almost a 40% increase in the size of the median fund in our sample
(Table 2). The coefficient estimates indicate that such an increase in size is associated with
a decrease in expected fund performance of only 0.00014% per month, or 0.17 bp per year.
While this coefficient is precisely estimated, it is also likely to be biased, as explained earlier.
For example, if skill and size are positively correlated in the cross section, the economic significance of the OLS estimate is understated. Chen et al. (2004) make a similar observation
when obtaining significantly negative estimates under this specification.
In the OLS FE specification, the negative coefficients on F undSize are highly statistically
To avoid imputing an AUM for a dead fund, we impute only if the fund reports a return during the given
month. We do not look more than 12 months back for a non-missing AUM. Imputing fund size introduces
measurement error in IndustrySize, but such error would be worse if we were to simply set the missing fund
sizes to zero. Note that we only fill in missing values of fund size when computing IndustrySize; we do not
do so when we use F undSize on its own, so there should be no measurement error in F undSize.

16

significant, with t-statistics of about −9. However, this estimated relation could potentially
be spurious since the OLS FE estimator is negatively biased, as explained earlier. Moreover,
despite this negative bias, the estimated OLS FE coefficients remain fairly small, indicating
that a $100 million increase in fund size lowers expected return by less than 0.0017% per
month, or about two bp per year. We thus see mixed evidence of fund-level decreasing
returns coming from the two OLS procedures, both of which produce biased estimates.
To avoid these biases, we apply the bias-free RD procedure from Section 2.2. We find
that the estimated effect of fund size on performance is no longer statistically significant,
with t-statistics of about −0.6 (see column 3 of Table 3). The magnitude of the effect
remains modest. The estimate from Panel A indicates that a $100 million increase in fund
size depresses performance by 0.0022% per month, or 2.5 bp per year. In Panel B, the same
increase in fund size depresses performance by only 1.3 bp per year.
In sum, we find mixed evidence of decreasing returns to scale at the fund level. The biased
OLS procedures indicate a negative relation between a fund’s size and its performance, but
the unbiased RD procedure detects no significant relation. All three procedures produce
estimates of the size-performance relation that are relatively small in economic terms. We
show later that these findings are unaffected by including numerous controls such as industry
size, sector size, family size, fund age, and fund turnover.

4.2.

Industry-level returns to scale?

To explore potential returns to scale at the industry level, we run panel regressions of
GrossR(i, t) on IndustrySize(t − 1). We consider the same panel regression approaches
as before: OLS, OLS FE, and RD. The results are in columns 4 through 6 of Table 3.
In the plain OLS specification, the estimated coefficient on IndustrySize is negative and
marginally significant, with t-statistics of −1.9 in both panels. This evidence is suggestive of
decreasing returns to scale at the industry level. However, since the plain OLS specification
does not allow for differences in skill across funds, we cannot treat this evidence as conclusive.
To allow for differences in skill, we add fund fixed effects (see column 5 of Table 3). The
evidence of decreasing returns to scale then becomes stronger: the estimated coefficients
on IndustrySize roughly double and the t-statistics drop to −3.6 in Panel A and −4.3 in
Panel B.15 The effect is not only statistically but also economically significant. For example,
15

To calculate standard errors, we cluster by sector × month to allow for potential correlation of
benchmark-adjusted fund returns across funds, as explained in Section 3. We do not cluster by fund in

17

consider a one percentage point increase in IndustrySize, which is not too large.16 In our
main sample, this increase in IndustrySize is associated with a sizable decrease in fund
performance: 0.0326% per month, or almost 40 bp per year. In the extended sample, the
magnitude of the same effect is smaller but still substantial, about 20 bp per year.
The RD estimates of the relation between GrossR on IndustrySize are shown in column 6 of Table 3. The point estimates are virtually identical to those in column 5 and even
though the t-statistics are smaller, the relation remains statistically significant. As noted
earlier in Section 2.2., IndustrySize can instrument for itself in the RD procedure because
it is not plagued by the bias-inducing correlation between the error term and the regressor
in equation (2). In particular, there is no reason to believe that innovations in IndustrySize
are correlated with the benchmark-adjusted returns of any given fund.17 Therefore, the
RD procedure in this case is simply the OLS regression of forward-demeaned GrossR on
forward-demeaned IndustrySize. Since there is no need for a backward-demeaned instrument, forward-demeaning is unnecessary as well. We report the results from the RD procedure only for comparison with the other approaches. The relation between GrossR and
IndustrySize is better captured by the OLS FE results in column 5.
In columns 7 through 9 of Table 3, we run a horserace by regressing GrossR(i, t) on
both F undSize(i, t − 1) and IndustrySize(t − 1) under all three approaches. We find that
F undSize enters significantly in the first two approaches, but its significance disappears in
the bias-free RD approach. In contrast, the coefficient on IndustrySize remains negative
and significant, and its magnitude is similar to column 5 where F undSize is excluded.
The negative relation between fund performance and industry size emerges not only
from the panel regressions in Table 3 but also from simple fund-by-fund regressions. For
each fund i, we run the time-series regression of GrossR(i, t) on IndustrySize(t − 1). In our
main sample, we find that 62% of the funds’ OLS slope estimates are negative, and 9% (4%)
are negative and significantly different from zero at the 5% (1%) two-sided confidence level.
In the extended sample, the results are very similar: 61% of the estimates are negative, and
10% (4%) are significantly negative at the 5% (1%) confidence level.
this OLS FE specification because there is very little serial correlation within funds: the first ten residual
autocorrelations are all smaller than 0.05 in absolute value. If we were to add clustering by fund to address
the serial correlation in the residuals, the t-statistics on IndustrySize would change from −3.60 to −3.58 in
Panel A and from −4.34 to −4.24 in Panel B.
16
Recall that IndustrySize is the total AUM of active mutual funds divided by the stock market capitalization. According to Table 2, changing IndustrySize by 1% represents movement of only about one fifth
of the interquartile range, one seventh of the median, and one sixteenth of the 98-percentile range.
17
Indeed, the R-squared from a panel regression of fraction changes in IndustrySize on benchmarkadjusted fund returns is only 0.006. The R-squared is almost 20 times larger, 0.110, if we replace
IndustrySize with F undSize in the regression. We winsorize the regressor at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

18

To summarize, we find a strong negative relation between fund performance and industry
size. This relation, which is both economically and statistically significant, is consistent with
the presence of decreasing returns to scale at the industry level.
Table 3 presents results from three different methods, only one of which, RD, removes
the bias inherent in estimating fund-level returns to scale. Unless noted otherwise, from now
on we report only the bias-free results based on RD for any panel regression that involves
F undSize (Tables 5, 6, 10, and 11). When the regression includes no variable involving
F undSize, so that the bias is not an issue, we report the OLS FE results.

4.3.

A closer look at industry size

Recall from Figure 1 that IndustrySize trends upward for most of the sample period. This
trend is nonmonotonic—for example, IndustrySize decreases in the late 1990s as well as
from 2009 to 2011—but it is clearly present. Is IndustrySize simply capturing a time trend?
To address this question, we define a time trend variable as the number of months elapsed
since January 1979. When we run an OLS FE panel regression of GrossR on the linear
time trend, we indeed find a significantly negative relation, as shown in column 2 of Table
4. To separate time from IndustrySize, we include both variables on the right-hand side of
the OLS FE regression. We find that IndustrySize retains its significantly negative slope
coefficient in the main sample, and the coefficient’s estimated value becomes substantially
more negative: −0.0852, compared to −0.0326 when the time trend is excluded (compare
columns 1 and 3 of Panel A of Table 4). In contrast, the sign of the estimated coefficient on
the time trend flips from negative to positive. Fund performance is thus negatively related
to IndustrySize instead of being a simple linear function of time.
Industry size fluctuates over time as a result of changes in the number of active mutual
funds as well as changes in the average fund size. Which of the two components drives the
negative relation between industry size and fund performance? To answer this question, we
define two new variables: Number of Funds, which is a count of the sample funds operating in
the given month, and Average Fund Size, which is the average AUM across all sample funds
in that month, inflated to current dollars. We perform this inflation by dividing the average
AUM by the total stock market capitalization in the same month and then multiplying by
the total stock market capitalization at the end of 2011. Note that IndustrySize equals
Number of Funds times Average Fund Size divided by a constant, namely, the total stock
market capitalization at the end of 2011.

19

Table 4 shows that both components of IndustrySize contribute to the negative sizeperformance relation. When the new variables are included individually in our OLS FE panel
regression, Average Fund Size exhibits a significantly negative relation with GrossR whereas
Number of Funds is insignificant. When the two variables are included together, though,
both of them enter with significantly negative coefficients. Interestingly, both variables lose
their statistical significance when IndustrySize is also included in the regression (see the
last two columns of Table 4). This result suggests that IndustrySize does a good job of
capturing the joint effect of its two components on fund performance.

4.4.

Determinants of the size-performance relation

In this subsection, we take a closer look at the size-performance relation by analyzing its
dependence on fund characteristics. We examine three characteristics that have some a priori
relevance for the size-performance relation: a small-cap indicator, volatility, and turnover.
The first characteristic, 1(SmlCap), is a dummy variable that is equal to one if the fund
is classified by Morningstar as a small-cap fund (i.e., a fund trading small-capitalization
stocks) and zero otherwise. About 19% of our funds are small-cap funds. The second
characteristic, T urnover, is the fund’s average annual turnover. We obtain turnover data
from CRSP if available, otherwise from Morningstar. To remove some implausible outliers,
we winsorize turnover at its 1st and 99th percentiles. Median T urnover is 73% per year. The
third characteristic, Std(AbnRet), is the standard deviation of a fund’s abnormal returns,
expressed as a fraction per month. Abnormal returns are the residuals from the regression
of the fund’s excess gross returns on excess benchmark returns.
Why might these characteristics affect the size-performance relation? The effect of scale
on a fund’s performance is likely to depend on the liquidity of the fund’s assets. Lower
liquidity implies a larger price impact for a trade of a given size. Therefore, lower liquidity is
likely to make a fund’s returns decrease in scale more steeply. This relation can in principle
hold both at the fund level and at the industry level. It can hold at the fund level because
a larger fund trades larger amounts, leading to a larger price impact. It can also hold at the
industry level because in a more crowded industry, there are likely to be more active funds
chasing the same investment opportunities and pushing prices in the same direction.18 This
logic suggests that if there are decreasing returns to scale at either the fund or industry level,
they should be decreasing more steeply for both small-cap funds and high-turnover funds,
both of which are likely to face larger total price impact costs.
18

Pástor and Stambaugh (2012) also argue that industry-level returns to scale are induced by illiquidity.

20

Higher-volatility funds might also exhibit steeper decreasing returns to scale. The reason
is that funds with more volatile benchmark-adjusted returns are effectively larger in terms
of their trading. Note that a fund’s portfolio can be thought of as a combination of a
(potentially levered) benchmark investment and a zero-cost long-short “active” portfolio
whose return is uncorrelated with the benchmark return. Since benchmark exposure can be
managed cheaply, the cost of managing the fund depends largely on the size of the active
portfolio. Given this portfolio’s zero-cost nature, a reasonable measure of its size is its dollar
volatility, which is the product of the active portfolio’s volatility and fund size. For example,
a “closet indexing” fund looks small by this metric, whereas an equal-sized fund that takes
big active bets looms larger. Funds with more volatile active portfolios are likely to face
larger trading costs and, consequently, steeper decreasing returns to scale.
To examine these hypotheses, we run panel regressions analogous to those in Table 3,
except that we add the interactions of both F undSize and IndustrySize with 1(SmlCap),
T urnover, and Std(AbnRet). The results are in Tables 5 (main sample) and 6 (extended sample). In both tables, we find significant interactions between IndustrySize and fund characteristics, whereas the interactions that involve F undSize are never statistically significant.
When IndustrySize × 1(SmlCap) is added to IndustrySize on the right-hand side (column
4), it enters negatively and significantly, indicating that industry-level decreasing returns to
scale are more pronounced for small-cap funds. Similarly, when IndustrySize×Std(AbnRet)
and IndustrySize × T urnover are added to IndustrySize (columns 5 and 6), both enter
negatively and significantly, indicating steeper decreasing returns to scale for funds with
higher volatility and higher turnover. When all three interaction terms are added at the
same time (column 7), their estimated slopes remain negative, and the volatility interaction
is the most robust. The slope on IndustrySize × 1(SmlCap) loses statistical significance in
both tables, but its magnitude remains about the same as in column 4 of Table 6.
To summarize, Tables 5 and 6 show that the negative relation between industry size and
fund performance is stronger for funds that have high volatility and high turnover. The
relation is also marginally stronger for small-cap funds.

4.5.

The evolution of fund skill

We now analyze fund skill. A natural measure of skill in our framework is the fund fixed effect
from the panel regression (4), where the right-hand-side variables include IndustrySize,
F undSize, and their interactions with fund characteristics. This measure of skill represents
the average benchmark-adjusted gross fund return (i.e., the gross alpha) that is further
21

adjusted for any potential fund-level and industry-level returns to scale. It is the expected
value of GrossR when F undSize = IndustrySize = 0; that is, the gross alpha earned on
the first dollar invested in the fund as well as in the industry. It is essentially the fund’s
alpha when the fund faces no competition from other funds or from its own dollars.
To estimate each fund’s skill, we focus on the specification of regression (4) that includes
IndustrySize, F undSize, and their interactions with all three fund characteristics (column
7 of Table 6). We choose the coefficient estimates based on the extended sample because
we plot the time series of fund skill over the extended sample. The results based on the
estimates from the main sample (column 7 of Table 5) are very similar.
Panel A of Figure 2 shows how the cross-sectional distribution of fund skill varies over
time. For each month in 1979 through 2011, the figure plots the average as well as the
percentiles of the estimated fund fixed effects across all funds operating in that month. The
plot shows a clear upward trend in the distribution of skill. For example, the mean fixed
effect grows from 24 bp per month at the beginning of the sample to 42 bp per month at the
end. The growth is more pronounced at the top: the 90th percentile grows from 98 to 123
bp per month whereas the 10th percentile is almost flat. This evidence suggests that funds
have become more skilled over time, especially the above-average funds.19
Does this improvement in skill translate into better performance? The answer is no,
according to Figure 3. This figure plots two-year moving averages of equal-weighted average fund returns. The solid red line shows the average benchmark-adjusted gross return
(GrossR). This line does not exhibit any obvious trend, certainly not an upward trend,
suggesting that fund performance has failed to improve over time.
How can we reconcile the upward trend in skill (Figure 2) with the lack of a trend in
performance (solid line in Figure 3)? Major clues appear in two results discussed earlier:
the upward trend in industry size (Figure 1) and the negative relation between industry
size and fund performance (Table 3). Taken together, these two results suggest that the
growing industry size makes it more difficult for managers to outperform despite their improving skill. To illustrate this point, we plot one more line in Figure 3. The dashed black
line is analogous to the solid red line except that in each month t, it adds 0.0326 times
(IndustrySizet − IndustrySize0), where t = 0 denotes the beginning of our extended sample (i.e., January 1979). This adjustment represents compensation for the adverse effect
of the growing industry size on realized fund performance. The coefficient 0.0326 is minus
the estimated slope from the regression of GrossR on fund fixed effects and IndustrySize
19

The upward trend in skill is also statistically significant. When we regress the average skill from Panel
A of Figure 2 on a linear time trend, the slope estimate is positive with a Newey-West t-statistic of 8.9.

22

(column 5 in Panel A of Table 3). The gap between the two lines in Figure 2 grows from
zero in 1979 to almost 50 bp per month in 2011. These estimates suggest that average
benchmark-adjusted fund returns in 2011 would have been almost 50 bp per month higher if
industry size had counterfactually stayed at its 1979 level instead of growing, all else equal.
Consistent with rising skill, the dashed line trends upward somewhat, especially between
1985 and 2000, when the estimated average skill increases the most.
What is the source of the upward trend in skill in Panel A of Figure 2? We can rule
out the explanation that a given fund’s skill improves over time because our measure of
a fund’s skill, the fund fixed effect, is time-invariant.20 For that reason, the answer must
involve changes in the composition of the fund universe. A natural explanation is that the
new funds entering the industry are more skilled, on average, than the existing funds. The
higher skill of the new arrivals could result from better education of the new managers,
for example, or from their superior mastery of new technology. In addition to new funds
being more skilled, it is also possible that the funds exiting the industry are less skilled,
on average. However, this exit-based effect is unlikely to be the leading explanation of the
growth in average skill because fund entry has far exceeded exit over time (Figure 1), and
also because the growth in skill is more pronounced at the top (Panel A of Figure 2).
To summarize, we find that funds have become more skilled over time, yet this improvement in skill has failed to boost fund performance. This evidence is consistent with the
observed gradual growth in industry size, which has had an adverse effect on fund performance due to decreasing returns to scale.

4.6.

Performance erosion over a fund’s lifetime

If industry size grows while a fund’s ability stays constant, then performance should erode
over the fund’s lifetime. To test this prediction, we run a panel regression of benchmarkadjusted gross fund returns (GrossR) on fund fixed effects as well as fund age dummy
variables. For any given fund and age t, t = 1, 2, . . . , 20 years, the age dummy variable is
equal to one in the fund’s t-th year of operations and zero otherwise. We measure fund age,
later referred to as F undAge, by the number of years since the fund’s first offer date (from
CRSP) or, if missing, since the fund’s inception date (from Morningstar). We estimate this
panel regression in our main sample and show the results in Figure 4.21 Specifically, Figure
4 plots the fund age fixed effects along with their 95% confidence interval. For any age t,
20

In Section 4.6., we consider an extension in which a fund’s skill can vary over the fund’s lifetime. The
resulting pattern in skill, plotted in Panel B of Figure 2, is similar to that in Panel A, as discussed later.
21
The results based on the extended sample are very similar; they are not reported here.

23

t = 1, 2, . . . , 20 years, the age-t fixed effect measures the difference between a fund of age t
and the same fund at age > 20 years in terms of their average GrossR.
Figure 4 shows that fund performance declines over a typical fund’s lifetime. This new
result is almost monotonic for fund ages up to 12 years. The point estimates of the age fixed
effects decline in an approximately linear fashion from 37 bp per month at age one to zero
at age 12, after which they are roughly flat. These estimates are positive and statistically
significant up to age six, indicating that up to this age, fund performance is significantly
higher than it is at ages exceeding 20 years. Since the regression includes fund fixed effects,
the decline observed in Figure 4 represents a within-fund rather than across-fund pattern.22
In short, as funds get older, their performance tends to suffer.
Further support for this negative age-performance relation comes from a panel regression
of GrossR on F undAge. Whereas Figure 4 uses age fixed effects to measure the nonparametric relation between GrossR and age, the regression assumes a linear relation. We include
fund fixed effects in the regression, as before, to focus on the variation in performance over
a given fund’s lifetime. The results are presented in column 1 of Table 7. Again, we find a
negative and significant relation between a fund’s age and its performance, with t-statistics
equal to −3.0 in the main sample and −4.0 in the extended sample. The point estimate of
the slope coefficient on F undAge in the main sample indicates that one additional year of
age reduces the fund’s gross benchmark-adjusted return by 1.23 bp per month, or 15 bp per
year.
One potential concern is that the negative relation between fund age and performance
could be driven by the incubation bias documented by Evans (2010). Incubation is a strategy
that some families follow to initiate new funds. A family might start multiple funds privately,
with a limited amount of capital. At the end of an evaluation period, it might open only
some of these funds, often those with better performance, to the public. Evans finds that
the incubated funds outperform the non-incubated funds during the incubation period.
Our age result does not seem to be driven by the incubation bias. First of all, our $15
million fund size screen eliminates many incubated funds. More important, Evans (2010)
reports that “removing the first three years of return data for all funds eliminates the bias.”
Motivated by this finding, we rerun the regression of GrossR on F undAge after excluding
the returns of funds younger than three years. The results, which are reported in column 4
of Table 7, are quite similar to those from column 1 in which all funds are included. The
22

Chen et al. (2004), Yan (2008), and Ferreira et al. (2013a) control for fund age in their performance
regressions. None of these studies find a significant coefficient on fund age for U.S. funds, but they do not
include fund fixed effects. Their datasets are also different; for example, they do not use Morningstar data.

24

estimates remain statistically significant in both panels, and they are only slightly smaller
in magnitude compared to column 1. In addition, recall from Figure 4 that the estimates of
the age fixed effects are positive and statistically significant up to age six. In the extended
sample, the estimates are significantly positive up to age eight (not plotted). All of this
evidence makes the incubation bias an unlikely explanation for our fund age result.
This result is also unlikely to be due to risk. Equity mutual funds’ market betas are
well known to be close to each other as well as close to one (e.g., Chen et al, 2004), and
any risk associated with size or value exposures is likely to be removed by our benchmark
adjustment. Moreover, for risk to explain why funds tend to perform better when younger,
risk exposure would have to decline with age. In contrast, Chevalier and Ellison (1999) argue
that younger managers have an incentive to avoid risk because they are more likely to be
fired for bad performance. Consistent with this argument, Chevalier and Ellison find that
younger managers tend to hold less risky and more conventional portfolios.
Why, then, does fund performance erode over a typical fund’s lifetime? Our earlier results
offer the following narrative. New funds entering the industry tend to be more skilled than
the existing funds (Panel A of Figure 2). Therefore, new funds tend to outperform their
benchmarks initially. However, as a given fund ages, the industry keeps growing (Figure 1),
and the continued arrival of skilled competition depresses the fund’s performance (Table 3).
According to this narrative, the source of the erosion in fund performance is the growth in
industry size during the fund’s lifetime. The negative age-performance relation should thus
disappear after controlling for IndustrySize. To test this idea, we add IndustrySize on the
right-hand side of the OLS FE regressions in Table 7 (columns 2 and 5). Indeed, we find
that adding IndustrySize annihilates the negative relation between GrossR and F undAge.
While IndustrySize enters with a negative coefficient, the slope on F undAge is no longer
significantly negative; in fact, it turns marginally positive. We reach the same conclusions
when we control for F undSize (columns 3 and 6), and also when we add interactions of
IndustrySize and F undSize with fund characteristics (column 8 of Tables 5 and 6). These
results lend further support to the narrative from the previous paragraph.23
The negative relation between fund age and performance, and its disappearance after
controlling for IndustrySize, are among our most important findings. Less important but
also noteworthy is the result, noted in the previous paragraph, that the estimated slope
on fund age turns positive after controlling for IndustrySize. This result is marginally
23

Also supporting the narrative is the fact that if we add IndustrySize as a control on the right-hand side
of the regression underlying Figure 4, the downward trend in the figure disappears and none of the age FEs
are significantly positive. The results are not plotted, to save space.

25

significant in the main sample (with t-statistics ranging from 2.02 to 2.19 in Panel A of
Table 7 and t = 1.97 in column 8 of Table 5), but it is never significant in the extended
sample. If this result is real, it suggests that skill improves as funds grow older, perhaps due
to fund managers’ learning on the job. Such learning, if present, mitigates the performance
erosion associated with the growth in IndustrySize over a typical fund’s lifetime.
Our main measure of fund skill, which is plotted in Panel A of Figure 2, is constant over a
fund’s lifetime. To allow for potential learning-on-the-job effects, we construct an alternative
measure of skill that can vary with fund age. We continue to define skill as the expected
value of GrossR when F undSize = IndustrySize = 0, but instead of using the coefficient
estimates from column 7 of Table 6 as before, we use the estimates from column 8 of Table 6,
which includes F undAge among the regressors. Our alternative skill measure is thus equal
to the fund fixed effect from column 8 plus the fund’s age multiplied by 0.000151, which is
the estimated slope on fund age in column 8. Under this measure, for each additional year
of a fund’s age, the fund’s skill grows by 1.51 bp per month, or 18 bp per year.
Panel B of Figure 2 shows the time evolution of this alternative skill measure. Similar
to our main measure in Panel A, the alternative measure exhibits a clear upward trend; in
fact, this trend is stronger and more consistent than in Panel A. This makes sense because
skill in Panel B grows not only due to the changing fund composition as in Panel A, but
also due to learning on the job for each fund. We do not want to overemphasize this result,
though, because the learning-on-the-job effect hinges on a coefficient estimate that is not
clearly significant, as explained earlier. With that caveat, Panel B reinforces our earlier
conclusion that the active management industry has become more skilled over time.

4.7.

Age-based investment strategies

As noted earlier, the most natural explanation for the growth in skill in Panel A of Figure
2 is that the new funds entering the industry are more skilled than the existing funds, on
average. This explanation predicts that younger funds should outperform older funds in a
typical month. In this section, we test this prediction and find empirical support for it.
This supporting evidence is particularly favorable to our explanation because it suggests
that the composition effect that we emphasize is stronger than the learning-on-the-job effect,
which pulls in the opposite direction. Learning on the job makes older funds perform better,
so if this effect were strong enough, it would invalidate the above prediction. Our evidence
suggests that this opposing effect is not strong enough—despite its potential presence, we

26

find that younger funds tend to outperform older funds, which supports the idea that the
newly-entering funds tend to be more skilled than the incumbents.
To test the above prediction, we examine age-based investment strategies. Each month,
we assign funds to four portfolios based on fund age: [0, 3], (3, 6], (6, 10], and > 10 years. We
calculate the portfolios’ equal-weighted average benchmark-adjusted gross and net returns
over the following month, at the end of which we rebalance. Table 8 shows the average
returns of the age-sorted portfolios, along with return differences across the portfolios.
Table 8 shows that younger funds tend to outperform older funds, especially based on
gross returns. All six young-minus-old differences in gross returns are positive, and four of
them are statistically significant. The youngest funds (aged ≤ 3 years) outperform the oldest
funds (aged > 10 years) by a statistically significant 7.2 bp per month, or 0.9% per year, in the
main sample. While the returns of the youngest funds might potentially be boosted by the
incubation bias, the funds aged between three and six years, which are immune to this bias
according to Evans (2010), also outperform the oldest funds, by the statistically significant
amount of over 0.5% per year. For the extended sample, the return difference between the
(3, 6] and > 10 portfolios is even larger than that between the [0, 3] and > 10 portfolios
(9.6 bp versus 7.5 bp per month), suggesting that the incubation bias is not responsible
for our results. For that sample, even the return difference between the (6, 10] and > 10
portfolios is statistically significant. Finally, an F -test, whose p-values are reported in the
last column of Table 8, rejects the null hypothesis that the average benchmark-adjusted
returns are equal across the four age-sorted portfolios. We thus conclude that younger funds
tend to outperform older funds based on gross benchmark-adjusted returns.
Based on net returns, the young-minus-old portfolio differences tend to be smaller. The
point estimates are positive in five of the six cases, but they are statistically significant only
between the [0, 3] and > 10 portfolios. Therefore, we cannot reliably conclude that investors
buying young funds outperform those buying old funds. The younger funds appear to be
able to capture some of their higher skill by charging higher fees. Indeed, the average annual
expense ratios in the four age-sorted portfolios in our main sample are 1.35% (youngest
funds), 1.30%, 1.27%, and 1.17% (oldest funds).
Recall that the age results in Table 7 are obtained from regressions that include fund fixed
effects. Therefore, those earlier results compare the performance of a typical fund at different
ages. In contrast, Table 8 compares the performance of young and old funds in a typical
month. The negative age-performance relation thus seems to hold not only within but also
across funds. Both the within-fund and across-fund performance differences are consistent

27

with our narrative. The across-fund results rhyme well with the notion that the new funds
entering the industry tend to be more skilled than the older funds. The within-fund results
are consistent with the idea that as a fund grows older, its performance deteriorates as a
result of industry growth and the related arrival of skilled competition.

4.8.

Robustness

In this subsection, we examine the robustness of our main results regarding the nature of
returns to scale. First, we add family size to the right-hand side of the baseline regression
specification from Table 3. For any given fund, we compute F amilySize by adding up
F undSize across all funds belonging to the fund’s family, as classified by Morningstar. The
median value of F amilySize is $12.2 billion (Table 2).24
Table 9 is the counterpart of Table 3 for our main sample, with F amilySize added to
each regression specification. The Fama-MacBeth regressions in Chen et al. (2004) and
Ferreira et al. (2013a) are most comparable to our simple OLS estimates without fixed
effects. Like those authors, we find a positive relation between returns and family size in
those specifications, although the relation is only statistically significant in specification (7).
The relation flips to negative and usually insignificant when we include fund fixed effects.
The coefficient on F undSize is negative but insignificant in the relevant RD specifications,
just like in Table 3. Finally, IndustrySize continues to enter with a significantly negative
slope, as in Table 3. In short, the addition of family size does not alter any of our conclusions.
The same conclusions continue to hold when we replace F amilySize with F undAge. Recall from Table 7 that when F undAge is included in the regression together with IndustrySize
and F undSize, the coefficient on F undSize is negative but insignificant, whereas the coefficient on IndustrySize is significantly negative, just like in Table 3.
In addition to family size and fund age, we also control for the state of the economy to
capture any potential business-cycle variation in fund performance as well as any cyclical
patterns in industry size. We add two popular business-cycle variables to our regressions:
a recession dummy, which is equal to one during an NBER recession and zero otherwise,
and the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. Neither variable enters significantly in our
regressions. In contrast, IndustrySize retains its significantly negative slope, supporting
our earlier conclusions. We do not tabulate the results to save space.
24

The addition of F amilySize is motivated by Chen et al. (2004), who find a positive relation between
a fund’s performance and the size of its fund family. Similarly, Ferreira et al. (2013a) and Cremers et al.
(2013) find a positive relation between family size and performance in international funds.

28

Our conclusions remain unchanged also when we remove the largest observations of
F undSize from our sample to alleviate a potential concern about outliers. Specifically, we
delete all values of F undSize that exceed the 99th full-sample percentile ($24.4 billion) and
rerun our tests from Table 3. (Recall that we exclude fund sizes below $15 million throughout, following prior literature.) While the negative slope coefficient on F undSize increases
in magnitude, it remains statistically insignificant, whereas the coefficient on IndustrySize
remains negative and significant. Again, we do not tabulate the results.
Table 10 uses different functional forms of F undSize, specifically the natural logarithm
of F undSize and F undSize squared, in the baseline regression specification from Table
3. The motivation is that while F undSize is not significantly related to fund returns in
Table 3 under the bias-free RD procedure, a different functional form of F undSize could
potentially matter for performance. However, Table 10 shows that none of the functional
forms of F undSize enters with a significant coefficient. In contrast, IndustrySize remains
significant in all specifications (albeit marginally so in column 2).
Finally, Table 11 adds sector size on the right hand side of the baseline regression. The
idea is that if decreasing returns to scale are driven by competition with other funds, then
funds in the same sector, which presumably follow similar investment strategies, should
matter more than funds in other sectors. A fund’s performance should therefore be more
closely related to the size of the fund’s sector than to the size of the entire industry. To
evaluate this idea, we measure SectorSize by adding up fund sizes across all funds within a
given sector, divided by the total market value of all stocks belonging to that sector.
We consider two versions of SectorSize. The first version uses the nine sectors corresponding to Morningstar’s 3 × 3 stylebox (small growth, mid-cap value, etc.).25 The number
of funds in these sectors ranges from 126 in small value to 653 in large growth. The second
version uses only three size-based sectors: large-cap, mid-cap, and small-cap.26 This simpler
version of SectorSize is coarser than the first version but it is immune to the difficulties
associated with labeling funds as following value, growth, and blend styles.
25

Details are in the Data Appendix. We allocate all CRSP stocks to the Morningstar 3×3 matrix using
Ken French’s 10×10 portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market. We use a 3-4-3 split for firm size and a
5-5 split for growth vs. value. Note that the three Morningstar size categories (small, mid-cap, and large)
are mutually exclusive, whereas the “blend” category overlaps with both growth and value. For example,
SectorSize for small-growth funds equals [size of small-growth funds + (1/2) size of small-blend funds ] /
[mkt. cap. of the 15 Fama-French portfolios in the bottom-3 size and bottom-5 B/M portfolios]. As another
example, SectorSize for small-blend funds equals [size of all small-cap funds (blend+growth+value)]/[mkt.
cap. of the 30 Fama-French portfolios in the bottom 3 size portfolios].
26
For example, SectorSize for small-cap funds is the total size of all small-cap funds divided by the total
market cap of all stocks in the bottom 3 Fama-French size deciles.

29

Table 11 shows that neither version of SectorSize exhibits a negative and significant
relation with fund performance. In fact, the estimated slope coefficients on SectorSize are
positive, especially when IndustrySize is also included in the regression. While F undSize is
insignificant throughout, IndustrySize is negative and significant. Interestingly, the addition
of SectorSize makes the slope coefficient on IndustrySize even more negative compared to
Table 3. These results indicate that decreasing returns to scale operate at the industry level
rather than sector level.
To summarize, while the idea of sector-level decreasing returns to scale seems sensible,
we do not find support for it in the data. Of course, this negative result may very well stem
from a measurement problem—our proxies for sector size may not accurately measure the
size of a fund’s competition. For example, a mid-cap growth fund is likely to compete not
only with funds classified as mid-cap growth but also with some large-cap growth funds and
small-cap growth funds, all of which could potentially hold mid-cap stocks. In addition, given
the disagreement among practitioners about what constitutes value and growth, a growth
fund is likely to compete with many value funds as well. Our simple measures of sector size
might just be too noisy to be useful. A more accurate measurement of a fund’s competition
could potentially reveal decreasing returns to scale operating at the sector level. We hope
that such a task will be undertaken by future research.

5.

Conclusions

We empirically analyze the interaction between skill and scale in active mutual fund management. We identify two econometric biases that plague the OLS estimates of fund-level
returns to scale. Our alternative bias-free estimates consistently point to decreasing returns
but are never significant. In contrast, we find strong evidence of decreasing returns at the
industry level. This negative relation between industry size and fund performance is stronger
for funds with higher turnover, higher volatility, as well as small-cap funds.
Our results on returns to scale shape our assessment of fund manager skill. We measure
skill by the fund’s gross alpha before its erosion by returns to scale. We find that the active
management industry has become more skilled over time. Despite this rise in skill, average
fund performance has failed to improve. These two facts can be reconciled by industrylevel decreasing returns to scale: the observed steady growth in industry size has impeded
the funds’ performance despite their improving skill. The growing industry size also helps
explain our finding that performance typically declines over a fund’s lifetime. We find that
young funds tend to outperform their older peers, consistent with the new entrants being
30

more skilled. However, as funds grow older, their performance tends to deteriorate due to
continued industry growth and the associated arrival of skilled competition.
Our study raises interesting new questions. First, what are the sources of the observed
upward trend in average skill? We argue that this trend is driven mainly by new fund
managers who are better educated or better acquainted with new technology, but we provide only indirect evidence. Second, is the negative relation between industry size and
fund performance causal? We do not establish causality; we simply refer to the negative
size-performance relation as decreasing returns to scale. We control for two business-cycle
variables that might potentially covary with industry size, but the potential importance of
additional factors could be explored. For example, Stambaugh (2014) suggests a role for
individual equity ownership. Third, is there evidence of industry-level decreasing returns
to scale in international data? For example, do active funds perform better in countries
with smaller active management industries? Suggestive evidence is provided by Dyck, Lins,
and Pomorski (2013), who find that active funds perform better outside the U.S., especially
in emerging markets, in which active managers are likely to face less competition. Finally,
despite our progress on the methodology, the evidence on fund-level returns to scale remains
inconclusive. We leave these challenges for future research.

31

Number of funds

2000
1500

Has return
Also has exp. ratio and benchmark data
Also has FundSize

1000
500
0
Jan 1980

Jan 1990

Jan 2000

Jan 2010

Jan 1990

Jan 2000

Jan 2010

Jan 1990

Jan 2000

Jan 2010

Avg. expense ratio

1.4
1.3

CRSP
Morningstar

1.2
1.1
1
Jan 1980

IndustrySize

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Jan 1980

Figure 1. Sample properties. The top panel shows how the number of funds with nonmissing observations changes over time. The black line plots the number of funds that have
a non-missing cross-checked net return. The blue line plots the number of funds that also
have a non-missing CRSP expense ratio and Morningstar benchmark return. The red line
plots the number of funds that also have non-missing cross-checked FundSize. The dashed
vertical line in the top two panels marks March 1993. The middle panel shows the time
series of average CRSP and Morningstar expense ratios, in percent per year, for funds that
have expense ratios from both sources. The bottom panel shows IndustrySize, the sum of
funds’ AUM divided by the total market value of CRSP stocks.

32

Panel A: Constant skill within funds

Panel B: Age−varying skill within funds

90th pctl.

1.2

90th pctl.

1
0.8

Fund skill (% per month)

33

Fund skill (% per month)

1.5

75th pctl.

0.6

Mean

0.4
Median

0.2

25th pctl.

0

1

Mean
Median
25th pctl.

0.5

10th pctl.

0

10th pctl.

−0.2
1980

75th pctl.

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 2. Distribution of fund skill over time. The figure plots each month’s mean and percentiles of estimated fund skill
across all funds operating during that month. Panel A measures skill by fund fixed effects estimated from the specification in
column 7 of Table 6. Panel B measures skill by ai + b ∗ F undAgeit, where fixed effects ai and b = 0.000151 are estimated from the
specification in column 8 of Table 6.

1

Average return (% per month)

GrossR
GrossR adjusted for IndustrySize

0.5

0

−0.5
Jan 1980

Jan 1990

Jan 2000

Jan 2010

Figure 3. Average fund returns over time. The figure plots two-year moving averages
of fund returns. The solid red line shows equal-weighted average benchmark-adjusted gross
returns (GrossR). The dashed black line is the same as the red line except that it adjusts
funds’ GrossR by adding 0.0326 times (IndustrySizet−IndustrySize0), where t = 0 denotes
January 1979, the beginning of our sample. The value 0.0326 is minus the estimated slope
from an OLS FE regression of GrossR on fund fixed effects and IndustrySize (Table 3 Panel
A column 5).

34

Estimates
95% CI
0.5

Age FE in GrossR (%/month)

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

−0.1
0

2

4

6

8

10
12
Fund age (years)

14

16

18

20

Figure 4. Time-series relation between fund age and fund performance. The figure
plots fund age fixed effects in benchmark-adjusted gross returns (GrossR) along with their
95% confidence intervals. We obtain these fixed effects from a panel regression of GrossR
on fund fixed effects and dummy variables for fund age = 1, 2, . . . , 20 years. The age-t fixed
effect measures the average difference between GrossR for a fund of age t and the same
fund at age 21+ years. Standard errors are clustered by sector × month. The sample covers
March 1993 to December 2011.

35

Table 1
Simulation Exercise Comparing OLS, OLS FE, and RD Estimators
We simulate 10,000 samples of mutual fund gross returns (R) and size (q). Simulated returns follow Rit = ai + βqit−1 + εit , and
size follows qit/qit−1 − 1 = c + γRit + vit . In each sample, we estimate β using the OLS, OLS FE, and RD estimators. Panel A (B)
shows means (medians) of the β estimates across the simulated samples. Panel C shows the fraction of samples in which we reject
the null hypothesis β = 0.

5

36

β (×10 )
0
-1
-3
-10

β

(×105 )
0
-1
-3
-10

5

β (×10 )
0
-1
-3
-10

Panel A: Mean estimated β (×105 )
OLS, no FE
OLS with FE
γ = 0.8 γ = 0.9 γ = 1.0
γ = 0.8 γ = 0.9 γ = 1.0
0.85
0.84
0.82
-0.39
-0.38
-0.37
0.30
0.37
0.42
-1.69
-1.73
-1.77
-0.96
-0.78
-0.62
-4.17
-4.28
-4.37
-7.51
-7.38
-7.27
-10.81
-10.82
-10.83

γ = 0.8
0.00
-0.97
-2.34
-10.03

RD
γ = 0.9
0.00
-0.87
-3.00
-10.02

γ = 1.0
0.00
-1.03
-3.08
-10.02

γ = 0.8
0.00
-1.02
-2.95
-10.01

RD
γ = 0.9
0.00
-1.01
-2.95
-10.01

γ = 1.0
0.00
-1.01
-2.95
-10.01

Panel C: Fraction reject the null hypothesis (β = 0)
OLS, no FE
OLS with FE
γ = 0.8 γ = 0.9 γ = 1.0
γ = 0.8 γ = 0.9 γ = 1.0
γ = 0.8
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.06
0.77
0.90
0.96
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.13
1.00
0.99
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.21
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

RD
γ = 0.9
0.06
0.14
0.20
1.00

γ = 1.0
0.06
0.16
0.19
1.00

Panel B: Median estimated β (×105 )
OLS, no FE
OLS with FE
γ = 0.8 γ = 0.9 γ = 1.0
γ = 0.8 γ = 0.9 γ = 1.0
0.85
0.84
0.82
-0.39
-0.38
-0.37
0.30
0.37
0.42
-1.68
-1.73
-1.76
-0.96
-0.78
-0.62
-4.17
-4.27
-4.37
-7.51
-7.38
-7.27
-10.81
-10.82
-10.83

Table 2
Summary Statistics

37

This table shows summary statistics for our sample of active equity mutual funds from 1979–2011. The unit of observation is the
fund/month. All returns and expense ratios are in units of fraction per month. Net return is the return received by investors.
Benchmark-adjusted net return equals net return minus the return on Morningstar’s chosen benchmark portfolio. GrossR is the
benchmark-adjusted net return plus 1/12th of the annual expense ratio. F undSize is the fund’s total AUM aggregated across
share classes, divided by the total stock market capitalization in the same month, then multiplied by the total stock market
capitalization at the end of 2011. IndustrySize is the sum of all funds’ AUM divided by the total stock market capitalization
in the same month, imputing F undSize when missing. T urnover is in units of fraction per year. 1(SmlCap) is an indicator for
a small-cap fund, as defined by Morningstar’s Category variable. Std(AbnRet) is the standard deviation of a fund’s abnormal
returns, defined as residuals from a regression of excess gross fund returns on excess benchmark portfolio returns. F undAge is the
number of years since the fund’s first offer date. F amilySize is the sum of F undSize across funds in the same family. SectorSize
is the sum of AUM (in nominal dollars) across all funds within a given sector, divided by the total market value of all CRSP stocks
belonging to that sector. The first version uses the nine sectors in Morningstar’s 3×3 StyleBox. The second version uses three
sectors: small cap, mid cap, and large cap.

Net return
Benchmark-adjusted net return
Benchmark-adj. gross return (GrossR)
Expense ratio
F undSize (in 2011 $millions)
IndustrySize
T urnover
1(SmlCap)
Std(AbnRet)
F undAge (years)
F amilySize (in 2011 $millions)
SectorSize (v.1)
SectorSize (v.2)

# of fund/
months
365,182
345,921
314,580
334,767
319,454
381,192
364,957
340,061
367,495
377,876
315,894
339,762
339,762

Mean
0.0069
-0.0005
0.0005
0.0010
1,564
0.1334
0.8478
0.1939
0.0183
13.16
61,821
0.1561
0.1390

Stdev.
0.0529
0.0234
0.0229
0.0004
5,779
0.0441
0.5674
0.3954
0.0084
14.27
149,667
0.0989
0.0681

1%
-0.1518
-0.0642
-0.0627
0.0003
16
0.0232
0.0660
0
0.0056
0.17
23
0.0220
0.0210

25%
-0.0197
-0.0106
-0.0095
0.0008
84
0.1227
0.4471
0
0.0125
3.92
1,768
0.0908
0.1106

Percentiles
50%
0.0103
-0.0009
0.0001
0.0010
265
0.1391
0.7304
0
0.0171
8.58
12,181
0.1290
0.1318

75%
0.0371
0.0091
0.0100
0.0012
921
0.1714
1.0919
0
0.0222
16.17
46,217
0.2004
0.1564

99%
0.1320
0.0680
0.0680
0.0021
24,371
0.1833
2.8521
1
0.0473
69.00
825,507
0.4788
0.3550

Table 3
Relation Between Size and Fund Performance
The dependent variable in each regression model is GrossR, the fund’s benchmark-adjusted gross return. F undSize is the fund’s total
AUM at the end of the previous month, inflated to millions of 2011 dollars using the total market cap of stocks in CRSP. IndustrySize is
the total AUM of all active equity mutual funds divided by the total market cap of all stocks in CRSP. The OLS FE estimator includes fund
fixed effects. The RD estimator recursively forward-demeans all variables and instruments for forward-demeaned F undSize using backwarddemeaned F undSize. We multiply the slopes on F undSize by 106 to make them easier to read. The reported slopes on F undSize thus
equal the change in GrossR, in units of bp per month, associated with a $100 million increase in F undSize. Heteroskedasticity-robust
t-statistics clustered by sector × month are in parentheses. We also cluster by fund in the RD specifications.

F undSize

Panel A: Main Sample (March 1993 – December 2011)
-0.168
-0.220
-0.0147
(-9.38) (-0.62)
(-2.02)

-0.0137
(-1.87)

IndustrySize

38

-0.0169
(-1.93)

Constant
Observations
Estimator
F undSize

0.000503
(2.18)
275847
OLS no FE
-0.0139
(-1.98)

275847
OLS FE

270556
RD

Observations
Estimator

283046
OLS FE

-0.00671
(-1.92)
0.000506
(2.28)
290150
OLS no FE

290150
OLS FE

285350
RD

0.00144
(2.58)
314580
OLS no FE

-0.0164
(-4.34)

314580
OLS FE

-0.425
(-1.25)

-0.0326
(-2.49)

-0.0165
(-1.90)

-0.0295
(-3.27)

-0.0277
(-2.14)

283046
RD

0.00300
(2.09)
275847
OLS no FE

275847
OLS FE

270556
RD

-0.103
(-7.91)

-0.268
(-1.69)

Panel B: Extended Sample (January 1979 – December 2011)
-0.126
-0.107
-0.0161
(-9.09) (-0.64)
(-2.30)

IndustrySize
Constant

0.00304
(2.10)
283046
OLS no FE

-0.0326
(-3.60)

-0.148
(-9.09)

-0.0165
(-2.66)

-0.00943
(-1.86)

-0.0165
(-3.15)

-0.0179
(-2.09)

314580
RD

0.00189
(2.26)
290150
OLS no FE

290150
OLS FE

285350
RD

Table 4
Properties of the Relation Between Industry Size and Fund Performance
The dependent variable in all regressions is GrossR, the fund’s benchmark-adjusted gross return. Time Trend is the number of months since January
1979. IndustrySize is the total AUM of all sample funds divided by the total market cap of all stocks in CRSP. Average Fund Size is the average
AUM across all active equity mutual funds in a given month. We inflate Average Fund Size to current dollars by dividing by the total stock market
capitalization in the same month, then multiplying by the total stock market capitalization at the end of 2011. Number of Funds is a count of the
sample funds operating in the given month. Note that IndustrySize equals Number of Funds times Average Fund Size divided by the total stock market
capitalization at the end of 2011. We multiply the slopes on Time Trend, Average Fund Size, and Number of Funds by 106 to make them easier to read.
All models include fund fixed effects and are estimated by OLS. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics clustered by sector × month are in parentheses.
Panel A: Main Sample (March 1993 – December 2011)
-0.0326
-0.0852
(-3.60)
(-3.04)

IndustrySize

-10.26
(-2.99)

Time Trend

23.89
(2.21)

39

-8.885
(-3.56)

4.315
(0.73)

4.249
(0.72)

-4.031
(-3.23)
283046

8.493
(1.61)
283046

8.234
(1.57)
283046

Panel B: Extended Sample (January 1979 – December 2011)
-0.0164
-0.0305
-0.0629
(-4.34)
(-1.72)
(-1.93)

-0.0697
(-1.87)

Number of Funds
Observations

283046

283046

-7.030
(-4.00)

Time Trend

283046

283046

0.450
(0.83)
283046

7.102
(0.84)

4.137
(0.51)
-2.532
(-2.44)

Average Fund Size
Number of Funds
Observations

-0.146
(-2.87)
15.35
(1.56)

-3.862
(-3.03)

Average Fund Size

IndustrySize

-0.115
(-2.60)

314580

314580

314580

314580

0.0184
(0.05)
314580

-8.898
(-3.83)

-1.455
(-0.30)

-1.608
(-0.34)

-3.926
(-4.26)
314580

3.516
(0.84)
314580

3.352
(0.81)
314580

Table 5
Determinants of the Size-Performance Relation
Main Sample (March 1993 – December 2011)
This table adds additional regressors to the specifications in Table 3. 1(SmlCap) is an indicator for whether the fund is a small-cap
fund. Std(AbnRet) is the fund’s standard deviation of residuals from a regression of excess gross returns (in fraction per month) on excess
benchmark returns. T urnover is the fund’s average annual portfolio turnover. We instrument for all forward-demeaned quantities that
involve F undSize by using the backward-demeaned values.

F undSize
F undSize ∗ 1(SmlCap)

(1)
-0.238
(-0.74)

(2)
-0.111
(-0.18)

(3)
0.0405
(0.08)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1.304
(0.42)

F undSize ∗ Std(AbnRet)

40

-11.41
(-0.30)

F undSize ∗ T urnover

-0.319
(-0.61)

IndustrySize

-0.0242
(-2.34)

IndustrySize ∗ 1(SmlCap)

-0.0523
(-2.09)

IndustrySize ∗ Std(AbnRet)

0.0547
(3.36)

-0.000687
(-0.06)

-4.533
(-4.80)

IndustrySize ∗ T urnover

-0.0391
(-3.10)

(7)
0.0881
(0.15)

(8)
0.206
(0.34)

-0.660
(-0.23)

0.249
(0.09)

-28.69
(-0.83)

-31.18
(-0.89)

0.0106
(0.03)

-0.00319
(-0.01)

0.0617
(2.41)

0.0109
(0.30)

-0.0342
(-1.03)

-0.0367
(-1.11)

-3.476
(-2.92)

-3.529
(-2.97)

-0.0218
(-1.65)

-0.0199
(-1.51)

236333

0.000271
(1.97)
236333

F undAge
Observations

246841

257658

270553

260411

278694

283039

Table 6
Determinants of the Size-Performance Relation
Extended Sample (January 1979 – December 2011)
This table is the same as Table 5 but uses data from January 1979 to December 2011.

F undSize
F undSize ∗ 1(SmlCap)

(1)
-0.0987
(-0.66)

(2)
0.0228
(0.03)

(3)
-0.316
(-0.30)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.273
(0.13)

F undSize ∗ Std(AbnRet)

-10.40
(-0.28)

41

F undSize ∗ T urnover

0.207
(0.21)

IndustrySize

-0.0120
(-3.04)

IndustrySize ∗ 1(SmlCap)

-0.0348
(-2.67)

IndustrySize ∗ Std(AbnRet)

0.0248
(2.92)

0.00541
(1.11)

-2.137
(-4.51)

IndustrySize ∗ T urnover

-0.0287
(-4.45)

(7)
0.271
(0.42)

(8)
0.318
(0.49)

-1.402
(-0.70)

-0.959
(-0.49)

-29.83
(-0.94)

-30.19
(-0.94)

0.0588
(0.20)

0.0360
(0.12)

0.0450
(2.35)

0.0194
(0.68)

-0.0340
(-1.33)

-0.0360
(-1.41)

-2.013
(-2.19)

-2.010
(-2.19)

-0.0250
(-2.57)

-0.0249
(-2.56)

252292

0.000151
(1.23)
252292

F undAge
Observations

261349

273881

285347

291869

310228

314573

Table 7
Time-Series Relation Between Fund Age and Fund Performance
This table shows results from estimating a panel model with dependent variable GrossR, the fund’s benchmark-adjusted gross
return. F undAge is the number of years since the fund’s first offer date. IndustrySize is the total AUM of all active equity mutual
funds divided by the total market cap of all stocks in CRSP. F undSize is the fund’s total AUM at the end of the previous month,
inflated to millions of 2011 dollars using the total market cap of stocks in CRSP. Specifications that do not include F undSize
use the OLS FE estimator; those that do include F undSize use the RD estimator. The first three columns in each panel use all
observations; the last three columns use only funds that are at least three years old. t-statistics clustered by sector × month are
in parentheses.
Panel A: Main Sample (March 1993 – December 2011)
-0.000123
0.000283 0.000277 -0.000102
0.000281
(-3.00)
(2.19)
(2.10)
(-2.37)
(2.19)

F undAge
IndustrySize

-0.0799
(-2.86)

-0.0746
(-2.60)

248050
≥3 years

-0.259
(-0.77)
238426
≥3 years

Panel B: Extended Sample (January 1979 – December 2011)
-0.0000845 0.0000832 0.000152 -0.0000729 0.0000934
(-4.00)
(0.82)
(1.28)
(-3.43)
(0.93)

0.000153
(1.29)

42

-0.0845
(-3.02)

-0.0794
(-2.77)

283046
All

-0.264
(-0.78)
270556
All

F undSize
Observations
Fund ages
F undAge

0.000267
(2.02)

283046
All

IndustrySize

-0.0302
(-1.70)

-0.0440
(-2.11)

314580
All

-0.220
(-1.48)
285350
All

F undSize
Observations
Fund ages

314580
All

248050
≥3 years

277381
≥3 years

-0.0298
(-1.69)

-0.0417
(-2.01)

277381
≥3 years

-0.204
(-1.39)
252222
≥3 years

Table 8
Investment Strategies Based on Fund Age
This table shows average returns of portfolios containing mutual funds of different ages. F undAge is the number of years since
the fund’s first offer date. At the beginning of each month, we assign mutual funds to portfolios based on their age at the
end of the coming month. Columns 2–5 show the portfolios’ average equal-weighted benchmark-adjusted gross (GrossR) and
net (NetR) returns, in percent per month. The next three columns show the average difference in benchmark-adjusted returns
between portfolios. The last column contains the p-value from an F -test of whether the four age-sorted portfolios have the same
average benchmark-adjusted return, clustering by calendar date.

43

Panel A: Main sample (March 1993 – December 2011)
Average portfolio return
Average differences
F undAge [0, 3]
(3, 6] (6, 10]
>10
[0,3] - (>10) (3,6] - (>10) (6,10] - (>10)
Avg. GrossR 0.084
0.056
0.020
0.012
0.072
0.043
0.008
(2.33) (1.45) (0.55) (0.30)
(2.85)
(2.48)
(0.52)
Avg. NetR -0.005 -0.052 -0.084 -0.083
0.077
0.031
-0.001
(-0.15) (-1.38) (-2.29) (-2.07)
(3.10)
(1.79)
(-0.08)

F undAge
Avg. GrossR
Avg. NetR

Panel B: Extended sample (January 1979 – December 2011)
Average portfolio return
Average differences
[0, 3]
(3, 6] (6, 10]
>10
[0,3] - (>10) (3,6] - (>10) (6,10] - (>10)
0.106
0.120
0.105
0.033
0.075
0.096
0.072
(2.14) (2.58) (2.41) (1.03)
(1.77)
(2.75)
(2.63)
0.007 -0.018 -0.033 -0.057
0.064
0.048
0.024
(0.18) (-0.46) (-0.86) (-1.78)
(2.69)
(1.77)
(1.06)

F - test
p-value
0.014
0.008

F - test
p-value
0.003
0.032

Table 9
Family Size and the Size-Performance Relation
This table adds F amilySize to the specifications in Panel A of Table 3 (Main Sample). F amilySize is the sum of F undSize
across funds belonging to the same family.

F amilySize
F undSize

(1)
0.000548
(1.33)

(2)
-0.00415
(-1.95)

(3)
-0.00489
(-1.41)

-0.0207
(-3.01)

-0.147
(-7.92)

-0.360
(-1.23)

IndustrySize

-0.0184
(-2.08)

44
Constant
Observations
Estimator

(4)
0.000367
(0.94)

0.000501
(2.13)
273569
OLS no FE

273569
OLS FE

268311
RD

0.00327
(2.24)
277838
OLS no FE

(5)
-0.00306
(-2.11)

-0.0305
(-3.40)

277838
OLS FE

(6)
-0.00308
(-1.84)

(7)
0.000792
(1.99)

(8)
-0.000124
(-0.08)

(9)
-0.000516
(-0.19)

-0.0247
(-3.83)

-0.147
(-7.94)

-0.436
(-1.49)

-0.0300
(-2.33)

-0.0179
(-2.04)

-0.0291
(-3.27)

-0.0271
(-2.10)

277838
RD

0.00321
(2.21)
273569
OLS no FE

273569
OLS FE

268311
RD

Table 10
Size-Performance Relation with Different Functional Forms
The dependent variable is GrossR, the fund’s benchmark-adjusted gross return. All columns use the RD estimator and data from
the main sample (March 1993 – December 2011). We divide F undSize by 106 before estimation, to make the slope coefficients
easier to read. We instrument for all forward-demeaned variables that involve F undSize by using their backward-demeaned values.
(1)
Log(F undSize) 0.00156
(0.38)

(2)
-0.00229
(-0.73)

F undSize2

45

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-2.369
(-1.22)

-3.232
(-1.56)

2.767
(0.65)

5.205
(1.26)

-0.475
(-1.14)

-0.767
(-1.91)

262396

-0.0298
(-2.28)
262396

F undSize
IndustrySize
Observations

248999

-0.0258
(-1.95)
248999

270556

-0.0291
(-2.24)
270556

Table 11
Relation Between Sector Size and Fund Performance
The dependent variable is GrossR, the fund’s benchmark-adjusted gross return. SectorSize (v1) is the total AUM of funds in the
same sector, divided by the total market cap of CRSP stocks in that same sector; we use the nine sectors defined by Morningstar’s
size × growth StyleBox. SectorSize (v2) is the same as SectorSize (v1) but uses three sectors: small, medium, and large-cap
stocks. Remaining variables and estimators are defined in Table 3. Data are from the main sample (March 1993–December 2011).

SectorSize (v1)

(1)
0.00505
(1.34)

(2)
0.00579
(1.46)

(3)
0.00977
(2.28)

(4)
0.0101
(2.26)

SectorSize (v2)
46

F undSize

-0.136
(-0.39)

IndustrySize
Observations

260411

249394

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.000349
(0.07)

0.00232
(0.37)

0.0185
(2.41)

0.0198
(2.28)

-0.388
(-1.17)
-0.0421
(-3.86)
260411

-0.0379
(-2.54)
249394

-0.177
(-0.52)

260411

249394

-0.428
(-1.29)
-0.0531
(-3.77)
260411

-0.0500
(-2.73)
249394

REFERENCES
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, 2009, Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Barras, Laurent, Olivier Scaillet, and Russ Wermers, 2010, False discoveries in mutual fund
performance: Measuring luck in estimated alphas, Journal of Finance 65, 179-216.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Jules H. van Binsbergen, 2012, Measuring managerial skill in the
mutual fund industry, Working paper, Stanford University.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.
Bris, Arturo, Huseyin Gulen, Padma Kadiyala, and P. Raghavendra Rau, 2007, Good stewards, cheap talkers, or family men? The impact of mutual fund closures on fund managers,
flows, fees, and performance, Review of Financial Studies 20, 953–982.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
52, 57–82.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode
mutual fund performance? American Economic Review, 94: 1276-1302.
Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Career concerns of mutual fund managers, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 389–432.
Cohen, Randolph, Joshua Coval, and Ľuboš Pástor, 2005, Judging fund managers by the
company they keep, Journal of Finance 60, 1057–1096.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479–512.
Cremers, Martijn, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro P. Matos, and Laura T. Starks, 2013, The
mutual fund industry worldwide: Explicit and closet indexing, fees, and performance,
Working paper, University of Notre Dame.
Cremers, Martijn, Antti Petajisto, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2013, Should benchmark indices have
alpha? Revisiting performance evaluation, Critical Finance Review, forthcoming.
Daniel, Kent D., Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring
mutual fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52,
1035–1058.
Dyck, Alexander, Karl V. Lins, and Lukasz Pomorski, 2013, Does active management pay?
New international evidence, Review of Asset Pricing Studies, forthcoming.
Edelen, Roger M. and Jerold B. Warner, 2001, Aggregate price effects of institutional trading:
A study of mutual fund flow and market returns, Journal of Financial Economics, 59:
195-220.
Edelen, Roger M., Richard Evans, and Gregory B. Kadlec, 2007, Scale effects in mutual fund
performance: The role of trading costs, Working paper, University of California at Davis.
Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber, and Christopher Blake, 2001, A first look at the accuracy of
the CRSP mutual fund database and a comparison of the CRSP and Morningstar mutual
fund databases, Journal of Finance 56, 2415–2430.

47

Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber, and Christopher Blake, 2012, Does mutual fund size matter?
The relationship between size and performance, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2, 31–55.
Evans, Richard, 2010, Mutual fund incubation, Journal of Finance 65, 1581–1611.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2010, Luck versus skill in the cross section of
mutual fund returns, Journal of Finance 65, 1915–1947.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Rudi W. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in
changing economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425-461.
Ferreira, Miguel A., Aneel Keswani, António F. Miguel, and Sofia Ramos, 2013, The determinants of mutual fund performance: A cross-country study, Review of Finance 17,
483-525.
Ferreira, Miguel A., Aneel Keswani, António F. Miguel, and Sofia Ramos, 2013b, Testing
the Berk and Green model around the world, Working paper, Nova School of Business
and Economics.
Fung, William, David A. Hsieh, Narayan Y. Naik, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2008, Hedge funds:
Performance, risk, and capital formation, Journal of Finance 63, 1777–1803.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual fund performance: An analysis of
quarterly portfolio holdings, Journal of Business 62, 393–416.
Hjalmarsson, Erik, 2010, Predicting global stock returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 49–80.
Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945–1964, Journal
of Finance 23, 389–416.
Juhl, Ted, and Oleksandr Lugovskyy, 2010, A test for slope heterogeneity in fixed effects
models, Working paper, University of Kansas.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of
actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983-2011.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008, Unobserved actions of mutual
funds, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379–2416.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and capital flows, Journal of Finance 55, 1791–1823.
Khan, Mozaffar, Leonid Kogan, and George Serafeim, 2012, Mutual fund trading pressure:
Firm-level stock price impact and timing of SEOs, Journal of Finance 67, 1371–1395.
Kosowski, Robert, Allan Timmermann, Russ Wermers, and Hal White, 2006, Can mutual
fund “stars” really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis, Journal of
Finance 61, 2551-2595.
Lou, Dong, 2012, A flow-based explanation for return predictability, Review of Financial
Studies 25, 3457–3489.
Moon, Hyungsik R., and Peter C.B. Phillips, 2000, Estimation of autoregressive roots near
unity using panel data, Econometric Theory 16, 927–997.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1999, Costs of equity capital and model mispricing,
Journal of Finance 54, 67–121.

48

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002, Mutual fund performance and seemingly
unrelated assets, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 315–349.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, On the size of the active management
industry, Journal of Political Economy 120, 740–781.
Perold, André F., and Robert S. Salomon, 1991, The right amount of assets under management, Financial Analysts Journal 47, 31–39.
Pollet, Joshua, and Mungo Wilson, 2008, How does size affect mutual fund behavior? Journal
of Finance 63, 2941–2969.
Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2013, How much does size erode mutual fund performance? A regression discontinuity approach, Working paper, Boston College.
Roberts, Michael R., and Toni M. Whited, 2012, Endogeneity in corporate finance, forthcoming in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz, eds. Handbook of the
Economics of Finance Volume 2, Elsevier.
Sensoy, Berk, 2009, Performance evaluation and self-designated benchmark indexes in the
mutual fund industry, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 25–39.
Stock, James H., Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo, 2002, A survey of weak instruments and weak identification in generalized method of moments, Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 20, 518–529.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54,
375–421.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 2014, Investment noise and trends, Working paper, University of
Pennsylvania.
Vasicek, Oldrich A., 1973, A note on using cross-sectional information in Bayesian estimation
of security betas, Journal of Finance 28, 1233–1239.
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655–1695.
Wermers, Russ, 2003, Is money really smart? New evidence on the relation between mutual
fund flows, manager behavior, and performance persistence, Working paper, University
of Maryland.
Wu, Youchang, Russ Wermers, and Josef Zechner, 2013, Managerial rents vs. shareholder
value in delegated portfolio management: The case of closed-end funds, Working paper,
University of Wisconsin.
Yan, Xuemin, 2008, Liquidity, investment style, and the relation between fund size and fund
performance, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 741-768.

49

