                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ARE CHINESE GROWTH AND INFLATION TOO SMOOTH? EVIDENCE FROM
                           ENGEL CURVES

                                             Emi Nakamura
                                             Jón Steinsson
                                               Miao Liu

                                         Working Paper 19893
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19893


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2014




We thank Michelle Sazo and He Yang for excellent research assistance. We thank Fred Gale for his
generous help in obtaining Chinese expenditure data. We thank Ingvild Almas, Christopher Balding,
Marcos Chamon, Jessie Handbury, Xian Huang, Peter Klenow, Aart Kraay, Nancy Qian, Xiaodong
Zhu, and seminar participants at various institutions for helpful comments and discussions. We thank
Bruce Hamilton and Dora Costa for sharing their adjusted estimates of U.S. inflation with us. This
research has been supported by National Science Foundation grant SES 1056107. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Emi Nakamura, Jón Steinsson, and Miao Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Chinese Growth and Inflation Too Smooth? Evidence from Engel Curves
Emi Nakamura, Jón Steinsson, and Miao Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 19893
February 2014, Revised September 2015
JEL No. D12,E21,E31,O11

                                               ABSTRACT

China has experienced remarkably stable growth and inflation in recent years according to official
statistics. We construct alternative estimates using detailed information on Chinese household purchasing
patterns. As households become richer, a smaller fraction of total expenditures are spent on necessities
such as grain and a larger fraction on luxuries such as eating out. We use systematic discrepancies
between cross-sectional and time-series Engel curves to construct alternative estimates of Chinese
growth and inflation. Our estimates suggest that official statistics present a smoothed version of reality.
Official inflation rose in the 2000's, but our estimates indicate that true inflation was still higher and
consumption growth was overstated over this period. In contrast, inflation was overstated and growth
understated during the low-inflation 1990's. Similar patterns emerge from the data whether we base
our estimates on major categories such as food or clothing as a fraction of total expenditures or subcategories
such as grain as a fraction of food expenditures or garments as a fraction of clothing expenditures.


Emi Nakamura                                           Miao Liu
Columbia Business School                               Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 820                           6L Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027                                     3022 Broadway
and NBER                                               New York, NY 10027
enakamura@columbia.edu                                 ml3085@columbia.edu

Jón Steinsson
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1026 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jsteinsson@columbia.edu
1        Introduction

China’s growth experience over the past two decades has been an unparalleled economic miracle
according to official statistics. Figure 1 plots official statistics for Chinese GDP growth, urban
consumption growth and inflation. China has grown substantially faster than any other country
over this period, with average output growth over 9% per year and average urban consumption
growth close to 7% per year. Growth rates have, furthermore, been remarkably stable, rarely
dipping below 5%, even over the tumultuous last few years.
        China’s official inflation statistics over this period are equally remarkable. Following a bout
of inflation in the early 1990’s, official measures of inflation in China have been low and stable,
averaging less than 2% and never rising above 6% since 1997. Moreover, there has been essentially
zero inflation in non-food products for more than a decade, according to official statistics. Since
1997, average non-food inflation has been reported to be -0.1%, with a standard deviation of only
1% (see Figure 16). In other words, prices of non-food goods and services have remained essentially
unchanged for 14 years, according to official figures.
        While few would dispute that China has undergone a remarkable economic transformation,
China’s official statistics remain controversial. National accounts measurement is challenging un-
der the best of circumstances, and all the more so in a rapidly growing economy. The “new goods”
or “quality change” bias is perhaps the best known of the biases that afflict the measurement of in-
flation and growth. Such biases can lead standard methods to systematically overestimate inflation
and underestimate GDP growth because standard methods fail to account for the fact that new
products tend to be introduced at lower quality adjusted prices than the products they replace—say
the replacement of last year’s television model by a new and improved model.1 Standard methods
for constructing price indexes can also make inflation appear too smooth in the face of rapid product
turnover, as a consequence of “product replacement bias” (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2012).
        Political tampering is another important concern regarding growth and inflation statistics, given
the highly politically sensitive nature of these statistics. Many studies suggest that the Chinese
government overstated grain production during the Great Leap Forward (see, e.g., Meng, Qian, and
    1
     Important papers on new goods and quality change bias include Court (1939), Griliches (1961), Nordhaus (1998),
Bils and Klenow (2001), Hausman (2003), Pakes (2003), Boskin et al. (1996), Bils (2008), Moulton and Moses (1997),
Abraham et al. (1998), Triplett (1997) and Hobijn (2002). Erickson and Pakes (2011) develop an experimental hedonic
price index for televisions that accounts, among other things, for price rigidity. Goldberg et al. (2010) show that new
imported varieties contributed substantially to effective price declines for Indian firms after a trade liberalization.
Reinsdorf (1993) studies the related idea of “outlet substitution bias.”



                                                          1
Yared, 2014).2 Concerns about inflation are one factor often cited as contributing to the discontent
that lead to the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests. The remarkable stability of growth and inflation
statistics over the past two decades has undoubtedly been an important source of popular support
for the Chinese Communist Party. Li Keqiang, the current prime minister of China, has said that
Chinese regional GDP statistics are “man-made” and therefore “unreliable” and that he relies on
electricity consumption, rail cargo volume and bank lending to gauge the economy (Reuters, 2010).3
       In this paper, we construct new growth and inflation statistics for China for the period 1995-
2011. The approach we use is based on Engel curves—the empirical finding that as households
become richer, a smaller fraction of total expenditures are spent on necessities, whereas a larger
fraction are spent on luxuries. Such Engel curves have been documented in a wide variety of
countries and time periods (see, e.g., Deaton and Muellbauer, 1980).4 The basic logic of our
approach is to exploit shifts in observed cross-sectional Engel curves over time to “back out” a bias
correction factor for inflation and growth. A simple approach would be to compare Engel curves
for different years. If the Engel curve in one year is systematically shifted down relative to the
Engel curve for an earlier year after controlling for the relative price of the good in question—i.e.,
the expenditure share is lower for a given level of measured expenditures—one might conclude that
measured expenditure growth is biased downward and measured inflation is biased upward. We
employ a “difference-in-difference” version of this idea.
       To estimate Engel curves for China, we develop a harmonized dataset on Chinese consumer
expenditures at the province and income-group levels based on Chinese urban household survey
data. In line with previous work for China and other countries, we find that as households become
richer, they spend a smaller fraction of total expenditures on food, and a smaller fraction of food
expenditures on staples such as grain, but spend a larger fraction on luxuries such as eating out.5
       Our bias adjusted estimates of inflation are highly correlated with official statistics. However,
our estimates suggest that official statistics present a smoothed version of reality. We find that
   2
     Also, Meng, Qian, and Yared (2014) suggest that the Chinese government may have understated mortality
during this period. Political pressure has also be suggested as affecting inflation statistics in some African countries
(Sandefur, 2013).
   3
     Rawski (2001, 2002) presents a detailed critique of GDP statistics in China over the period 1997-2002 and, in the
same spirit as the “Keqiang index”, demonstrates an inconsistency between official GDP data and related data such
as energy use and airline travel. Mehrotra and Paakkonen (2011) use factor analysis to summarize information from
various macroeconomic indicators and compare it with official GDP from 1997 to 2009. In both cases, the biases are
quite different from those we identify—though it is important to emphasize that these papers focus on GDP whereas
we focus on consumption.
   4
     See Gale and Huang (2007) for recent work estimating Engel curves for China.
   5
     See Subramanian and Deaton (1996) for earlier evidence of systematic differences in expenditure shares across
subcategories of food for households with different levels of income.

                                                           2
inflation was overestimated and growth was underestimated by several percentage points per year
in the late 1990’s. During this period, official inflation was low or slightly negative, and our Engel
curve based measure of inflation is even lower (perhaps due to new goods bias). The flip-side of
this is that we estimate a very high growth rate for urban consumption over this period—above
10% per year in each year from 1996 to 2002.
       Our estimates indicate a reversal in the direction of the bias in the recent period. Since 2002,
official inflation statistics have risen only modestly, but our Engel curve based inflation estimates
have risen much more. Our estimates imply that urban consumption growth in China has slowed
substantially over the past decade, and dipped into negative territory in 2007 and 2008. One reason
for the low growth in standards of living in 2007 that we measure may be a large negative supply
shock to pork that occurred in China in that year.6
       We should emphasize that our estimates do not necessarily imply that GDP growth in China
was low in 2007. Our estimates pertain to consumption are silent about growth in investment.
Official data suggest the unusual pattern that Chinese consumption is negatively correlated with
investment and other measures of economic activity (Chang et al, 2015; Fernald et al., 2014).
Our estimates imply an even stronger correlation in this direction. In fact, overheating due to an
investment boom may have been a contributing factor to the slump we identify in 2007, by pushing
prices up and crowding out consumption.
       One might worry that the shifts in the food Engel curve we observe arise from demand shocks
such as shifts in households’ preferences for food rather than biases in official statistics. What is
remarkable about the Chinese data, however, is the pervasive nature of the Engel curve shifts both
within and outside of food, and the systematic patterns in these shifts both for necessities and
luxuries. Estimates of our Engel curve model based only on subcategories of food (excluding the
food share itself) yield similar results to our baseline pooling analysis. As do estimates based on
subcategories of food-at-home (eliminating the effects of preference shifts between food-at-home
and eating out). As do estimates based on sub-categories of clothing, and those based on upper-
level categories of consumption such as clothing and household appliances. For demand shocks to
explain our findings, there would need to be demand shocks in a large number of different categories
   6
    Unlike our findings for China, Hamilton (2001) and Costa (2001) do not find “excess smoothness” in the official US
data based on their Engel curve analyses. Rather, they find that official statistics overstate inflation and understate
growth in the United States. They interpret their findings as evidence for new goods bias. The high growth rates we
estimate in the late 1990s for China may be evidence of new goods bias for China. However, the overall pattern of
results we find for China is more intricate, suggesting that other sources of bias play an important role in the Chinese
case.


                                                           3
that all produced very similar Engel curve shifts.
   A similar argument can be made against other concerns about potential model misspecifica-
tion. The pervasive nature of the Engel curve shifts means, for example, that mismeasurement or
misspecification in the effect of relative prices on expenditure shares would have to have systematic
patterns across many categories of necessity and luxury goods. However, the qualitative patterns
of relative price movements are quite different. For example, the evolution of the price of food
relative to total expenditure is quite different from that of grain relative to total food. The nature
of the model misspecification would, therefore, also have to vary in a somewhat intricate way across
goods to explain the patterns we find.
   We have re-estimated our model in various other ways to evaluate the importance of other forms
of misspecification. We have re-estimated our model using micro-data from the China Household
Income Project (CHIP) for the years 1995, 1999, 2002 and 2007. These results provide a separate
check on our analysis based on a different data source. As in our baseline results, the CHIP data
indicate that inflation was overestimated over the periods 1995-1999 and 1999-2002 but under-
estimated over the period 2002-2007. The magnitude of the underestimate of inflation over the
2002-2007 period is somewhat larger according to CHIP than our baseline results. One advantage
of the CHIP data is that we can estimate the model both including and excluding individuals with
a non-local “hukou” to assess the role of rural-urban migration. The results based on CHIP are
very similar including and excluding migrants.
   The general approach to measuring growth and inflation we employ was pioneered by Nakamura
(1996), Hamilton (2001) and Costa (2001) and employed by these authors to measure new good
bias in the US. A key idea underlying this approach is that while standard methodologies for
measuring growth require the statistical agency to confront the formidable challenges associated
with new goods and quality change discussed above, the Engel curve approach requires only the
measurement of expenditure shares. Furthermore, disaggregated expenditures may be less likely to
be subject to political tampering than headline inflation and growth statistics.
   Our work is related to a growing literature that uses Engel curve approaches to infer various
aspects of economic growth. Aguiar and Bils (2015) use Engel curves to derive an alternative es-
timate of the growth in US consumption inequality. Almas (2012) uses Engel curves to estimate
biases in purchasing power parity statistics. Young (2012) uses related methods to generate alter-
native estimates of African growth. Bils and Klenow (1998) use Engel curve methods to test the
predictions of various business cycle models.

                                                  4
        For the case of China, Xu and Zeng (2009) (in Chinese) estimate Engel curves for food, and
derive the implications for the CPI bias over the 1997-2006 period, concluding that there have been
no significant biases in Chinese inflation except in 1997. However, two fundamental differences
between their work and ours are that they introduce an ad hoc dummy variable that accounts for
shifts in the Engel curve in the post-2000 period—effectively absorbing any bias over this period,
and that they do not include regional fixed effects, and instead divide the regions into two groups as
a way of capturing the cross-sectional heterogeneity. Almas and Johnsen (2012) apply Engel curve
methods to the 1995 and 2002 waves of the CHIP survey to construct a “regional price index,”
finding that inflation has been higher in rural than in urban China. Gong and Meng (2008) perform
a similar spacial analysis for urban areas. Woo and Wang (2011) apply an Engel curve approach to
a novel survey data set on household income to construct alternative estimates of income inequality
in China. Both Almas and Johnsen (2012) and Woo and Wang (2011) find that official statistics
underestimate income inequality in the recent period. Filho and Chamon (2013) apply an Engel
curve approach to infer inflation biases from the food share using UHIES micro-data for a subset of
Chinese regions over the 1998-2005 period. Our analysis of the CHIP micro-data is methodologically
similar, and we obtain qualitatively similar results to theirs for the time period they study, though
we estimate a larger cumulative bias.7 Numerous papers have carried out related exercises for other
countries: Beatty and Larsen (2005) for Canada, Larsen (2007) for Norway, Gibson, Stillman, and
Le (2008) for Russia, Barrett and Brzozowski (2010) for Australia, Gibson and Scobie (2010) for
New Zealand, Chung, Gibson, and Kim (2010) for Korea, and Filho and Chamon (2012) for Brazil
and Mexico.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 4 presents illustrative
evidence on cross sectional Engel curves in China and how they shift over time. Section 3 outlines
our empirical model and the resulting estimator of biases in Chinese inflation and growth statistics.
Section 5 presents our adjusted estimates of Chinese inflation and growth. Section 6 discusses the
inflation spike of 2007. Section 7 concludes.


2        Data and Institutional Background

Our main source of data is the yearbooks on urban prices and household expenditures compiled
and published by the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) based on their Urban Household
    7
    This difference most likely arises because of the semi-parametric approach they use to allow to adjust for different
biases across income groups. We discuss this issue further in footnote 22.

                                                           5
Income and Expenditure Survey (UHIES). The UHIES gathers data on annual expenditures of
many disaggregated product categories for Chinese urban households. Households are chosen for
the survey using stratified random sampling in such a way as to make the survey representative of
the total urban population. Households in the survey are asked to record income and expenditures
in a diary for a full year. Officials visit sample households several times a month to review and
retrieve diaries and assist households. For most of our analysis, we use province-level expenditure
data based on the UHIES. In our robustness analysis, we also make use of an analogous data
stratified by income group.
       A general concern regarding the surveys we use is that the sampling frame used by the Chi-
nese government may not be adequate, or that there may be systematic underreporting by some
demographic groups (as there is in U.S. consumption surveys. Piketty and Qian (2009) discuss
how households that refuse to participate are typically the poorest and richest households. One
advantage of the Engel curve approach to measuring growth and inflation is that it does not, in
principle, require that the sample be representative or even constant over time. Under the (perhaps
heroic) assumption that the model of demand is literally correct, then a non-representative sample
simply implies that the Engel curve will be estimated off of a non-representative sample of the
population—but the resulting income elasticities will still be correct. Analogously, changes in the
sample will lead to movements along, as opposed to shifts in, the Engel curve.
       In addition to the expenditure data, we use CPI price index data by product category to account
for potential changes in relative prices across commodities (but not the overall level of inflation,
which we assume is measured with error). We also incorporate a number of demographic controls in
our analysis: household size, the number of people earning income (including non-wage income such
as retirement earnings) per household, the number of people employed per household, the average
sex ratio, the unemployment rate, the child-dependency ratio, the elderly-dependency ratio, and a
measure of urban migration.8
       We make use of the official CPI published by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), as a
basis for comparison for our Engel-curve based inflation estimates. The NBS reports that the data
underlying the CPI are collected from 63,000 prices collection units in 500 cities and counties of
   8
     Since 2002, the sample frame for the urban household survey has included all residents living in an urban area
irrespective of residency status (whereas before that time, a local, non-agricultural residency status (hukou) was
required). In our baseline analysis, we control for this factor by constructing an migration variable that is zero before
2002 and after 2002 is equal to the cumulative net in-migration since 2002. This variable adjusts gradually and does
not appear to be cyclical and has virtually no effect on our results. We also assess the importance of migration using
data from CHIP (see description below), where we can include and exclude migrants.


                                                           6
the 31 provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities), which cover grocery stores, department
stores, supermarkets, convenience stores, professional markets, franchise houses, shopping centers,
open fairs and community service centers run by local governments. The CPI is constructed ac-
cording to a Laspeyres index. We focus on the urban CPI released by the NBS, since our Engel
curve estimates are constructed from urban households. However, Figure A.1 shows that the urban
and total CPI measures are very similar.
   We also present estimates of inflation and consumption growth based on micro-data from the
Chinese Household Income Project (CHIP). CHIP is a household survey that has been added to
the UHIES for a subsample of that survey sample in a subsample of Chinese provinces in the years
1988, 1995, 1999, 2002, 2007, and 2008. We use data from the 1995, 1999, 2002, and 2007 CHIP
surveys. We do not use data from the 1988 CHIP because rationing was still widespread in China
in 1988 (see discussion below). The CHIP survey changed in 2008 to ask only about “necessary”
consumption on food and “necessary” total consumption, implying that the survey responses are
not comparable in this year. For this reason, we do not use the 2008 CHIP data. We use data on
total expenditures and the share of expenditures spent on food from the urban households survey
in CHIP. We exclude liquor and cigarettes from the food share both because there is no liquor and
cigarette expenditure in the 2007 CHIP and because these categories are not a part of the food
share in the UHIES.
   We have extensively analyzed the data to eliminate inconsistencies and harmonize the data
across years. We have also filled in gaps in digital sources from hard copy sources. The exact data
sources, and the details of how we compiled the data are described in appendix A.
   For our Engel curve approach to work, it must be the case that household expenditure shares
are the consequence of optimizing decisions on the part of households. It is therefore important
that household consumption decisions are not contaminated by rationing. In China, rationing was
completely phased out by 1996 (and mostly phased out by the early 1990’s). Price controls do not
pose a problem for our approach, since we do not make any assumptions about the supply-side of
the economy, but these too were mostly phased out by the mid-1990’s. Concerns about rationing
lead us to restrict attention to expenditure data from 1995 onward.




                                                7
3        Engel Curve Estimation

The methods we use to estimate inflation and consumption growth from shifts in Engel curves are
based on earlier work by Nakamura (1996), Hamilton (2001) and Costa (2001). We extend these
methods to allow for pooling across Engel curves for different commodities. This pooling approach
improves the precision of our estimates, and lessens their sensitivity to idiosyncratic measurement
errors and demand shocks.
        Our estimates are based on the following log-linear model for the expenditure share of com-
modity k in region i at time t:
                                                                                  X
                      k
                     ωi,t = ψik + β k log(Ci,t /Pi,t ) + γ k log(Pi,t
                                                                   k
                                                                      /Pi,t ) +       Θkx Xi,t + ki,t ,         (1)
                                                                                  x

                                                                                                 k /P
where Ci,t /Pi,t denotes real total expenditures (and Pi,t is the true aggregate price level), Pi,t  i,t

denotes the relative price of commodity k, Xi,t is a set of demographic controls, ψik denotes a
region-good fixed effect, and ki,t is a residual.9
        Equation (1) describes how the expenditure share for good k varies with real total expenditures
and the good’s relative price. The coefficient on real total expenditures, β k , measures the extent
to which households spend a larger or smaller share of total expenditures on good k as they
become richer. For example, the well-known negative relationship between the food share and
total expenditures would imply β k < 0. More generally, expenditure shares decline with total
expenditure for necessities (β k < 0) and rise for luxuries (β k > 0).
        It has been observed in many countries, both cross-sectionally, and over time, that there is a
strong negative relationship between the food share and total expenditure. In other words, richer
households spend a smaller fraction of their income on food. This empirical relationship was first
widely recognized after the work of Engel (1857, 1895) and is referred to as an Engel curve for food.
                                                                                                      k
        In practice, the true price level and the true price of good k are measured with error. Let π̃i,t
denote the measured cumulative inflation for good k in region i between periods 0 and t. Then we
have
                                                k          k      k
                                          log Pi,t − log Pi,0 = π̃i,t + µki,t ,                                  (2)
    9
     A linear relationship of this type between expenditure shares and log income arises from Deaton and Muelbauer’s
(1980) Almost Ideal Demand System. One caveat is that the formula for the price index Pi,t in equation (1) may differ
from the one constructed by a national statistical agency. See Beatty and Crossley (2012) for a detailed discussion
of this issue. In section 5.4, we use the methods laid out in Feenstra and Reinsdorf (2000) to construct inflation
estimates for different income groups. Differences in inflation between different income groups appear to play little
role in explaining our results.


                                                           8
where µki,t denotes the cumulative bias in the measurement of inflation. Define measured cumulative
inflation for all prices π̃i,t and the cumulative bias for all prices µi,t analogously. Using these concepts
                                                   k from equation (1) yields
to eliminate the unobserved true prices Pi,t and Pi,t
                                                                                         X
               k
              ωi,t = ψ̂ik + β k log Ci,t − β k π̃i,t − β k µt + γ k (π̃i,t
                                                                       k
                                                                           − π̃i,t ) +       Θkx Xi,t + ki,t .   (3)
                                                                                         x

    Our interest centers on the inflation bias term µt . It is straightforward to estimate µt from the
Engel curve for a single product k, such as food. To do this, we simply replace the terms β k µt by time
fixed effects and then estimate the resulting equation by OLS. We can then recover µt by dividing
the estimated time fixed effects by the estimated coefficient β k . This is the original Hamilton-Costa
approach (with the slight difference that they have individual level data on expenditures but price
indexes that vary only by region).
    Suppose, however, that we wish to estimate the bias term µt pooling information across more
than one commodity. In this case, we wish to allow the slope of the Engel curve, β k , to vary across
commodities, while µt is common across all commodities. This specification no longer admits a
representation that can be estimated using ordinary least squares. Hence, for the pooled specifi-
cations we consider, we estimate equation (3) using non-linear least squares on a pooled dataset
containing the expenditure shares of multiple commodities.
    Since we allow for region fixed effects, the slope of the Engel curve β k is identified from what
happens to the expenditure share in one province versus another when its relative consumption
increases. In other words, a good is a necessity if regions whose consumption is growing particularly
quickly relative to other regions also have expenditure shares for the good that are falling rapidly.
Our estimates are not, therefore, affected by constant differences in consumption preferences across
regions.


4    Illustrative Evidence

To develop intuition for our main results, it is useful to plot the Engel curve for food, and observe
how it has shifted over time. Figure 2 plots the share of food in total expenditures as a function of
log total expenditures for different income groups in China. The top panel plots this for 1995, 1998
and 2000, while the bottom panel plots 2006 and 2008. In each case, the food share is adjusted
for both movements in relative prices and an income group fixed effect using the methods laid out



                                                            9
in section 3.10 It is clear from the figure that there is a strong negative relationship between the
food share and total expenditures across these income groups in each year. In other words, richer
households spend a smaller fraction of their income on food.
    A second—more curious—pattern that emerges from this figure is that the Engel curves appear
to “shift” downward over time between 1995 and 2000. In other words, for a given level of total
expenditures, as measured by official statistics, households appear to spend successively lower
fractions of their total expenditures on food over this period. One possible explanation for these
shifting Engel curves—the one we explore in this paper—is that they arise from biases in official
inflation statistics. If the change in the CPI measure used to deflate the real expenditures plotted
on the x-axis is overstated, this will lead the points for, say, 2000 to be plotted too far to the left
relative to the points for 1995—accounting for the apparent shift. A similar pattern of shifting Engel
curves in the U.S. led Hamilton (2001) and Costa (2001) to conclude that there was a substantial
downward bias in official U.S. growth statistics and an upward bias in the U.S. CPI inflation rate
due to new goods bias.
    In panel B of figure 2, we again see that the Engel curve appears to shift, but this time in
the opposite direction. The Engel curve for 2008 lies above the Engel curve for 2006. This means
that for a given level of total expenditures, as measured by official statistics, households appear to
allocate a higher fraction of their total expenditures on food in 2008 than in 2006. This suggests
that the official growth statistics were too high between 2006 and 2008, and the official inflation
measures were too low. The upward shift in the Engel curves coincided with an increase in official
measures of inflation (see Figure 1). The Engel curve approach suggests that true inflation increased
by even more than official measures of inflation indicate.
    We can redo this analysis using regional data on expenditure shares—the main data source used
in our paper. While the regional Engel curves are more noisy, the same patterns emerge. Figure 3
plots Engel curves for food across different regions in China for the same years as Figure 2, adjusted
for movements in relative prices, demographic controls, and a region fixed effect using the methods
laid out in section 3. The figure shows that as regions become more affluent they spend a smaller
fraction of their total expenditures on food. But as in Figure 2, these Engel Curves seem to shift
over time. Just as in the case of the income group analysis, the Engel curves shift downward from
1995 to 2000 (indicating an upward bias in official inflation) and then upward from 2006 to 2008
  10
     Given the income group fixed effects in our specification in section 3, the negative slope of this relationship is
identified from the fact that income groups with more rapidly growing expenditures see a larger drop in their food
shares.

                                                          10
(indicating a downward bias in official inflation).
    Figure 4 plots “Engel curves” for grain as a fraction of total food expenditures. Since grain is
a necessity even within food, the expenditure share of grain as a fraction of total food expenditure
falls as total expenditures rise. This relationship is often referred to as Bennett’s Law (Bennett,
1941). We simply refer to it as the Engel curve for grain. We observe a similar pattern of shifting
Engel curves for grain as for the case of food. While the Engel curves for grain shift downward
from 1995-2000, they shift upward from 2006-2008. That these patterns arise for grain as a fraction
of food as well as for food as a fraction of total expenditures bolsters the case that both patterns
arise from a common cause— mismeasurement in official statistics. We show in section 5 that
similar patterns arise for a much wider range of necessities beyond just food and grain, and that
the opposite patterns arise for luxuries such as eating out and pre-made garments.


5     Results on Inflation and Urban Consumption Growth

Figure 5 presents our baseline Engel curve based estimates of inflation over the period 1996-2011,
based on estimating equation (3). Our baseline specification pools information from the Engel curve
for food expenditures as a fraction total expenditures with 14 separate Engel curves for expenditures
on 14 subcategories of food (e.g., grain, meat, or eating out) as a fraction of food expenditures.11
The dashed lines present two standard error bands. The standard errors are clustered by commodity
to allow for arbitrary time series correlation of the error term. The estimates are plotted alongside
official inflation statistics.
    According to our Engel curve based estimates, official inflation statistics present a smoothed
version of reality. Our Engel curve based inflation series is highly correlated with the official inflation
series, but has substantially larger swings. In the late 1990’s, China experienced a mild deflation
according to official statistics, which the IMF attributed to commodity cost declines, WTO-related
tariff cuts, productivity gains from reforms to state-owned enterprises and greater competition
(IMF, 2003). Our inflation series indicates that there was considerably more deflation over this
period than official statistics suggest. On the other hand, in the late 2000’s, inflation started to rise
modestly according to official statistics, peaking in 2008. Our estimates suggest that true inflation
  11
     The 14 subcategories of food are grain, meat, beans, starch, egg, oil, milk, baked goods, condiments, sugar,
vegetables, fruit, fish and eating out. These categories are chosen as all those for which it was possible to construct
harmonized expenditure and price series over time. We do not include two amalgam categories for which we were
unable to construct price indexes: ”Tea, Liquor and Beverage” and ”Other food.” We also exclude tobacco, which
we viewed as potentially subject to very different demand shocks from the rest of the food category.


                                                          11
was considerably higher than official statistics indicate over this period.12
       It is important to note that the official inflation rate plays no role in the construction of our
Engel curve based inflation series. Intuitively, our inflation series is backed out from expenditure
data as a factor that is needed to undo shifts over time in the cross-sectional Engel curves for
various expenditure shares. There is, therefore, no mechanical reason for the strong correlation we
observe between the official CPI and our adjusted inflation measure.13
       The flipside of understated inflation is overstated growth. This follows from the fact that
inflation statistics are used to transform nominal growth rates into real growth rates. Figure 6
presents the implications of our Engel curve estimates for Chinese urban consumption growth. The
figure shows that while official statistics suggest a highly stable, and slightly upward sloping trend
in Chinese urban consumption growth over the period 1996-2011, our Engel curve based estimates
of urban consumption growth indicate considerably more volatility and a marked slowdown in the
late 2000’s. According to our estimates, urban consumption growth in China was substantially
higher than official statistics indicate in the late 1990’s—above 10% per year in each year from
1996 to 2002 and above 15% per year between 1998 and 2000. Since then, growth has been lower,
in particular, dipping into negative territory in 2007 and 2008.
       Recall that our estimates are driven by changes over time in the expenditure shares for necessities
versus luxuries. Rapidly falling expenditure shares for necessities suggest that growth is high (and
inflation low, all else equal), while falling or slowly rising expenditure shares for luxuries suggest
the opposite. Table 1 presents the income coefficients β k and the price coefficients γ k from our
baseline pooled estimation of equation (3). Our estimate of β k for food is negative, indicating that
food is a necessity. Our estimate of β k for grain and meat are also negative indicating that grain
and meat are necessities within food (i.e., the share of food expenditures that go towards grain
and meat fall as total expenditures rise). On the other hand, our estimate of β k for milk, fruit and
eating out are positive, indicating that these are luxuries within food. It is crucial for our analysis
that many of the coefficients on total expenditures differ substantially from zero. It is only because
  12
     The official inflation measure in Figure 5 is the urban CPI. However, Figure A.1 shows that the urban and total
CPI measures are very similar. Moreover, total nominal consumption as measured in the household survey is very
similar to total nominal consumption as measured by the Chinese national accounts. This is illustrated in Figure A.2.
The only significant discrepancy is a spike in the household survey in 2002 that may have arisen from the redefinition
of some of the categories in that year.
  13
     The fact that measured inflation is one of the regressors in equation (3) may give the impression that measured
inflation plays a role in the construction of our bias estimates. This is not the case. We could have run regression
(3) without measured inflation as a regressor. In this case, the evolution of the time fixed effects (divided by β k )
would yield the evolution of true inflation. Including measured inflation as an additional regressor simply changes
the interpretation of the time fixed effects so that they yield the inflation bias as opposed to true inflation.


                                                         12
expenditure shares change in a systematic way with total expenditures that we are able to draw
inferences about growth and inflation from variation in expenditure shares.
    Figure 7 presents the evolution of the expenditure share on food as well as the share of food
expenditures on grain and eating out over the period 1996-2011. Both the food share and the
grain share within food declined rapidly in the late 1990’s and the share of food expenditures that
go towards eating out rose rapidly. These rapid changes in expenditure patterns then decelerated
markedly after 2002. This suggests a marked slowdown of growth in urban consumption after 2002.


5.1    Estimates Based on Engel Curves for Other Products

Model misspecification is an important concern in assessing Engel curve estimates of growth and
inflation. One might be concerned, for example, that the rapid declines in expenditure shares for
food in the late 1990s reflect changing household preferences that are not accounted for by our
model. To address this concern, we present results for many different product categories. The
fact that we find common patterns regarding the shifts in Engel curves over time across a large
number of these categories suggests that these shifts arise from a common cause—mismeasurement
in official inflation statistics—as opposed to product specific changes in household preferences.
    As we discuss above, our baseline specification presented in Figures 5 and 6 is based on pooled
data for food and 14 subcategories of food. Figure 8 compares our baseline estimates for inflation
with inflation estimates based on the food share alone and inflation estimates based on pooled data
for the 14 subcategories of food alone. There is no mechanical reason why these two specifications
should yield the same results regarding inflation bias. Yet the figure shows that both of these
components of our baseline specification yield very similar results for inflation. This similarity
across the predictions of the different models is reassuring, since it makes it less likely that our
results are driven by idiosyncratic demand shocks or measurement error.
    The next three figures present results based on several additional Engel curves. Figure 9 presents
estimates of inflation using the share of eating out within food—a luxury—alone. It also presents
estimates based on pooling across various sub-categories of food at home, such as grain, meat and
vegetables as a fraction of food at home. Both of these specifications yield qualitatively similar
results—larger deflation in the late 1990s and larger inflation in the 2000s than official inflation
statistics.
    Figure 10 is analogous to Figure 8 except that it is based on the Engel curves for clothing and


                                                 13
subcategories of clothing.14 The specification pooling clothing and subcategories of clothing and
the specification pooling only the subcategories of clothing both yield results that are similar to our
baseline results. The specification based on the Engel curve for clothing alone yields similar results
for the late 1990s and late 2000s, but somewhat different results for 2000-2003. It is clear from the
figure that when the Engel curve for clothing is pooled with the Engel curves for the subcategories
of clothing the Engel curve for clothing contributes very little to the pooled estimates suggesting
that there is less information about inflation in the Engel curve for clothing than the Engel curves
for the subcategories of clothing.
       Figure 11 presents results from a specification that pools data from the Engel curves of all of the
major expenditure categories of consumption—food, clothing, household appliances and services,
transportation and communication, education, recreation and culture, housing, and health care.
Since one might be concerned that there is a large amount of government intervention in housing
and health care, the figure also presents results of pooling only the first five categories. Finally,
the figure also presents results excluding food in addition to housing and health care. All three of
these specifications yield qualitatively similar results—larger deflation in the late 1990s and larger
inflation in the 2000s than official inflation statistics.


5.2       Relative Prices

A potential worry with our methodology is that we might not account correctly for the effect
of relative prices on expenditure shares. Figure 12 plots the evolution of the price of food rel-
ative to all goods, and the price of five large subgategories of food relative to food. These are
the main expenditure categories in our baseline specification (Figure 5). These relative price se-
ries follow markedly different patterns over the time period of our analysis. The relative price
of Food/Total and Meat/Food fall in the late 90s and rise in the 2000s, Eating-out/Total does
the opposite, Grain/Food and Fish/Food fall (unevenly) throughout, while Vegetables/Food rise
(unevenly) throughout. The large amount of heterogeneity in the evolution of relative prices and
the consistency of our results on inflation across many different expenditure categories makes it
difficult to construct a story based on movements in relative prices that accounts for our results.
       Let’s nevertheless consider several concerns along these lines. First, our empirical methodology
implicitly assumes that all variation in prices is due to supply shocks. If this is not the case, we
may be underestimating the price elasticity of demand. For food, we estimate γ k > 0 implying that
  14
       The four subcategories of clothing are garments, clothing material, shoes and other clothing, laundry and tailoring.

                                                             14
an increase in the relative price of food raises the expenditure share of food. In other words, we
estimate the price elasticity of demand for food to be lower than one. Suppose we underestimate
the true price elasticity, implying that the true γ k is smaller than our estimates suggest. In this
case, our Engel curve methodology would imply even larger divergences between true and official
inflation (in the same direction) to fit the observed patterns in expenditure shares.15 A similar
argument applies to the Engel curve estimates based on eating out, since the pattern of price
movements for that category is opposite that of food.
       A different concern would be that we underestimate γ k , perhaps due to attenuation bias (most
of our estimated γ k ’s are positive but small). In the case of the Engel curves for food, meat, and
eating out, this could potentially help explain the overall pattern in the difference between our
estimate of inflation and official inflation. But this is not the case for grain, fish, vegetables or most
of the categories outside of food.


5.3      Non-Uniform Bias Across Product Categories and Income Groups

A related concern is that the bias in official inflation statistics may not be uniform across sectors.
In most of our specifications, we make the simplifying assumption that the inflation bias is uniform
across sectors. It may however be that the bias in official inflation statistics is, e.g., more severe
in food—perhaps because food prices are more politically sensitive than the prices of other goods.
In Figure 13 we present results assuming that the entire bias is concentrated in food.16 Under this
(rather extreme) assumption, the bias we estimate is somewhat attenuated but remains substantial.


5.4      Differences in Inflation Across Income Groups

The existence of Engel curves, implies that households have non-homothetic utility. It is well
known that in this case no single price index is the appropriate price index—i.e., the unit expen-
diture function—for all households. Intuitively, the price index for households with higher income
will place greater weight on luxury products and the price index for poorer households will place
greater weight on necessities. The CPI is often considered to be a good approximation to the price
index for a household with income around the 75% percentile of the income distribution (Deaton,
  15
     To see this notice that the relative price of food is falling in the early part of our sample and rising in the later
part of our sample. This implies that the relative price term is absorbing some of the rapid fall in the food share
in the early part of our sample and subsequent slowdown later in our sample. If the coefficient γ k was smaller, this
term would absorb less, leaving more to be explained by the time fixed effects, i.e., leading to a larger estimate of the
measurement bias.
  16
     We implement this change in specification by replacing the β k µt term in equation 3 with (β k − γ k )µt .

                                                           15
1998). Beatty and Crossley (2012) point out that the price index that results from the Engel curve
methodology we employ yields the appropriate price index for a household at a particular level of
income but that it is unclear which level of income this is. A concern with our analysis is then that
the difference we document between CPI implied inflation and the inflation rate that our Engel
curve methodology yields arises not because of mismeasurement but because these two indexes
measure inflation for different income groups.
   To address this concern, we use the methods laid out in Feenstra and Reinsdorf (2000) to
calculate exact price indexes for different income groups and compare these to our Engel curve
based inflation estimates. Feenstra and Reinsdorf (2000) show that an exact price index for different
incomes groups of households whose preferences generate Deaton and Mullbauer’s (1980) Almost
Ideal Demand System can be constructed using the Divisia price index, which requires only data
on expenditure shares and prices at the initial and final period in question for the income group in
question. Figure 14 plots the resulting inflation rates for different income groups in China along
with the CPI and our Engel curve based estimate of inflation. While the inflation rate estimated
using the Feenstra and Reinsdorf method is different for different income groups in China, these
differences are small compared to the difference between our Engel curve based estimate of inflation
and the CPI (or the inflation rate for any of the income groups). We therefore conclude that these
differences in inflation between different income groups appear to play little role in explaining our
results.


5.5    Cross-equation Restrictions

It is well-known that the log-linear Engel curve relationship we present in equation (1) can be
microfounded using the Almost Ideal Demand System. This demand system implies cross-equation
restrictions on the price elasticities that we have not imposed above. In this sub-section, we
present a modification of our baseline estimation procedure in which we estimate the full Almost
Ideal Demand System presented in Deaton and Muellbauer (1980). The precise form of the model
equations and cross-equation parameter restrictions are given by equations (8)-(12) in Deaton and
Muellbauer (1980). While many of these restrictions are untestable since they follow directly from
the adding up the of the expenditure shares, the Almost Ideal Demand System imposes additional
symmetry restrictions that we impose here, in addition to allowing for additional price terms to




                                                 16
appear in the demand function.17
       One well-known issue with the AIDS demand system that arises in our analysis is that the
full-blown AIDS demand system involves estimating a huge number of cross-price elasticities. We
therefore implemented this procedure for the subcategories of food, using slightly consolidated
categories: Grain, Meat, Vegetables, Fruit, Eating Out and “Other Food.” (Using all 14 sub-
categories of food generates more parameters than we have observations.) We estimate the model
using the expenditure shares of these items as a fraction of total expenditure; where non-food items
are included in the “outside” category.18
       Figure 15 depicts the results of this estimation procedure. The results are compared to those
based on pooling the 14 different sub-categories of food as a fraction of total food expenditure
(Figure 8). The results are qualitatively similar, though the estimated inflation bias is somewhat
larger for the specification imposing the AIDS parameter restrictions in certain years. The addi-
tional price terms and parameter restrictions imposed by AIDS evidently work against explaining
the Engel curve shifts in the recent period using observed movements in prices. The inflation bias
required to explain the Engel curve shifts is, therefore, even larger than in our baseline specification.


5.6      Urban Migration

China has experienced a substantial amount of urban migration over the past 15 years. Urban
migrants are typically poorer than the existing urban population. Could urban migration explain
our results? Poor urban migrants will likely have a higher food share than the existing urban
population. But they also have lower total expenditures. An influx of poor urban migrants will
therefore move the province in question along the Engel curve, as opposed to shifting the Engel
curve itself. It is therefore not clear that the presence of urban migration affects our baseline
results.19
       However, to assess the role of urban migration directly, we re-estimate our model using micro-
data from the China Household Income Project (CHIP) both including and excluding migrants.
We do this using the 1995, 1999, 2002 and 2007 CHIP surveys. To estimate equation (3), we merge
the CHIP data with the regional price data that we use in our baseline analysis. Our Engel curve
  17                                          k                                                          j
                                                  = ψ̂ik + β k log Ci,t − β k π̃i,t − β k µt + j γ k,j π̃i,t + x Θkx Xi,t + ki,t
                                                                                              P               P
     Specifically, we estimate the equation, ωi,t
and impose the symmetry restrictions γ k,j = γ j,k .
  18
     The price of other food is aggregated using a Fisher Index.
  19
     Also, we include cumulative net in-migration by province in our dataset as a covariate in our baseline Engel curve
estimation.


                                                              17
analysis for the CHIP data is based on the food share alone, since this is the commodity for which
consistent expenditure share data are available in CHIP.
       Table 2 compares our estimates of the income and price elasticities from the CHIP data to
our baseline estimates.20 The estimated income elasticity for our baseline specification (Panel
A) implies that a 1% increase in real total expenditure is associated with a 0.66% increase in
food purchases, all else equal. Costa (2001) and Tobin (1950) report similar values of the income
elasticity of food for the US, while Hamilton (2001) reports a substantially lower value. The food
price elasticity of −0.61, indicates that food is inelastically demanded. The CHIP estimation yields
a very similar income elasticity and a price elasticity that is somewhat more negative. Table 2
presents results based on two alternative estimation approaches as well: 1) The log-log version of
our baseline approach and 2) Data aggregated at the income-group as opposed to province level.
Both approaches yield similar results to our baseline specification.21
       Despite its limited time-series coverage, CHIP has the advantage that it is based on a separate
consumption survey, and also a different methodology—individual data as opposed to data aggre-
gated at the regional level.22 Table 3 compares the inflation bias estimates based on the CHIP
data to our baseline estimates for the three time spans over which the CHIP bias can be calculated:
1995-1999, 1999-2002, and 2002-2007. The CHIP estimation yields similar qualitative results to
our baseline analysis: a large positive inflation bias for 1995-2002, which becomes progressively
smaller, and then negative for 2002-2007 period. Whether or not migrants are included has essen-
tially no impact on the CHIP estimates. This is consistent with the argument we describe above
that migration cause a movement along the Engel curve as opposed to shifts in the Engel curve.
  20
     The formula for the expenditure elasticity in the linear-log case is 1 + β k /ω k , while the corresponding price
elasticity formula is −1 + (γ k − ψ̂ k β k )/ω k , where ω k is the average of the national expenditure share for product
k over the 1995-2011 period. In the log-log case, the expenditure elasticity is given simply by β k while the price
elasticity is given by −1 + γ k − ψ̂ k β k .
  21
     The income groups are: poor, low income, lower middle income, middle income, upper middle income, high income
and highest income. The price elasticity cannot be identified in this specification because we do not observe separate
price indexes for the different income groups. Hence, we set the coefficient on the price term in this specification
equal to its counterpart from the province level analysis.
  22
      Although, more disaggregated data may not be an advantage in this case. Filho and Chamon (2013) find that
the Engel curve shift is larger for poor than rich households in the UHIES micro-data, and conclude this implies a
larger inflation bias for poor households. In our baseline analysis, we use province level data as opposed to household
micro-data. The differences they observe across income groups appear small for our province level analysis, probably
because our regional Engel curves are estimated over a much smaller range of incomes. Also, the difference that Filho
and Chamon (2013) discuss does not appear to occur between 2002 and 2007.




                                                           18
5.7         Additional Robustness

We have carried out three additional robustness checks that are presented in appendix B. First,
we have re-estimated our model allowing for separate Engel curves for the pre-2002 and post-2002
periods. This exercise addresses the concern that the slope of the Engel curve may have changed over
time as Chinese consumption grew. Second, we re-estimated our model using a simple Generalized
Least Squares specification, that accounts for heteroskedasticity across products (i.e., the fact that
a product with a 20% expenditure share is likely to have more volatility in absolute terms than
a product with a 5% expenditure share). Third, we estimated a log-log specification of the Engel
curve. These robustness exercises all yield the same qualitative results as our baseline analysis: a
positive inflation bias in the 1990’s and early 2000’s and a negative inflation bias thereafter.


6         The 2007 Inflation Spike

Our revised estimates of Chinese growth and inflation suggest a substantial slowdown in consump-
tion growth in 2007 coinciding with a large inflation spike. Chinese official statements in 2007 are
consistent with these findings. In May 2007, Premier Wen Jiabao appeared publicly on television to
address widespread inflation concerns. He stated: “the pork price hike should have a limit, because
some urban residents can’t afford it.” Subsequently, he said: “Prices have been on the rise these
days, and I’m aware that even a one-yuan increase in prices will affect peoples lives.”
         There are various other signs that the Chinese government recognized the impact of these
inflation pressures on consumption growth. The Chinese government convened an emergency cab-
inet meeting ordering local governments to increase food assistance to low-income families and to
encourage pig rearing through grower subsidies. This led, for example, to Guangzhou Province
promising to give a monthly payment of 20 Yuan for every low income family during May, June
and July to help offset the higher prices of pork and non-staple foods.23
         The Minimum Living Standard Allowance (MLSA) is a government subsidy program that has
been in operation on a national scale since 1997. Over this time period, the Ministry of Civil
Affiars has made five announcements in which it discusses increasing the MLSA. Four of these five
announcements were in 2007 and 2008. Three of the announcements made specific recommendations
to increase the MLSA by a combined total of RMB 40—a significant increase relative to the previous
level of roughly RMB 170. The announcements stated that these increases were intended to offset
    23
         See http://www.thepigsite.com/articles/2014/the-story-behind-chinas-rising-pork-prices.

                                                            19
increasing food prices.24 Similarly, the Ministry of Civil Affairs announced on July 4, 2007 that local
governments should establish or improve their “Temporary Relief” programs, which are intended
to provide support to low-income families suffering temporary economic difficulties.25 The number
of people receiving “Temporary Relief” rose sharply in 2007, in line with this announcement.26
       Pork prices played an important role in the inflation of 2007. Figure 16 depicts official measures
of overall inflation alongside those for meat, food, and non-food. According to official measure, the
2007 inflation spike was driven primarily by an increase in food prices, and within food, that meat
and in particular pork price increases were particularly large.
       A Sept 18, 2007 article in The Economist writes:

         “There is no doubt that the August consumer price inflation figure of 6.5%, well above
         many analysts’ expectations, was once again driven primarily by movements in the cost
         of pork. Exacerbated by an outbreak of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
         (“blue-ear” disease) that has affected pig supplies, the usual cyclical volatility in pork
         prices has reached new highs, pushing the year-on-year increase in meat and poultry
         product prices to 49% in August. Pork alone accounts for around 4% of the basket used
         for the consumer price index, so movements in its price have a direct feed-through into
         inflation.”

       The “blue-ear disease,” which is discussed above as a major source of the pork price increase, was
observed in 26 of 33 Chinese provinces. The disease led household pig farmers, who provide more
than 50% of Chinese meat, to leave the market in large numbers, leading to a substantial decrease in
the supply of pork. The New York Times reported that, “International health experts are already
calling this one of the worst disease outbreaks ever to hit Asia’s livestock industry....Officials in
  24
     On August 14, 2007, the government announced that the subsidies would be increased by at least RMB 15
per person per month for urban residents, and on September 24 2007 the government announced that the subsidies
would be increased by another RMB 10 per person per month for the next three months. On February 4, 2008,
the government announced that the 2007 increases in subsidies still applied in 2008, and that as of January 1, 2008,
there would be an additional RMB 15 increase in the urban MLSA and a RMB 10 increase in the rural MLSA. The
remaining two announcements were less specific. On June 14, 2007, the government noted that local governments
should continue to focus on making appropriate increases in the urban minimum living subsidy level. On November 12,
2001, the government announced that local governments at all levels should continue to focus on making appropriate
increases in the MLSA. These announcements were obtained from the official website of the Ministry of Civil affairs
http://dbs.mca.gov.cn/article/csdb/.
  25
     Since 1992, there has been only one other announcement regarding the “Temporary Relief Program” by the
Ministry of Civil Affairs. The other announcement followed the 2008 earthquake in Sichuan province, which killed
70 thousand people.
  26
     Statistics on the number of people receiving “Temporary Relief” are available from the main statistical yearbook
of the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics.


                                                         20
Beijing worry that widespread pork shortages and soaring food prices could prompt panic, unrest
or inflation, undermining a sizzling economy” (Barboza, 2007).
         Pork prices are notoriously volatile. Figure 17 depicts the hog price cycle since 1995. The
dark line depicts the change in the wholesale price of hogs (the price the slaughterhouse pays to
farmers) while the lighter line depicts the change in Chinese pork production. Since 1995, there
have been numerous hog price cycles. The figure shows a sharp decline in pork production and a
sharp increase in hog prices in 2007.
         Grain price inflation was another contributing factor to both rising pork prices and inflation
more generally. Grain is an input into the production of many food products, including meat,
poultry and eggs. The Economist notes that the rise in grain prices arose partly as a conseqence
of “industrial demand, in the form of soaring demand from biofuel producers.” Indeed, China
declared a moratorium on ethanol production 2007 because of the belief that ethanol production
was leading to rapidly rising food prices.27 China’s rapid investment growth during this period
no doubt also contributed to rapid commodity price inflation (note that rapid investment growth
is not inconsistent with the slow consumption growth we estimate given China’s investment-led
growth model).
         Finally, grain prices were also driven up by the drought of 2006-2007. This drought was one of
the most severe over the past two decades, and had the most severe effects on the availability of
livestock drinking water of any drought over our sample period.28 In summary, a variety of supply-
side forces, in conjunction with rapid growth in demand for commodities from China’s investment
sector were likely behind the 2007-2008 inflation spike and slowdown in consumption growth.


7         Conclusion

We use an Engel curve approach to derive new estimates of Chinese growth and inflation. Our
approach makes use of systematic discrepancies between cross-sectional and time-series Engel curves
in China. Our estimates suggest that official statistics present a smoothed version of reality. We
find that inflation was overestimated and growth underestimated by several percentage points per
year in the late 1990’s. In contrast, since 2002, official inflation statistics have risen only modestly,
but our Engel curve based estimates have risen much more. Our estimates imply that growth was
    27
     See                     http://www.resilience.org/stories/2007-09-09/low-grain-harvest-rising-food-prices-and-
china%C3%A2%E2%82%AC%E2%84%A2s-ethanol-plan.
  28
     See the last table of http://www.mwr.gov.cn/zwzc/hygb/zgshzhgb/201311/P020131104379205206821.pdf (in
Chinese).

                                                        21
substantially lower than official statistics suggest since 2002, and actually dipped into negative
territory in 2007 and 2008.
    The qualitative patterns we identify emerge for a wide range of expenditure categories both
within and outside of food. The pervasive nature of the empirical patterns we identify, despite
considerable variation across product categories in other factors such as price trends, helps buttress
the case that the patterns we observe arise from mismeasurement of official statistics as opposed
to idiosyncratic factors within individual consumption categories.
    Our finding that the 2007-2008 period was one of low consumption growth is consistent with
Chinese official statements during this period, as well as the Chinese government’s unusual decision
in increase subsidies to the poor in 2007 and 2008 to offset the rising cost of food. A severe outbreak
of the “blue ear disease” among Chinese hogs led to a dramatic increase in the price of pork, and
a substantial decrease in pork production. This, in conjunction with other adverse supply shocks
to agriculture and increased demand for commodities from China’s investment sector were likely
behind the large increase in inflation that we identify—which is only partially reflected in official
statistics.
    While we present no direct evidence on this topic, we suggest two possible interpretations
of our finding that Chinese official statistics are “too smooth.” First, they may reflect political
motivations to report low and stable inflation and high and stable growth statistics. Second, they
may reflect true difficulties measuring inflation. The analysis in Holz (2013) suggests that this might
be the more likely explanation. It might seem strange that a government would ever substantially
overstate inflation (as we suggest was the case in China in the late 1990’s). Recall, however, that
this is exactly what would occur in a country with a large “new goods bias.” Given the rapid
pace of development in the late 1990’s in China, the new goods problem during this period was
likely very large. The understatement of inflation since 2002 may be explained either by political
manipulation or by the product replacement bias discussed in Nakamura and Steinsson (2012).




                                                  22
A        Data Appendix

Our primary source of data for the years 2005-2011 is the “China Urban Life and Price Yearbook,”
published by the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). For 1995-2004, we use the previous
version of this yearbook, known as the “Chinese Price and Urban Household Survey Yearbook.”29
These yearbooks compile data from the annual Urban Household Income and Expenditure Survey
(UHIES) run by the NBS. From these yearbooks, we obtain the following variables at both the
regional and income-group levels: commodity price indexes (CPI and RPI, at the regional level
only), household expenditures by commodity, household size, the number of people earning income
(including non-wage income such as retirement earnings) per household, and the number of people
employed per household.
       Our second source of data is the “China Statistical Yearbook,” also published by the NBS,
from which we obtain the following variables at the regional level: sex ratio, elderly dependency
ratio, child dependency ratio, and unemployment rate.30 The household survey also has data on
sex ratio. However, 2006 data on sex ratio are missing in the survey. We use instead general sex
ratio from the main statistical yearbook as a proxy.
       Our third source of data is the “China Sub-County Population Statistics,” published by China’s
Ministry of Public Security. The Chinese are required to register with the local public security office
whenever they move. We obtain from these data a measure of net migration ratio defined as the
ratio of population moving into the urban areas of each province minus the ratio of population
moving out these areas.31 From these data, we construct a variable that is zero up until 2002
and then equal to the cumulative net in-migration into each region’s urban area. We include this
variable as a control for the potential role of migration on our analysis (we have also investigated
this issue in several other ways, as we discuss in section 5).32
       We have made a number of adjustments and modifications to the raw expenditure data to
eliminate inconsistencies and errors, and to harmonize the expenditure categories across years:
  29
     Most of these data are available in Chinese in digital form from the China Knowledge Resource Integrated
Database (CNKI) database.
  30
     These data are available in digital form from the website of NBS at
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/statisticaldata/yearlydata/.
  31
     These data is available in digital form from China InfoBank at http://www.bjinfobank.com/.
  32
     The NBS collects and publishes an alternative dataset on migration between regions. These data are based on
the Chinese census in 2010, the 1% mini-Census in 2005, and on a smaller survey in non-Census years. The migration
series from this dataset have large discontinuities in 2005 and 2010. This arises because annual NBS yearbook
population data are based on hukou counts (only people with local hukou are included), not resident counts (all
people with or without a local hukou), whereas the census counts are for residents. See Li and Gibson (2014).


                                                       23
1. The NBS revised the survey yearbook in 2002 and 2007, resulting in some inconsistencies
  in the definitions of commodities. First, the categories “Fruits, Melons and their Products”
  and a“Nuts and Kernels” are separate categories in the 1995-2001 data; however, “Nuts and
  Kernels” becomes a subcategory of “Fruits, Melons and their Products” in 2002. Thus, the
  definition of “Fruits, Melons and their Products” is inconsistent before versus after 2002. To
  address this issue, we combine the categories “Nuts and Kernels” and “Fruits, Melons and
  their Products” for the period before 2002, which harmonizes the definitions over time. This
  newly defined “Fruits, Melons and their Products” is the “Fruit” category we use in our
  pooling regressions.

  Second, we combine the “Meat” and “Poultry” categories in the 2002-2011 data to create a
  larger category consistent with the “Meat and Poultry” category before 2002. This newly
  defined “Meat and Poultry” category is the “Meat” category we use in our pooling regressions.

2. We corrected a number of errors in the raw data. In 1995 and 1996, the sub-categories of
  “Food” do not add up to “Food.” Moreover, the “Other Foods” category has a value of
  zero for all regions in these two years only. We therefore believe that the “Other Foods”
  expenditures are misreported in these years. We define “Other Foods” in these two years as
  equal to the gap between “Food” and the sum of all its subcategories.

3. In 2006, the price observations from the household yearbook for Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai,
  and Chongqing are all zero for all goods. We are able to partially fill in these missing
  data by using the fact that, when available, observations of the urban and national CPI are
  the same for these regions, and the national CPI is also available from the main Statistical
  Yearbook. We therefore substitute national CPI data from the main Statistical Yearbook
  for these missing values whenever possible. Unfortunately, some missing values remain since
  the main Statistical Yearbook reports the CPI for a less detailed array of categories than
  the household survey. In particular, price observations for Starch, Bean, Condiment, Sugar,
  Milk, Cake are missing in 2006. This means that our pooling estimation for 2006 does not
  incorporate information from these subcategories of food.




                                            24
B      Additional Robustness

B.1     Allowing for a Break in 2002

One potential concern regarding our baseline results is that the shape of the Engel curve may have
changed over time. Perhaps, for example, Engel curves have become flatter as China has developed,
leading our model to be misspecified. Figure A.3 compares the results of our baseline analysis to
results based on estimating separate Engel curves for the pre-2002 and post-2002 periods. The
figure shows that this modification has almost no impact on our results.


B.2     Generalized Least Squares Estimation

In Figure A.4, we divide through equation (3) by the average expenditure share for each product
category. The logic for doing this is to reduce potential heteroskedasticity in the baseline specifica-
tion. In the baseline specification, the dependent variable is the level of the expenditure share. The
average level of the expenditure share varies quite a bit across products—e.g., it is much higher for
food/total than for fruit/food. This much larger level of the expenditure share for some products
than others may be associated with a larger variance of the error term for those products. Dividing
through by the average expenditure share will then put less weight on the product categories with
large product shares.33 It is clear from Figure A.4 that once the baseline specification is scaled
in this way, it yields results that are closer to the results for the specification that pools only the
subcategories of food. However, since both food/total and the subcategories of food yield similar
results, this scaling affects our results in only a modest way and, in particular, does not change the
results qualitatively.


B.3     Log-log versus Linear-log Engel curves

An additional question is whether our results are sensitive to the functional form of the Engel curve.
To address this question, in Figure A.5, we change the dependent variable in equation (3) from the
level of the expenditure share to the logarithm of the expenditure share. We refer to this as the
“log-log” as opposed to the “linear-log” specification. From an economic standpoint, this means
that we are assuming a different functional form for the underlying demand system. An advantage
of this specification from a theoretical point of view is that the expenditure share is constrained to
  33
    This specification is a simple Generalized Least Squares regression under the assumption that the variance of the
error term varies by product category and is proportional to the average level of the product category’s expenditure
share.

                                                         25
be positive. From an econometric standpoint, the effect of this change is similar to the rescaling in
Figure A.4 in that it effectively puts more weight on the product categories with smaller average
absolute levels of expenditure shares. Again the results are not much affected.




                                                 26
References
Abramhan, K. G., J. S. Greenlees, and B. R. Moulton (1998): “Working to Improve the
 Consumer Price Index,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1), 27–36.

Aguiar, M., and M. Bils (2015): “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality,”
 American Economic Review, 105(9), 2725–2756.

Almas, I. (2012): “International Income Inequality: Measuring PPP Bias by Estimating Engel
 Curves for Food,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 1093–1117.

Almas, I., and A. A. Johnsen (2012): “The cost of living and its implications for inequality and
 poverty measures for China,” Working paper.

Barboza, D. (2007): “Virus Spreading Alarm and Pig Disease in China,” The New York Times,
 August 16, 2007.

Barrett, G. F., and M. Brzozowski (2010): “Using Engel Curves to Estimate the Bias in the
 Australian CPI,” The Economic Record, 86(272), 1–14.

Beatty, T. K. M., and T. F. Crossley (2012): “Lost in translation: What do Engel Curves
 tell us about the cost of living?,” Working Paper.

Beatty, T. K. M., and E. R. Larsen (2005): “Using Engel curves to estimate bias in the
 Canadian CPI as a cost of living index,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 38(2), 482–499.

Bennett, M. (1941): “Wheat in National Diets,” Wheat Studies of hte Food Research Institute,
 18(2), 37–75.

Bils, M. (2008): “Do Higher Prices for New Goods Reflect Quality Growth of Inflation?,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 124(2), 637–675.

Bils, M., and P. J. Klenow (1998): “Using Consumer Theory to Test Competing Business Cycle
  Models,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(2), 233–261.

         (2001): “Quantifying Quality Growth,” American Economic Review, 91(4), 1006–1030.

Boskin, M. J., E. R. Dullberger, R. J. Gordon, Z. Griliches, and D. W. Jorgenson
 (1996): “Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living,” Final Report to the Senate
 Finance Committee.

Chang, C., K. Chen, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2015): “Trends and Cycles in China’s
 Macroeconomy,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual, 30, Forthcoming.

Chung, C., J. Gibson, and B. Kim (2010): “CPI Mismeasurements and Their Impacts on
 Economic Management in Korea,” Asian Economic Papers, 9, 1–15.

Costa, D. L. (2001): “Estimating Real Income in the United States from 1888 to 1994: Correcting
 CPI Bias Using Engel Curves,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(6), 1288–1310.

Court, A. (1939): “Hedonic Price Indexes with Automobile Examples,” in The Dynamics of
 Automobile Demand, pp. 99–117, New York. General Motors Corporation.

                                               27
Deaton, A. (1998): “Getting Prices Right: What Should Be Done?,” Journal of Economic Per-
 spectives, 12, 37–46.

Deaton, A., and J. Muellbauer (1980): “An Almost Ideal Demand System,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 70(3), 312–326.

Engel, E. (1857): “Die Productions- und Constumptionsverhaeltnisse des Koenigsreichs Sach-
 sen,,” Zeitschrift des Statistischen Bureaus des Koniglich Sachsicshen Ministerium des Inneren,
 8 and 9.

          (1895): “Die Lebenskosten Belgischer Arbeiter-Familien Fruher and Jetzt,” International
  Statistical Institute Bulletin, 9, 1–74.

Erickson, T., and A. Pakes (2011): “An Experimental Component Index for the CPI: From
 Annual Computer Data to Monthly Data on Other Goods,” American Economic Review, 101(5),
 1707–1738.

Feenstra, R. C., and M. B. Reinsdorf (2000): “An Exact Price Index for the Almost Ideal
  Demand System,” Economics Letters, 66, 159–162.

Fernald, J. G., E. Hsu, and M. M. Spiegel (2014): “Has Chinas Economy Become More
  Standard?,” FRBSF Economic Letter, 30.

Filho, I. d. C., and M. Chamon (2012): “The Myth of Post-Reform Income Stagnation: Evi-
  dence from Brazil and Mexico,” Journal of Development Economics, 97, 368–386.

         (2013): “Consumption Based Estimates of Chinese Growth,” IMF Working Paper No.
  13/265.

Gale, F., and K. Huang (2007): “Demand for Food Quantity and Quality in China,” USDA
 Economic Research Report Number 32.

Gibson, J., and G. Scobie (2010): “Using Engel curves to estimate CPI bias in a small, open,
 inflation-targeting economy,” Applied Financial Economics, 20, 1327–1335.

Gibson, J., S. Stillman, and T. Le (2008): “CPI bias and real living standards in Russia during
 the transition,” Journal of Development Economics, 87, 140–160.

Gong, C. H., and X. Meng (2008): “Regional Price Differences in Urban China 1986-2001:
 Estimation and Implication,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 3621.

Griliches, Z. (1961): “Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric Analysis of
 Quality Change,” in Price Statistics of the Federal Government, pp. 173–196, New York. National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Hamilton, B. W. (2001): “Using Engel’s Law to Estimate CPI Bias,” American Economic Review,
 91(3), 619–630.

Hausman, J. (2003): “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the CPI,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 17, 23–44.

Hobijn, B. (2002): “On Both Sides of the Quality Bias in Price Indexes,” Federal Reserve Bank
 of New York Staff Report, No. 157.
                                               28
Holz, C. (2013): “The Quality of China’s GDP Statistics,” Working Paper, Stanford Center for
 International Development.

IMF (2003): “Deflation: Determinants, Risks and Policy Options–Findings of an Interdepartmental
  Task Force,” Task force report.

Larsen, E. R. (2007): “Does the CPI Mirror the Cost of Living? Engel’s Law Suggests Not in
  Norway,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 109(1), 177–195.

Li, C., and J. Gibson (2014): “Urbanization Economies in China: Nature, Locations and Effects,”
  Working Paper, University of Waikato.

Meng, X., N. Qian, and P. Yared (2014): “The Institutional Causes of Chinas Great Famine,
 1959-1961,” Working Paper.

Moulton, B. R., and K. E. Moses (1997): “Addressing the Quality Change Issue in the Con-
 sumer Price Index,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997(1), 305–349.

Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2012): “Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and
 Pricing to Market,” American Economic Review, 102(7), 3277–3316.

Nakamura, L. I. (1996): “Is U.S. Economic Performance Really That Bad?,” Federal Reserve
 Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 95-21/R.

Nordhaus, W. D. (1998): “Quality Change in Price Indexes,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 12(1), 59–68.

Pakes, A. (2003): “A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indexes with an Application to PC’s,”
  American Economic Review, 93, 1578–1596.

Piketty, T., and N. Qian (2009): “Income Inequality and Progressive Income Taxation in China
  and India, 1986-2015,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(2), 53–63.

Rawski, T. G. (2001): “What Is Happening to China’s GDP Statistics?,” China Economic Review,
 12, 347–354.

         (2002): “Measuring China’s Recent GDP Growth: Where Do We Stand?,” Jingjixue
  (China Economic Quarterly), 2(1), 53–62.

Reinsdorf, M. B. (1993): “The Effect of Output Price Differentials in the U.S. Consumer Price
 Index,” in Price Measurement and Their Use, ed. by M. Foss, M. Manser, and A. Young, pp.
 227–254, Chicago, Il. University of Chicago Press.

Reuters (2010):  “China’s GDP is “man-made,” unreliable:         top leader,” Decem-
 ber   6,  2010,  http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/12/06/us-china-economy-wikileaks-
 idUSTRE6B527D20101206.

Sandefur, J. (2013): “Africa Rising? Using Micro Surveys to Correct Macro Time Series,”
  Working Paper, Center for Global Development.

Subramanian, S., and A. Deaton (1996): “The Demand for Food and Calories,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 104(1), 133–162.

                                              29
Tobin, J. (1950): “A Statistical Demand Function for Food in the USA,” Journal of the Royal
 Statistical Society. Series A (General), 113(2), 113–149.

Triplett, J. E. (1997): “Measuring Consumption: The Post-1973 Slowdown and the Research
 Issues,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 79(3), 9–42.

Woo, W. T., and X. Wang (2011): “The Size and Distribution of Hidden Household Income in
 China,” Asian Economic Papers, 10(1), 1–26.

Xu, Y., and W. Zeng (2009): “Estimation of CPI Bias with Chinese City Statistical Data,”
 Statistical Research, 26(4).

Young, A. (2012): “The African Growth Miracle,” Journal of Political Economy, 120, 696–739.




                                             30
                                                Table 1
                             Coefficients from Baseline Pooled Specification
                                                                        k
                                       Average Share           Income ( )           Price (gk)

             Food                              0.40                -0.135               0.077
                                                                   (0.01)              (0.027)
             Grain                             0.10                -0.052               0.083
                                                                  (0.005)              (0.015)
             Meat                              0.21                -0.034               0.102
                                                                  (0.003)              (0.005)
             Bean                              0.01                -0.005               0.004
                                                                 (0.0005)             (0.0001)
             Starch                            0.01                -0.003               -0.001
                                                                 (0.0004)             (0.0001)
             Egg                               0.03                -0.012               0.008
                                                                 (0.0007)              (0.003)
             Oil                               0.03                -0.004               0.028
                                                                 (0.0003)             (0.0003)
             Milk                              0.04                 0.021               0.021
                                                                  (0.002)              (0.003)
             Baked Goods                       0.02                -0.001               0.003
                                                                (0.00006)             (0.0001)
             Condiments                        0.01                -0.001               0.003
                                                                 (0.0001)             (0.0001)
             Sugar                             0.01                0.001                0.004
                                                                 (0.0001)            (0.00007)
             Vegetable                         0.10                -0.026               0.030
                                                                  (0.002)              (0.003)
             Fruit                             0.07                0.004                0.021
                                                                 (0.0004)             (0.0004)
             Fish                              0.07                -0.007               0.006
                                                                 (0.0008)             (0.0004)
             Eating Out                        0.17                0.104                0.010
                                                                  (0.005)               (0.03)
The table reports the coefficients on total expenditure and relative prices from equation (3) in the paper for our
baseline specification. Our baseline specification pools information from the Engel curve for food expenditures
as a fraction total expenditures with 14 separate Engel curves for expenditures on 14 subcategories of food
(e.g., grain, mean or eating out) as a fraction of food expenditures. The first data column reports the average
expenditure share on food as well as the average expenditure on each of the 14 subcategories as a fraction of
food expenditures. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                            Table 2
                       Income and Price Elasticities for Food Expenditures
                                           Regional        Income Group
                                                                                    CHIP
                                           Analysis           Analysis
        Panel A: Linear-Log
           Income Elasticity                  0.66               0.71                0.68
                                             (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.004)
            Price Elasticity                  -0.61                                  -0.83
                                             (0.03)                                 (0.05)
        Panel B: Log-Log
           Income Elasticity                  0.63               0.71               0.58
                                             (0.03 )            (0.01)             (0.01)
            Price Elasticity                  -0.66                                 -0.65
                                             (0.07)                                (0.12)




                                               Table 3
                      Inflation Bias based on CHIP with and without Migrants
                                                          Annual Bias      Annual Bias       Annual Bias
                                                          1995-1999        1999-2002         2002-2007

Food/Total CHIP with migrants                                 0.061            0.028           -0.064
                                                             (0.006)          (0.003)          (0.007)
Food/Total CHIP without migrants                              0.062            0.028           -0.069
                                                             (0.006)          (0.003)          (0.007)
Food/Total from main dataset                                  0.113            0.050           -0.014
                                                             (0.009)          (0.006)          (0.007)
Baseline estimates from main dataset                          0.096            0.055           -0.028
                                                             (0.013)          (0.009)          (0.005)

The table reports the average annual inflation bias between different years. For example, an estimate of
0.061 implies that official inflation was overstated by 6.1% per year over the period in question. The first
three rows of estimates are based on the Chinese Household Income Project (CHIP). The first row includes
urban migrants -- households for which the household head does not have a local, urban hukou. The
second row excludes these households. The third row presents results based on the food share data from
our main dataset. The fourth row presents results based on our baseline, pooled specification using data
from our main dataset.
20%
                    CPI Inflation
                    GDP Growth
16%                 Urban Consumption Growth


12%


8%


4%


0%


-4%
      1995   1997    1999     2001     2003     2005     2007     2009   2011

               Figure 1: Official Growth and Inflation in China
              Food Share
              0.65

              0.60
                                                                                  1995
              0.55
                                                                                  1998
              0.50                                                                2000

              0.45

              0.40

              0.35

              0.30
                     6.5               7.0               7.5              8.0                 8.5
                                        Official Log Real Total Expenditures
                                                    Panel A

              Food Share
             0.50


             0.45                                                                 2006
                                                                                  2008
             0.40


             0.35


             0.30


             0.25
                     7.0         7.5             8.0           8.5          9.0                9.5
                                       Official Log Real Total Expenditures
                                                    Panel B
                                   Figure 2: Income Group Engel Curves
The figure plots the expenditure share on food for 8 different income groups in China for various years. The
reported food shares are adjusted for income group fixed effects (the omitted category is the second highest
income group) and movements in the relative price of food using an estimate for the price elasticity of food from
our baseline regional specification from section 5. Real Total Expenditures are measured in 1985 yuan.
             Food Share
             0.70


             0.65                                                                       1995
                                                                                        1998
             0.60                                                                       2000

             0.55


             0.50


             0.45


             0.40
                    6.9       7.1            7.3        7.5        7.7       7.9          8.1
                                          Official Log Real Total Expenditures
                                                      Panel A

             Food Share
             0.51

             0.49                                                                      2006
                                                                                       2008
             0.47

             0.45

             0.43

             0.41

             0.39

             0.37

             0.35
                    7.6             7.8             8.0           8.2          8.4              8.6
                                          Official Log Real Total Expenditures
                                                      Panel B
                                    Figure 3: Region Engel Curves for Food
The figure plots the expenditure share on food as a function of log total expenditures for 30 different regions in
China for various years. The reported food shares are adjusted for region fixed effects (the omitted region is
Anhui), movements in the relative price of food and demographic controls using estimates from our baseline
specification from section 5. Real Total Expenditures are measured in 1985 yuan.
             Grain/Food
             0.16


              0.14
                                                                                 1995
                                                                                 1998
              0.12
                                                                                 2000

              0.10


              0.08


              0.06


              0.04
                     6.9      7.1        7.3        7.5       7.7      7.9          8.1        8.3
                                        Official Log Real Total Expenditures
                                                    Panel A

              Grain/Food
              0.10
                                                                                   2006
              0.09
                                                                                   2008
              0.08

              0.07

              0.06

              0.05

              0.04

              0.03

              0.02
                     7.5        7.7          7.9         8.1        8.3           8.5          8.7
                                        Official Log Real Total Expenditures
                                                    Panel B
                                    Figure 4: Region Engel Curves for Grain
The figure plots expenditures on grain as a fraction of expenditures on food as a function of log total
expenditures for 30 different regions in China for various years. The reported grain/food shares are adjusted for
region fixed effects (the omitted region is Anhui), movements in the relative price of grain, and demographic
controls using estimate from our baseline specification from section 5. Real Total Expenditures are measured in
1985 yuan.
          40%
                             Official Inflation
          30%
                             Engel Curve Based Inflation

          20%


          10%


            0%


         -10%


         -20%


         -30%
                  1996      1998       2000       2002      2004       2006      2008       2010
                             Figure 5: Official and Engel Curve Based Inflation
 Note: Official inflation is the Chinese CPI. Adjusted inflation is from a pooled specification using the Engel
 curve for food expenditures as a fraction of total expenditures and Engel curves for the expenditures on 14 major
 subcategories of food (e.g., grain, mean or eating out) as a fraction of food expenditures. Dashed lines are two
 standard error bands. Standard errors are clustered by commodity.


         30%



         20%



         10%



          0%



        -10%
                           Official Consumption Growth
                           Engel Curve Based Consumption Growth
        -20%
                 1996     1998        2000        2002     2004       2006       2008       2010

                  Figure 6: Official and Engel Curve Based Urban Consumption Growth
Note: Adjusted urban consumption growth is from a pooled specification using the Engel curve for food
expenditures as a fraction of total expenditures and Engel curves for the expenditures on 14 major subcategories
of food (e.g., grain, mean or eating out) as a fraction of food expenditures. Official consumption growth is for
urban consumption from the National Accounts. Dashed lines are two standard error bands. Standard errors are
clustered by commodity.
               0.55                                                                                           0.24
                                    Food/Total (left axis)
                                    Grain/Food-at-Home (right axis)
                                                                                                              0.22
                                    Eating-Out/Food (right axis)
               0.50
                                                                                                              0.20

                                                                                                              0.18
               0.45

                                                                                                              0.16

               0.40
                                                                                                              0.14

                                                                                                              0.12
               0.35
                                                                                                              0.10

               0.30                                                                                           0.08
                      1996      1998       2000      2002      2004       2006       2008       2010

                      Figure 7: Evolution of Expenditure Share for Food, Grain, and Eating Out
 The figure plots the evolution over time of the share of total expenditures that go towards food, the share of food-at-home
 expenditures that go towards grain, and the share of food expenditures that go toward eating out.



               30%
                                    Food/Total + SubCat/Food Pooled
               25%                  Food/Total
               20%                  SubCat/Food Pooled

               15%

               10%

                5%

                0%

               -5%

              -10%

              -15%

              -20%
                      1996       1998       2000       2002       2004        2006       2008          2010

                                       Figure 8: Food versus Subcategories of Food
The figure plots results based on three specifications. The first is the baseline specification that pools the Engel curve for
food expenditures as a fraction of total expenditures and Engel curves for the expenditures on 14 major subcategories of
food as a fraction of food expenditures. The second specification is for the Engel curve for food expenditures only. The
third specification pools the Engel curves for the expenditures on the 14 major subcategories of food as a fraction of food
expenditures only.
             50%
                                       Eating-Out/Food
                                       SubCat-Food-at-Home/Food-at-Home Pooled
             40%
                                       Official inflation

             30%


             20%


             10%


              0%


            -10%


            -20%
                    1996        1998       2000        2002       2004       2006        2008       2010

                            Figure 9: Eating Out versus Subcategories of Food-at-Home
The figure plots official inflation along with two Engel curve based estimates of inflation. The dark line is an estimate of
inflation based on the Engel curve for expenditures on eating out relative to food, while the lighter line is an estimate of
inflation based on a specification that pools 13 Engel curves for expenditures on 13 subcategories of food relative to total
expenditures on food at home.

            40%

            30%

            20%

            10%

             0%

           -10%

           -20%
                                                                 Clothing/Total + SubCat/Clothing Pooled
                                                                 Clothing/Total
           -30%                                                  SubCat/Clothing Pooled
                                                                 Official Inflation
           -40%
                   1996       1998        2000       2002       2004       2006       2008       2010

                               Figure 10: Clothing and Subcategories of Clothing
  The figure plots official inflation along with three Engel curve based estimates of inflation. The unbroken dark
  line is an estimate of inflation based on a specification that pools the Engel curves for clothing expenditures as a
  fraction of total expenditures and Engel curves for all subcategories of clothing. The unbroken light line is based
  on the Engel curve for the clothing share alone, while the dark gray dotted line is based on a pooled
  specification of the subcategories of clothing alone.
         50%
                                  Top Categories
         40%                      Top Categories excl. Housing and Health Care
                                  Top Categories excl. Food, Housing, and Health Care
         30%
                                  Official inflation
         20%

         10%

          0%

        -10%

        -20%

        -30%

        -40%
                1996       1998       2000         2002      2004        2006          2008      2010
                                           Figure 11: Top Categories
The figure plots official inflation along with three Engel curve based estimates of inflation. The unbroken dark
line is based on a specification that pools the Engel curves for the expenditure share of all top categories. The
unbroken light line is the same except that it excludes housing and education. The dark gray broken line is the
same expect that it also excludes food.


        1.70
                            Food/Total                       Grain/Food
                            Eating-Out/Food                  Meat/Food
        1.50                Fish/Food                        Vege/Food



        1.30



        1.10



        0.90



        0.70
               1995      1997       1999       2001       2003      2005        2007      2009     2011

                                           Figure 12: Relative Prices
The figure plots the price of food relative to total expenditure, the price of grain, eating out, meat, fish and
vegetables relative to food. All series are normalized to 1 in 1995.
                20%


                15%


                10%


                  5%


                  0%


                 -5%

                                                                             Official Inflation
                -10%                                                         Food/Total -- Baseline
                                                                             Food/Total -- Bias only in Food
                -15%
                        1996       1998        2000       2002        2004       2006        2008       2010

                                                 Figure 13: Bias only in Food
  The figure plots official CPI inflation and inflation estimated based on two Engel curve specifications. The first
  specification is the baseline version of the Food/Total specification (same as in Figure 8). The second version is also
  based on Food/Total, but assumes that the entire CPI bias is concentrated in Food.

                25%

                20%

                15%

                10%

                 5%

                 0%

                -5%

               -10%

               -15%
                       1996        1998       2000        2002       2004        2006       2008        2010
                       Average                          Highest (90-100%)                 High (80-90%)
                       Upper Middle (60-80%)            Middle (40-60%)                   Lower Middle (20-40%)
                       Low (10-20%)                     Lowest (0-10%)                    Poor (0-5%)
                       Official CPI                     Engel Curve Based

                                      Figure 14: Inflation for Different Income Groups
The figure plots our estimate of inflation basted on Engel curves, the official CPI as well as inflation rates for different income
groups calculated using the Divisia index shown by Feenstra and Reinsdorf (2000) to be an exact price index for the Almost
Ideal Demand System. The percentages in the labels refer to the range of the income distribution covered by each line.
     50%
                            Adjusted Inflation (Pooling)
                            Adjusted Inflation (AIDS)
     40%
                            Official Inflation
     30%

     20%

     10%

       0%

     -10%

     -20%

     -30%
             1996      1998       2000       2002          2004   2006       2008       2010

                                Figure 15: AIDS System Estimation
The figure plots official CPI inflation and inflation estimated based on two Engel curve specifications.
The AIDS specification imposes symmetry restrictions and includes the full set of relative price terms
implied by that demand system. The Pooling specification estimates the Engel curve using our baseline
pooling approach. Both specifications use the five largest subcategories of food, namely grain, meat,
vegetable, fruit, and dining-out, plus an additional “other food” subcategory.

       35%
                          Aggregate Inflation
       30%                Food Inflation
                          Non-Food Inflation
       25%                Meat Inflation
       20%

       15%

       10%

        5%

        0%

       -5%

      -10%

      -15%
             1996       1998       2000      2002          2004   2006       2008       2010

                                 Figure 16: Food and Meat Inflation
80%                                                                          20%
                     Change in Hog Prices (left axis)

60%                  Change in Pork Production (right axis)                  15%


40%                                                                          10%


20%                                                                          5%


 0%                                                                          0%


-20%                                                                         -5%


-40%                                                                         -10%


-60%                                                                         -15%
       1995   1997       1999      2001       2003      2005   2007   2009

               Figure 17: Changes in Prices and Production of Pork
12%

10%

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%

                                           Total Consumption Growth (NIPA)
-2%                                        Urban Consumption Growth (NIPA)
                                           Total Inflation (CPI)
-4%                                        Urban Inflation (CPI)
       1996     1998      2000      2002     2004        2006    2008      2010

         Figure A.1: Official Inflation and Real Consumption: Urban vs. Total




 16%

 14%

 12%

 10%

 8%

 6%

 4%
                                                  National Accounts
 2%
                                                  Household Survey

 0%
        1996     1998      2000     2002      2004     2006      2008      2010

       Figure A.2: Nominal Consumption: National Accounts vs. Household Survey
          25%
                            No Break
          20%               Break in 2002

          15%

          10%

           5%

           0%

          -5%

         -10%

         -15%
                 1996       1998       2000       2002       2004        2006       2008       2010
                           Figure A.3: Separate Engel Curves Pre and Post 2002
The figure plots results based on our baseline specification and an alternative version of this specification where
we allow the Engel curve coefficients to be different before and after 2002. In both cases the results are based on
a specification that pools the Engel curve for food expenditures as a fraction of total expenditures and Engel
curves for the expenditures on 14 major subcategories of food as a fraction of food expenditures.

         20%

         15%

         10%

          5%

          0%

         -5%

        -10%

                                                                     Food/Total + SubCat/Food Pooled
        -15%
                                                                     Food/Total
                                                                     SubCat/Food Pooled
        -20%
                1996       1998        2000       2002       2004        2006       2008        2010
                           Figure A.4: Food versus Subcategories of Food Scaled
The figure plots results based on three specifications. The first is the baseline specification that pools the Engel
curve for food expenditures as a fraction of total expenditures and Engel curves for the expenditures on 14 major
subcategories of food as a fraction of food expenditures. The second specification is for the Engel curve for food
expenditures only. The third specification pools the Engel curves for the expenditures on the 14 major
subcategories of food as a fraction of food expenditures only. In the pooled specifications, the Engel curves are
scaled by the average expenditure share for the product in question to reduce heteroskedasticity.
          25%
                               Linear-Log
          20%
                               Log-Log
          15%

          10%

            5%

            0%

           -5%

         -10%

         -15%

         -20%
                 1996       1998       2000       2002       2004        2006       2008       2010
                           Figure A5: Linear-Log versus Log-Log Specification
The figure plots results based on our baseline specification and an alternative version of this specification where
the dependent variable is the log of the expenditure share as opposed to the level of the expenditure share. In
both cases the results are based on a specification that pools the Engel curve for food expenditures as a fraction
of total expenditures and Engel curves for the expenditures on 14 major subcategories of food as a fraction of
food expenditures.
