                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ON THE INCEPTION OF RATIONAL
                      BUBBLES IN STOCK PRICES




                           Behzad Diba


                       Herschel I. Grossman




                      Working Paper No. 1990




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 1986




We thank Robert Flood, Danny Quah, David Runkle, and Kenneth West
for helpful discussions relating to the ideas in this paper. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in
Economic Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   Working Paper #1990
                                                   July 1986




                On the Inception of Rational Bubbles in Stock Prices




                                     ABSTRACT



     This paper analyzes the theoretical possibility of rational
bubbles in stock prices in a model in which stockholders have
infinite planning horizons and in which free disposal of equity
rules out the existence of negative rational bubbles. The
analysis shows that in this framework if a positive rational
bubble exists, then it started on the first date of trading of
the stock. Thus, the existence of a rational bubble at any date
would imply that the stock has been overvalued relative to market
fundamentals since the first date of trading and that prior to
the first date of trading potential stockholders who anticipated
the initial pricing of the stock expected that the stock would be
overvalued relative to market fundamentals. The analysis also
shows that any rational bubble will eventually burst and will not
restart. Thus, even if a positive rational bubble exists,
stockholders know that after a random, but almost surely finite,
date the stock price will conform to market fundamentals forever.




Behzad Diba
                                                Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics
                                                Department of Economics
Brown University
                                                Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
                                                Providence, RI 02912
     Most studies that   analyze the theoretical possibility and
empirical implications   of rational bubbles in stock prices——see,
for example, Blanchard   and Watson (1982) or West (1984a, 1984b)——
utilize a simple model   in which the required rate of return from
holding equity is constant. Quah (1985), in contrast, considers
a more general model in which risk—averse asset holders with
infinite planning horizons explicitly maximize expected
utility. In Quah's model, the product of a stock's price and the
marginal utility of consumption satisfies a first—order linear
expectational difference equation that has an eigenvalue greater
than unity and a stochastic forcing term that reflects the
expected evolution of the stock's dividends.

     A particular solution to such an expectational difference
equation——referred to as the market—fundamentals component of the
stock price——equates the stock price to the present value of
expected future dividends, discounted at the expected marginal
rate of intertemporal substitution. This discount factor depends
uniquely on the process generating endowments and dividends and
on the rate of time preference, both of which are exogenously
given. The general solution to the expectational difference
equation allows the stock price to have a rational—bubbles
component in addition to the market—fundamentals component   The
existence of a rational—bubbles component would reflect a self—
confirming belief that the stock price depends on a variable (or
a combination of variables) that is intrinsically irrelevant——
that is, not part of market fundamentals——or on truly relevant
variables in a way that involves parameters that are not part of
market fundamentals.

     The property that the eigenvalue of the expectational
difference equation is greater than unity has two important
consequences. First, it guarantees the existence of an
economically meaningful (i.e., forward looking) market—
fundamentals solution except in extreme cases of the process
                              —2—

generating dividends. Second, it implies that rational bubbles
have explosive conditional expectations. Specifically, the
expected value of a rational—bubbles component of a stock price
either would increase or would decrease geometrically into the
infinite future.

    The results of Mussa (1984) underscore the association of
economically interesting market fundamentals with nonconvergent
rational bubbles. Mussa shows that various examples of attempts
to construct alternative models in which potential rational
bubbles are convergent all preclude a forward—looking market—
fundamentals solution for some relevant price variable. 1

    The fact that rational bubbles have explosive conditional
expectations implies that a negative rational—bubbles component
cannot exist, because, given free disposal of equity, stock
holders cannot rationally expect a stock price to decrease
without bound and, hence, to become negative at a finite future
date. The property of explosive conditional expectations also
suggests that if a positive rational bubble exists, stockholders
might expect it eventually to dominate the stock price, which
would then bear little relation to market fundamentals. Positive
rational bubbles are empirically plausible only if, despite
explosive conditional expectations, the probability is small that
a rational bubble would become arbitrarily large. This
observation focuses attention on processes, like one suggested by
Blanchard and Watson, that apparently can generate rational
bubbles that are likely to start, burst, and restart repeatedly.

     The present paper explores more deeply the theoretical
possibility of rational bubbles in stock prices by focusing on
the circumstances of the inception of rational bubbles. The
inception of a rational bubble after the first date of trading of
a stock would involve an innovation in the stock price.
Accordingly, any rational—bubbles component that starts after the
first date of trading has an expected initial value of zero.
Moreover, because free disposal rules out negative rational
                               —3—

bubbles, this expected initial value can equal zero only if any
initial realization of a rational bubble after the first date of
trading equals zero with probability one.

     This theoretical argument means that the impossibility of
negative rational bubbles also rules out the inception of a
positive rational bubble except at the first date of trading of a
share. One important implication of this argument is that the
process suggested by Blanchard and Watson for generating
empirically interesting positive rational bubbles is inconsistent
with the impossibility of negative rational bubbles. Once a
positive rational bubble that began at the first date of trading
has burst, it cannot restart.

     In the existing literature, Brock (1982) and Tirole (1982)
already have constructed arguments against the existence of
positive rational bubbles in stock prices.2 Brock's argument is
based on a transversality condition implied by the optimizing
behavior of asset holders with infinite planning horizons. The
existence of a rational bubble would violate this transversality
condition. Specifically, as Gray (1984) explains, the existence
of a positive rational bubble would imply that stockholders
expect to gain utility from selling the stock now and never
buying it back.

     Tirole's argument assumes that, even if stockholders have
infinite planning horizons, they would not plan to hold an
overvalued asset——that is, one with a positive rational bubbles
component——forever. Instead, each stockholder would want to
realize the capital gain associated with a positive rational
bubble at some date in the finite future. Consequently, if the
number of potential asset holders is finite, a finite future date
would exist beyond which no one would plan to hold overvalued
shares. Under these conditions, a backward unraveling argument
precludes the existence of positive rational bubbles.
                              —4--


     The arguments of Brock and Tirole do not apply to a model of
an infinite succession of overlapping generations of asset
holders with finite planning horizons. In addition, Quah claims
that, even if planning horizons are infinite, Brock's argument
does not rule out positive rational bubbles that almost surely
burst at a date in the finite future. The idea seems to be that,
even if such rational bubbles can restart repeatedly, the
probability that stockholders will gain utility from a strategy
that involves selling shares now and never buying them back is
zero. Accordingly, the transversality condition would not rule
out such rational bubbles if stockholders ignore zero probability
events.

     An analogous objection would apply to Tirole's argument if
stockholders cannot identify a finite future date by which demand
for shares whose price contains a positive rational—bubbles
component will have vanished with probability one——say, because
the total number of potential stockholders or the length of some
stockholders' holding periods are not known. In this case, each
stockholder could only infer that a positive rational bubble
must, with probability one, eventually burst. This inference
would rule out the possibility of a rational bubble that, with
nonzero probability, lasts forever but not the possibility of one
that almost surely bursts.

     The argument developed in the present paper applies to all
forms of rational bubbles, including those that apparently can
burst and restart repeatedly. Moreover, unlike the analyses of
Brock and Tirole, the present argument does not exploit the
properties of either infinite planning horizons or a finite
number of potential stockholders. Accordingly, although we
formalize the analysis within the model of infinite planning
horizons studied by Quah, we presumably could develop an
analogous argument that would apply to the inception of rational
bubbles in an overlapping—generations framework.
                               —5—

     In this regard, note that the results derived below are
directly applicable to a model in which the required rate of
return on equity is constant. This model can represent a special
case, which arises under risk neutrality, ot either the model of
infinite planning horizons or the model of overlapping
generations.  (Analysis of a more general overlappinggenerations
model would present an additional conceptual problem because in
such a model the marginal rate of intertemporal substitution
would depend on asset prices in addition to the rate of time
preference and the process generating endowments and dividends.
Consequently, the overlapping—generations framework generally
does not yield a unique relation between the stock price and
expected future dividends that defines market fundamentals.

     In what follows, section 1 reviews the basic properties of
rational bubbles in stock prices. Section 2 derives the result
that if a rational bubble exists, it must have started on the
first date of trading. Section 3 derives the further result that
rational bubbles cannot burst and simultaneously restart. In
light of these results, section 4 discusses the possible forms
that interesting rational bubbles in stock prices could take if
stockholders have finite planning horizons. Section 5 offers
concluding remarks.

1.    Properties of Rational Bubbles

     Assume that a representative household maximizes expected
utility over an infinite horizon,


(1)
           Et L T_tu(c),       0 <     < 1,


where {c} is a stochastic process representing consumption of
a single perishable good, and    is a discount factor for future
consumption. Positive time preference implies that     is less
than unity. The utility function, u(.), is strictly concave,
increasing, and continuously differentiable. The conditional
expectations operator Et is based on an information set that
                                           —6—

contains, at least, current and past values of all the variables
entering the model.

     Each period, the household receives an endowment, y, of
the consumption good. The household can attempt to smooth
consumption by acquiring shares, s, at the price of p
(units of the consumption good) per share. Each share pays a
dividend of d    units of the consumption good pe.r period. The
budget constraint faced by the household at date T is

(2)             + pT(sT+l_          )         +   ds.
The stochastic process {d,y} is exogenous to the model and
assumed stationary.
     The first—order condition for the household's utility
maximization problem is


(3)          Et[u'(ct+1)p÷i] —            '[u'(c)pJ             =
                                                                    Et{u'(ct÷i)dt+iJ.
We can normalize the number of outstanding shares to unity and
impose s = 1 as the stock market equilibrium condition. The
representative household's consumption, c, in equilibrium must
then eua1 the total suoDlv, v + d . Eauation (3), combined
                                                  T
with the equilibrium conditions, implies

                       —l
(4)          Eq1 —          q   =
                                        Et[u'(yt+i     +


where


                        + dt)p.

        Equation (4) is a first—order expectational difterence
                                                      —l
equation. Because the eigenvalue,                          ,   is
                                                              greater than unity,
the forward—looking solution for                       involves a convergent sum,
as long as Et[U'(Yt+. + dt+)d+.} does not grow with                             j   at   a
                                      —7

 geometric rate equal to or greater than l• The forward—
 looking solution, denoted by Ft and referred to as the market—
 fundamentals component of              is


             Ft =                       +
 (5)
                    j=l
                          JEt[u'(yt+.        dt+)dt+.].
     This market—fundamentals solution to equation (4) sets the
current product of the stock price and the marginal utility of
consumption equal to the present value of expected future
products of dividends and the marginal utility of consumption.
If the representative household is risk neutral, equation (5)
reduces to the simpler specification of market fundamentals,
which equates the stock price to the present value of expected
future dividends.

     The general solution to equation (4) is the sum of the
market—fundamentals component, Ft and the rational—bubbles
component, Bt__that is,

(6)
               =Bt +Ft,

where Bt is the solution to the homogeneous expectational
difference equation,

(7)
            Et Bt+i —          = 0.

A nonzero value of Bt would reflect the existence of a rational
bubble at date t——that is, a self—confirming belief that
does not conform to the market—fundamentals
                                            component, Ft.
       The assumption of rational expectations implies that in
forming EtBt÷., for all j > 0, potential asset holders behave
as if they know that any rational—bubbles component would conform
to equation (7) in all future periods. Accordingly, any solution
to equation (7) would have the property

(8)        EtBt÷i =       Bt   for all j > 0.
                                       —8—

Equation (8) says that the existence of a nonzero rational—
bubbles component at date t would imply that the expected value
of the rational—bubbles component at date t+j either increases
or decreases with j at the geometric rate         Therefore,
because the eigenvalue      exceeds unity, the existence of a
rational bubble would imply that {Eq÷.}1 either increases
or decreases without bound.

     In particular, the existence of a negative rational—bubbles
component at date t would imply that            becomes negative
for some finite j. But, given free disposal of shares,
stockholders cannot rationally expect a stock price to become
negative at a finite future date. Therefore, a negative
rational—bubbles component would be a contradiction and, hence,
cannot exist.
       Solutions to equation (7) satisfy the stochastic difference
equation

                    —l        =
(9)        Bt+i —        Bt

where z1 is a random variable (or combination of random
variables) generated by a stochastic process that satisfies

(10)       Et.zt+i = 0            for all   j   0.


The key to the relevance of equation (9) for the general solution
of      is that equation (7) relates Bt to EtBt÷l, rather
than to Bt÷i itself as would be the case in a perfect—foresight
model.

     The random variable z1 is an innovation, comprising new
information available at date t+l. This information can be
intrinsically irrelevant——that is, unrelated to F÷i__or it can
be related to truly relevant variables, like dt÷i through
parameters that are not present in Ft÷i. The critical property
of         given by equation (10), is that its expected future
values are always zero.
                                              —9—

            The general solution to equation (9), for any date t,
 t         0,   is


    (11)             Bt =        +         T—t
                                      rl
 where date zero denotes the first date of trading of the stock.
 Equation (11) expresses the rational-bubbles component at date
 t as composed of two terms. The first term is the product of
the eigenvalue raised to the power t and the value of the
rational—bubbles component at date zero. The second term is a
weighted sum of realizations of z    from r = 1 to r = t.     The
weights are powers of the eigenvalue such that the contribution
of z   to Bt increases exponentially with the difference
between t and T. For example, a past realization Z,
1      r < t, contributed only the amount z
                        r—t
                                                            to B, but
contributes                 z    to Bt.

2.         The Inception of Rational Bubbles
     The fact that a negative rational—bubbles component cannot
exist means that, in addition to satisfying equation (9), the
rational—bubbles component of a stock price at date t+l
satisfies B+1     0. Taken together, equation (9) and this
nonnegativity condition imply that realizations of z1 must
satisfy

(12)            z1 > -          'Bt    for all t    0.


Equation (12) says that the realization                  z1 must be large
enough to insure that equation (9) implies a nonnegative value
for Bt+l.
     Suppose that Bt equals zero. In that case, equation (12)
implies that z1 must be nonnegative. But, equation (10) says
that the expected value of                 z1 is zero. Thus, if Bt equals
zero, then z1 equals zero with probability one.
                               — 10 —



    This result says that if a rational bubble does not exist at
date t, t    0, a rational bubble cannot get started at date
t+1, nor, by extension, at any subsequent date. Therefore, if a
rational bubble exists at present, it must have started at date
zero, the first date of trading of the stock, and, hence, this
stock must have been overvalued relative to market fundamentals
at every past date. The essential idea underlying this line of
argument is that, because the inception of a rational bubble at
any date after the first date of trading would involve an
innovation in the stock price, the expected initial values of a
positive rational bubble and a negative rational bubble would
have to be equal. Accordingly, because free disposal rules out a
negative rational-bubbles component, a positive rational—bubbles
component also cannot start after the first date of trading.

     Suppose that, prior to the first date of trading, potential
stockholders anticipate the introduction of trading and they form
an expectation about the initial stock price. Suppose further
that this expectation coincides with market fundamentals——that
is,


(13)        E1B0 = E1q0 — E1F0    =   0.


Equation (13) would imply that     is a random variable with
mean zero. Accordingly, given the nonnegativity condition
B0
       0, B0 would equal zero with probability one. This
observation implies that if a positive rational bubble exists,
potential stockholders who, prior to the first date of trading,
anticipated the initial pricing of this stock expected it to be
overvalued relative to market fundamentals.

3.     Can Positive Rational Bubbles Burst and Restart?

       As mentioned above, the existence of a positive rational—
bubbles component is empirically plausible only if, despite
explosive conditional expectations, the probability is small that
                                         — 11 —



 the rational bubble component will ever become large enough to
 dominate the stock price. This observation suggests the
 following model of the innovation

 (14)        t+l =    0t+l     —
                                   ')Bt +
where °t+l and          are mutually and serially independent
random variables. If the processes generating         and
satisfy

 (15)        Et.Ot+i =             for   all j         0 and

(16)         EtiEti =      0   for all j          0,


then z1 as given by equation (14) satisfies equation (10).
        Substituting for z1 in equation (9) from equation (14)
gives

(17)         Bt÷i =   Ot÷iBt   + Ct+l•

Equation (17) says that, with            z1 given by equation (14), an
existing rational—bubbles component, Bt, will burst next period
if the event       0 occurs. If this event has positive
probability, then any rational—bubbles component would burst at a
random, but almost surely finite, future date. Specifically, if
the probability associated with 0t+l= 0 is II, 0 < 11 < 1,
then the expected duration of a rational—bubbles component is
ill periods and the probability that Bt will not burst by
date T (T > t)        is   (1_11)T—t, which tends to zero as T
approaches infinity.
        Given that realizations of                 and         are mutually
and serially independent and also independent of               B0, then
t+l is independent of Bt for all t > 0.      In this case, if
the event 0t+l= 0 were by chance to coincide with a positive
                             — 12 —



realization   of       then, according to equation (17), as an
existing rational-bubbles component bursts, a new rational—
bubbles component, which is independent of all existing and past
rational—bubbles components, would simultaneously start.
     Quah suggests this model as a generalization of a model of
rational bubbles that could burst and restart proposed by
Blanchard and Watson (1982). Quah argues that the property that
any existing rational—bubbles component will almost surely burst
at a date in the finite future, in addition to implying a small
probability that the rational—bubbles component would become
large enough to dominate the stock price, also makes these models
of rational bubbles immune to Brock's argument that a
trarisversality condition precludes rational bubbles. Quah's
presumption is that stockholders ignore the possibility, which
has zero probability, that the rational—bubbles component will
never burst. As mentioned above, a rational—bubbles component
that will almost surely burst also would seem to be immune to
Tirole's argument that stockholders would not plan to hold an
overvalued asset forever.

     The result derived in section 2 that, given the
impossibility of a negative rational—bubbles component, a
rational—bubbles component can start only on the fIrst date of
trading directly implies that a rational—bubbles component that
burst could not restart at a later date. The essential property
that a negative rational—bubbles component cannot exist follows
directly from equation (8) and, hence, obtains whatever the
process or combination of processes that generate the innovation
       This property means that in the present model, in addition
to satisfying equation (17), the rational—bubbles component
satisfies Bt+l     0. Therefore, the event 0t÷l= 0 cannot
coincide with a negative realization of       Accordingly,
given that the event 0t+l= 0 has positive probability and that
the random variables        and 0t+l are independent, e÷1
                                 — 13 —



must be nonnegative. But, equation (16) says that the expected
value of         is zero. Therefore,  c1÷1 equals zero with
probability one and the chance coincidence of 0t+l= 0 and
       0 has zero probability.

      This result says that the impossibility of a negative
rational—bubbles component also precludes the possibility that a
new independent positive rational—bubbles component
simultaneously starts when an existing positive rational—bubbles
component bursts. In sum, the analysis in sections 2 and 3 has
shown that, if a positive rational—bubbles component exists, then
it must have started on the first date of trading of the stock,
it has not yet burst, and it will not restart if it bursts.
Together with the assumption that the event        0 has
positive probability, these properties correspond to Blanchard's
(1979) specification of a rational—bubbles component that exists
from the first date of trading, eventually bursts, and does not
res tart.

       minor variation on Blanchard's specification is possible
if stockholders ignore events that have small probability.
Suppose that e+1 equals zero with probability one for all
t   0 except for a finite prespecified collection of dates.   In
this case, if the probability of the event        0  is large
enough and all possible realizations of        are close enough
to zero, the probability that a given negative rational—bubbles
component conforming to equation (17) violates the nonnegativity
constraint on the stock price can be arbitrarily small.
Accordingly, the probability that all of the finitely many
independent negative rational—bubbles components that start
eventually burst before they violate the nonnegativity constraint
can be arbitrarily close to unity. If, contrary to the strict
interpretation of rational expectations, stockholders ignore such
possible violations because they have small probability, then
this model would allow a near—rational—bubbles component that can
                                            — 14 —



burst   and restart and can be either positive or negative. This
model, however, would imply, like Blanchard's model, that after
some random, but almost surely finite, date the stock price will
conform to market fundamentals forever.


4.      Finite Planning Horizons

     The probability that a positive rational—bubbles component
will ever become large enough to dominate the stock price can be
small even if the rational—bubbles component never bursts. As an
alternative, a rational—bubbles component, which began on the
first date of trading, can exist forever as long as it will
shrink periodically.  If, however, stockholders have infinite
planning horizons, such a model would be subject to the arguments
of Brock and Tirole against the existence of rational bubbles
that never burst.

     Although the formal analysis developed above assumed
infinite planning horizons, equation (7) also describes the
potential rational—bubbles component of a stock price for a model
of an infinite succession of overlapping generations of risk—
neutral stockholders with finite planning horizons. In this
case, the required rate of return from holding equity would be
the constant,       1.  In this case the arguments of Brock and
Tirole do not apply, and a positive rational—bubbles component
that will never burst can exist if, as pointed out by Tirole
(1985), the required rate of return is less than the growth rate
of the economy.

     An example of such a positive rational—bubbles component
that is consistent with the results derived in the preceding
sections is

                            +                               with probability
                  I   ôBt        Ct+ll                                         II



(18) B t +1   =
                  (l—ll) (
                                —l   1
                                         ll)B   +
                                                    6t+1'   with probability (1—11)
                                — 15 —


 where   ó   is a small positive constant and where   EtEti= 0 and
 B0 > 0. This specification corresponds to setting 0+ in
 equation (17) equal to 5 with probability II and equal to
             n) with probability (1—n) and allowing        E1     to
 depend on Bt and        in such a way that Bt÷l remains
nonnegative with probability one. In particular, given
      5, realizations of         must satisfy         —
                                                        SB.
Equation (18) specifies a positive rational—bubbles component
that starts on the first date of trading, that collapses with
probability     in any period, but that, given
               II
                                                   greater than
zero and the appropriate restriction on the realizations of
       always remains positive.

5.   Concluding Remarks

     This paper analyzed the theoretical possibility of rational
bubbles in stock prices in a model in which stockholders have
infinite planning horizons and in which free disposal of equity
rules out the existence of negative rational bubbles. The
analysis showed that in this framework if a positive rational
bubble exists, then it started on the first date of trading of
the stock. Thus, the existence of a rational bubble at any date
would imply that the stock has been overvalued relative to market
fundamentals since the first date of trading and that prIor to
the first date of trading potential stockholders who anticipated
the initial pricing of the stock must have expected that the
stock would be overvalued relative to market fundamentals. The
analysis also showed that any rational bubble will eventually
burst and will not restart. Thus, even if a positive rational
bubble exists, stockholders know that after a random, but almost
surely finite, date the stock price will conform to market
fundamentals forever. We also observed that, if stockholders
have finite planning horizons and if the growth rate of the
economy is larger than the required rate of return on equity, a
positive rational bubble that began at the first date of trading
could go on forever.
                               — 16 —



     In   permitting the inception of a rational bubble only at the
first date of trading, the rational expectations model of equity
with free disposal is like a perfect foresight model and unlike
the general linear rational—expectations model analyzed, for
example, by Shiller (1978). As in the case of perfect foresight,
a single initial condition stating that the stock price conforms
to market fundamentals at the first date of trading would
guarantee that both the rational expectations of the stock price
and the actual realizations of the stock price conform to market
fundamentals at all dates.

     The analysis in this paper focused on an asset (equity) that
pays a real dividend. The case of a real asset that directly
yields utility——for example, gold or tulips——is identical. The
case of a pure fiat money, however, is different in that free
disposal does not necessarily rule out negative (that is,
inflationary) rational bubbles——see, for example, Flood and
Garber (1980), and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983). We can, however,
rule out rational deflationary bubbles by appealing to the
arguments of Brock or Tirole against the possibility of positive
rational bubbles or by assuming in the overlapping generations
setting that the relevant interest rate exceeds the growth rate
of the economy.  In either case, an argument analogous to that of
the present paper, with some technical modifications having to do
with the nonlinear structure of the model involving a fiat money,
would limit the possible inception of rational inflationary
bubbles——see, Diba and Grossman (1986).
                              — 17 —



                              NOTES


1.
     Quah (1985) develops an example in which the stock price
     coincides with the expected present value of future
     dividends, and yet rational bubbles are convergent for
     certain parameter values.  In this example, however, the
     market—fundamentals solution is essentially backward
     looking, because dividends depend on a set of state
     variables that have no apparent relation to currently
     available information about current and future earnings and
     other potentially relevant variables.

2.   Lucas (1978) presents another argument for uniqueness of
     rational expectations equilibrium based on contraction
     mappings. Brock (1982) points out that this argument rules
     out multiple stationary equilibria but does not preclude the
     nonstationary price paths associated with rational bubbles.
                              — 18 —



                            REFERENCES


0.J. Blanchard, "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes, and Rational
     Expectations," Economics Letters, 3, 1979, 387—389.
0.3. Blanchard and M.W. Watson, "Bubbles, Rational Expectations,
     and Financial Markets," in Crises in the Economic and
     Financial Structure, P. Wachtel, ed. (Lexington Books,
     1982).
W.A. Brock, "Asset Prices in a Production Economy," in The
     Economics of Information and Uncertainty, J.J. McCall, ed.
     (University of Chicago Press, 1982).
B.T. Diba and H.I. Grossman, "Rational Inflationary Bubbles,"
     unpublished, July 1986.
R. Flood and P. Garber, "Market Fundamentals Versus Price Level
     Bubbles: The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy,
     88, August 1980, 745—770.
J.A. Gray, "Dynamic Instability in Rational Expectations Models:
     An Attempt to Clarify," International Economic Review, 25,
     February 1984, 93—122.
R.E. Lucas, "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica,
     46, November 1978, 1429—1445.
M. Mussa, "Rational Expectations Models with a Continuum of
     Convergent Solutions," NBER Technical Working Paper No. 41,
     June 1984.
M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff, "Speculative Hyperinflations in
     Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal of
     Political Economy, 91, August 1983, 675—687.
D. Quah, "Estimation of a Nonfundamentals Models for Stock Price
     and Dividend Dynamics," unpublished, September 1985.
R. Shiller, "Rational Expectations and the Dynamic Structure of
     Macroeconomic Models: A Critical Review," Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 4, January 1978, 1—44.
J. Tirole, "On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational
     Expectations," Econoinetrica, 50, September 1982, 1163—1181.
                             — 19 —


J. Tirole, "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,"
     Econometrjca, 53, September 1985, 1071—1100.
K.D. West, "A Specification Test for Speculative Bubbles,"
     Princeton University Working Paper, July l984(a).
K.D. West, "Speculative Bubbles and Stock Price Volatility,"
    Princeton University Working Paper, December 1984(b).
