                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         A CENTURY OF CAPITAL STRUCTURE:
                       THE LEVERAGING OF CORPORATE AMERICA

                                          John R. Graham
                                           Mark T. Leary
                                         Michael R. Roberts

                                        Working Paper 19910
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19910


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




We thank Bill Schwert (editor), Malcolm Baker, an anonymous referee; Andy Abel, Effi Benmelech,
Charles Calomiris, Murray Frank, Joao Gomes, Boyan Jovanovich, Stew Myers, Ken Singleton, Ilya
Strebulaev; seminar participants at Duke University, Georgetown University, Miami University, MIT,
Notre Dame, the SEC, Rutgers University, Stanford University, University of Oklahoma, University
of British Columbia, University of California San Diego, University of Chicago, University of Colorado,
University of Illinois, University of Pennsylvania, University of Utah, Vanderbilt University, Yale
University; and conference participants at the 2013 American Economics Association, ASU Winter
Finance Conference, Financial Management Association, NBER, and SITE for helpful comments.
We also thank many research assistants for their help gathering data. Roberts gratefully acknowledges
financial support from an Aronson, Johnson and Ortiz Fellowship and Geewax-Terker Fellowship,
and support from the Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by John R. Graham, Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Century of Capital Structure: The Leveraging of Corporate America
John R. Graham, Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 19910
February 2014
JEL No. E44,E62,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

Unregulated U.S. corporations dramatically increased their debt usage over the past century. Aggregate
leverage – low and stable before 1945 – more than tripled between 1945 and 1970 from 11% to 35%,
eventually reaching 47% by the early 1990s. The median firm in 1946 had no debt, but by 1970 had
a leverage ratio of 31%. This increase occurred in all unregulated industries and affected firms of all
sizes. Changing firm characteristics are unable to account for this increase. Rather, changes in government
borrowing, macroeconomic uncertainty, and financial sector development play a more prominent role.
Despite this increase among unregulated firms, a combination of stable debt usage among regulated
firms and a decrease in the fraction of aggregate assets held by regulated firms over this period resulted
in a relatively stable economy-wide leverage ratio during the 20th century.


John R. Graham                                       Michael R. Roberts
Duke University                                      The Wharton School
Fuqua School of Business                             University of Pennsylvania
100 Fuqua Drive                                      3620 Locust Walk, #2320
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                             and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu                                 mrrobert@wharton.upenn.edu

Mark T. Leary
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133, One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
leary@wustl.edu
1. Introduction



       This paper sheds light on the evolution and determination of corporate financial policy by

analyzing a unique, panel dataset containing accounting and financial market information for

U.S. nonfinancial publicly-traded firms over the last century. Our analysis is organized around

three questions. First, how have corporate capital structures changed over the past 100 years?

Second, do existing empirical models of capital structure account for these changes? And, third,

if not explained by existing empirical models, what forces are behind variation in financial

policy over the last century?

       We begin by showing that the aggregate leverage ratio (i.e., debt-to-capital) of

unregulated firms was low and stable, varying between 10% and 15%, from 1920 to 1945. In

contrast, leverage more than tripled, from 11% to 35%, between 1945 and 1970. Since then,

leverage has remained above 35%, peaking at 47% in 1992. Combined with an increase in non-

debt liabilities, the aggregate corporate balance sheet shifted from 25% liabilities in the 1930s to

over 65% liabilities by 1990.

       This change is robust, observed in a variety of leverage measures that reveal additional

insights into the changing nature of financial policy over the last century. For example, we show

that debt gradually substituted for preferred equity between 1920 and 1960, when relatively little

preferred equity remained. We also show that cash holdings exhibited a secular decrease

concomitant with the secular increase in debt usage. In aggregate, cash and short-term

investments accounted for nearly 25% of assets in 1945, but fell to 6% by 1970 when cash began

a moderate climb to just over 10% in 2010. As a result, measuring leverage net of liquid assets

reveals an even more pronounced levering up of unregulated firms during the last century.




                                                 1
         Further analysis reveals that these aggregate trends are systemic. The leverage series of

each unregulated industry – defined by the Fama and French 12-industry classification – exhibits

a pattern similar to that found in the aggregate. The leverage of each size-based portfolio of firms

– defined by the highest, middle, and lowest quintile of the annual size distribution – also

exhibits a pattern similar to that of the aggregate. The median firm had no debt in its capital

structure in 1946, but by 1970 had a leverage ratio of 31%. Finally, the fraction of investment

financed with debt doubled from approximately 10% in the pre-WW II era to over 20% after

1970.

         These patterns are in contrast to those for nonfinancial regulated firms (e.g., utilities,

railroads, and communications), for which the aggregate debt to capital ratio was fairly stable

over the century. The changing relative indebtedness of regulated and unregulated firms, along

with changes in the relative asset sizes of the two sectors, led to a largely stable economy-wide

corporate leverage ratio (Frank and Goyal, 2008) that masked the secular increase experienced

by most unregulated firms. Our paper focuses on this increase in leverage among unregulated

firms.

         Having established the dramatic increase in leverage among unregulated firms, we first

ask to what extent this trend can be accounted for by changing firm characteristics identified in

prior studies as capital structure determinants (e.g. Rajan and Zingales, 1995; Frank and Goyal,

2009).    The answer is not much, if at all. We estimate regressions of leverage on firm

characteristics using pre-WW II data. Predicted leverage computed using realized firm

characteristics is flat to declining from 1945 through the end of our sample period – in stark

contrast to the increase in observed leverage over this period.           Inspection of individual

characteristics reveals that, with the possible exceptions of earnings volatility and firm size, none




                                                 2
of the average or aggregate characteristics change over the century in a way that would support

greater debt capacity or higher optimal leverage. Alternative estimation periods and model

extensions, such as time-varying parameters and nonlinear relations, do not improve the out of

sample fit. Thus, any explanation for these secular trends in financial policy must come from

sources of variation not central to the existing capital structure literature.

        The inability of firm characteristics to account for the shift in leverage policies over time

suggests either omitted firm characteristics that have yet to be identified, or macroeconomic

factors that altered firms’ propensities to use debt. We therefore turn to our final set of analyses,

which examines macroeconomics factors capturing changes in the economic environment that

are theoretically relevant for financial policy. These factors capture changes to taxes, economic

uncertainty, financial sector development, managerial incentives, and government borrowing.

While a complete investigation into each underlying theory is beyond the scope of this paper, our

results provide suggestive evidence.

        Specifically, one of the more robust relations that we find is a negative association

between corporate leverage and government leverage, the latter defined as the ratio of Federal

debt held by the public to GDP. A one standard deviation increase in government leverage is

associated with a one-quarter standard deviation decrease in aggregate corporate leverage. This

marginal effect on capital structure is significantly larger than that of other macroeconomic

factors, such as GDP growth, inflation, and the BAA-AAA corporate bond yield spread, as well

as firm characteristics, such as profit margins, asset growth, and the market-to-book equity ratio.

This negative relation holds not just for the level of debt but also for the flows of debt in the two

sectors. Thus, when the government reduces debt issuance, corporations increase their use of

debt relative to equity, resulting in an increase in corporate leverage.




                                                   3
       There are several potential mechanisms behind these findings. First, our results are

consistent with government deficit financing crowding out corporate debt financing through

competition for investor funds (Friedman, 1978). Second, and closely related, market

imperfections, such as taxes (McDonald, 1983), informational frictions (Greenwood, Hansen,

and Stein, 2010) and transaction costs (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012) generate an

imperfectly elastic demand curve for corporate debt, as investors are no longer able to costlessly

transform return streams from corporations to match their consumption needs. Consequently,

fluctuations in the supply of government debt, a substitute for corporate debt, can shift the

demand curve for corporate debt in a manner that affects equilibrium quantities.

       Alternatively, the supply of government debt may proxy for latent investment

opportunities. Increases in the supply of Treasuries tend to occur during economic downturns

when firms’ investment opportunities are poor and their need for external capital falls. Because

debt is the primary source of external capital (Gorton and Winton, 2003), corporate leverage

falls. In this case, the relation between leverage and government borrowing may reflect

fluctuations in unmeasured investment opportunities.

       We also find a positive relation between corporate financial policy and the output of the

financial sector from business credit and equity (Philippon, 2012). This relation exists with both

leverage and the fraction of investment funded with debt, implying a potentially important role

for the development of financial institutions and markets. However, other measures of financial

market development, such as the fraction of debt and equity held through intermediaries, are not

robustly correlated with aggregate leverage.

       While other macroeconomic factors appear related to corporate leverage on visual

inspection, further analysis reveals that these relations are not statistically distinct from a time




                                                 4
trend. For example, corporate taxes underwent 30 revisions over the past century and increased

10% to 52% between 1920 and 1950. Yet, we find no significant times-series relation between

taxes and the margin between debt usage and common equity, in large part because of a near

decade long delay in the response of leverage to tax changes. (As detailed below, we do however

find a more robust positive relation between taxes and the use of debt relative to preferred equity

in the early part of the century.) Measures of economic uncertainty and aggregate risk, both of

which proxy for expected distress costs, are negatively correlated with leverage, but show no

relation after controlling for other leverage determinants. Finally, we find little evidence of a

relation between proxies for managerial incentives and leverage in the aggregate.

        Our primary data include a comprehensive set of balance sheet and income statement

variables for each industrial firm on CRSP back to 1920. Prior studies use alternative data

sources to examine components of the broader trends and issues explored here. Using aggregate

data, some authors note a fairly stable leverage ratio over time (Sametz, 1964; Wright, 2004;

Frank and Goyal, 2008) while others note varying degrees of increase in the leverage ratio during

the post-WW II era (e.g., Miller, 1977; Taggart, 1981; McDonald, 1983).1 Using Compustat

data, Gordon and Malkiel (1981), Philippon (2009), Strebulaev and Yang (2013), and DeAngelo

and Roll (2013) document an increase in leverage and a decrease in the proportion of

conservatively levered firms in the second half of the 20th century. Finally, Ciccolo (1981) and

DeAngelo and Roll (2013) collect data extending back to the early part of the 20th century for 50

and 24 firms, respectively. The former study finds evidence of increasing debt usage and

substitution of debt in place of preferred stock; the latter emphasizes within-firm variation in

leverage.

1
  Other studies documenting varying degrees of aggregate leverage increases beginning in the middle of the 20th
century include von Furstenberg (1977) and Holland and Myers (1979). Among these earlier studies identifying
leverage increases, there is also disagreement about the permanence of the increase.


                                                         5
        The unique breadth of our data and the scope of our analyses enable us to make several

contributions to the capital structure literature. First, we provide a more complete picture of

capital structure that identifies three distinct eras in both the aggregate and the cross-sectional

distribution of firms’ financial policies over the last 100 years and highlights a broad-based,

steep increase in leverage in the middle of the 20th century. Second, we identify sharp differences

between regulated and unregulated sectors, and distinct similarities among unregulated industries

and firms of different sizes. Third, we show that traditional empirical models of capital structure

based on firm characteristics fall short in explaining the capital structure trends that we

document. Rather, changes in the broader economic and institutional environments play a more

prominent role in explaining the changes in corporate financial policy over the last century. An

important feature of our data is the ability to avoid the selection biases affecting samples

conditioned on firm survival, such as the pre-1962 Compustat data.2

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we discuss our data and

sample selection. In Section 3 we examine trends in corporate financial policy over the last

century at the aggregate, industry, and firm level. In Section 4 we outline a theoretical

framework for understanding why leverage has undergone such a dramatic change. Section 5

explores the ability of firm characteristics to account for the increase in leverage, while Section 6

focuses on changes in the economic environment.                  Recognizing that this analysis mostly

documents correlations, we discuss the opportunities and challenges that remain for future

research and conclude in Section 7.



2. Sample selection and summary statistics

2
  As many authors (e.g., Opler et al., 1999) note, pre-1962 Compustat data are backfilled to the 1950s and
consequently any inferences with these data may be an artifact of survivorship bias. As such, almost all studies
ignore pre-1962 Compustat data.


                                                       6
           Our sample frame begins with all firms listed in the Center for Research in Security

Prices (CRSP) monthly stock files. This frame includes all firms listed on the New York Stock

Exchange (NYSE) since 1925, all firms listed on the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) since

1962, and all firms listed on the NASDAQ since 1972. For these firms, stock market data come

from CRSP. Accounting data are obtained from two sources: Standard and Poor’s (S&P)

Compustat database and data hand-collected from Moody’s Industrial manuals. We exclude

financial firms from all of our analysis. The end result is an unbalanced firm-year panel

beginning in 1920 and ending in 2010.

           Because of different institutional environments, we distinguish between two sectors of

the economy that we loosely refer to as regulated (utilities, railroads, and telecommunications)

and unregulated (all other nonfinancial industries). We recognize that regulatory status is

dynamic, heterogeneous, and extends beyond our classification (e.g., airlines). Thus, we

emphasize that these are merely labels used to identify a division in our data. This division

permits us to avoid confounding our results with financial policy that is governed primarily by

the industry-specific regulatory environment, and to maintain consistency with previous capital

structure research. For the most part, we focus our attention on the unregulated sector but discuss

and analyze the regulated sector where relevant.

           Table 1 presents summary statistics for the unregulated sector of the economy. In

addition to their descriptive value, these results provide a context for subsequent analysis.3 Panel

A presents aggregate measures of firm characteristics and macroeconomic variables. Aggregate

firm characteristics are computed as the ratio of sums over firms within each year. Panel B

presents results for the firm-year panel. Panel C presents average firm characteristics by decade.
3
    Appendix A details the data sources and variable construction.


                                                           7
3.      Trends in corporate leverage



3.1. Aggregate trends



        Fig. 1 examines long run trends in aggregate leverage ratios for unregulated firms. Panel

A presents the aggregate time series for two measures of leverage. The solid line represents the

ratio of all interest bearing debt (i.e., total debt) to financial capital (i.e., capital), the latter of

which is defined as the sum of total debt and the book value of equity. The figure reveals three

periods of distinct corporate leverage behavior. From 1920 to 1945, leverage among unregulated

firms is fairly stable and relatively low, with total debt to capital falling from 17% to 11% during

this quarter century. From 1946 to 1970 leverage increased steadily and significantly – more than

tripling – from approximately 11% in 1945 to almost 35% in 1970. Since 1970 leverage has

remained fairly stable, but for an increase during the 1980s that gradually reversed over the next

two decades. We observe similar broad patterns when we restrict our sample to firms listed on

the NYSE or only include the 500 largest firms each year, both of which mitigate a changing

sample composition.4

        The dashed line in Panel A shows the ratio of long-term debt (maturity greater than one

year) to capital. Comparing the dashed and solid lines reveals that while much of the increase in

financial leverage was due to long-term debt, a significant portion came from the increased use

of short-term debt starting in the late 1960s, coinciding with the growth in commercial paper

issuance by nonfinancial firms in the wake of the 1966 credit crunch (Hurley, 1977).


4
 DeAngelo and Roll (2012) study the leverage series of 24 firms that survived over a similar sample period. They
note that long leverage drifts (both levering and delevering) are common among these firms.


                                                        8
        The measures in Panel A isolate variation in leverage to that associated with changes in

financial liabilities (Welch, 2011). However, the debt-to-capital measure excludes non-debt

liabilities, which, like financial debt, represent a claim on the firm’s assets that is senior to

equity. As such, we examine the ratio of total liabilities to total assets in Panel B.

Complementing the increase in financial leverage observed in Panel A is a secular increase in

non-debt liabilities, such as pensions and accounts payable, beginning in 1970.5 The combined

result is a dramatic shift in the composition of corporate balance sheets.                     Total liabilities

represented between 20% and 25% of assets in the 1920s and 1930s, but increased to over 65%

of assets by the early 1990s before declining to 56% by 2010.

        Fig. 2 presents time series of several alternative leverage measures. Thus far all the

presented measures of leverage are in book, or accounting terms. While book value ratios are

often the focus of financing decisions, particularly as they pertain to credit (Chava and Roberts

(2008)), some authors have argued that market value ratios are more economically meaningful

for some firms (e.g., Welch, 2004).6 As such, the dashed line in Panel A presents a market-based

measure of leverage that replaces the book value of equity in our definition of capital with the

equity market capitalization of the firm. We must still rely on a book value of debt because of

data constraints, but the variation in equity dominates that of debt even in market terms

(Schaeffer and Strebulaev, 2008). The results show a more volatile time-series driven by

fluctuations in equity market valuations but a broadly similar pattern in which initially low

leverage increases to a higher level post-1970. One noticeable difference is in the timing and

duration of the leverage run-up, which in Panel C starts only in the mid-1960s and peaks around


5
  The temporary spike in non-debt liabilities in the early 1940s was due mainly to increases in Federal income tax
reserves reflecting a sharp increase in war-related tax obligations.
6
  On the other hand, if assets in place support more debt capacity than do future investment opportunities (Myers,
1977), book leverage may be the more appropriate measure.


                                                        9
1974. Market leverage is fairly stable until the 1960s due to rising equity values in the 1950s,

and experiences a sharp decline coinciding with the bull market of the 1990s.

        The solid line in Panel A treats preferred equity as debt and thus includes it in the

numerator and denominator of the debt to capital ratio (e.g., Fama and French, 2005 and Huang

and Ritter, 2009). The ratio of debt plus preferred equity to capital is quite stable between 1940

and 1960, suggesting that much of the increase in leverage over this period was due to

substitution between debt and preferred equity rather than substitution between debt and

common equity. Indeed, preferred stock was over 13% of aggregate assets in the early 1920s, but

only 2% of assets in 1960. While there are several components affecting the timing of this

secular shift, the alternative measures in Panel C continue to show the same broad pattern: a

substantial shift toward higher leverage in the middle of the century.

        Finally, Panel B shows that corporate cash holdings also underwent a significant change

over the last century that mirrors the change in leverage. The solid line shows the aggregate ratio

of cash and marketable securities to assets. It has been well documented that corporate cash

holdings have increased over the past three decades (Bates et al., 2009). Notably, looking across

the century, we see that cash holdings peaked at nearly 25% of assets in 1945, and then steadily

declined through 1970, roughly the same period over which leverage increased.7 As a result, the

ratio of net debt (debt minus cash) to assets has changed even more dramatically, from -16% in

1945 to 21% in 1970.

        Because of the similarity of results across samples and leverage definitions, we focus our

analysis and discussion on the ratio of total debt to capital. Doing so avoids redundancy in


7
  Opler et al. (1999) also note a decline in cash to asset ratios in the 1950s and 1960s for subsamples of small and
large firms using Compustat data. However, the authors note that because they are limited to Compustat, they
cannot discern whether this trend is an artifact of the aforementioned survivorship bias. Our data allow us to
overcome this limitation.


                                                        10
exposition. Nonetheless, the majority of our analysis is repeated using the alternative leverage

definitions just discussed, as well as on various subsamples. We note when differences or

similarities in results have a material effect on our inferences.



3.2. Cross-sectional and industry trends



       Fig. 3 examines the evolution of the cross-sectional leverage distribution by plotting the

annual quartiles of leverage year-by-year. Evident from Panel A is that the change in aggregate

leverage observed in Fig. 1 reflects a broad-based shift in financial policy. All three quartile

breakpoints move in tandem. Interestingly, the median firm was unlevered in the late-1930s and

the mid-1940s and at least a quarter of the sample firms were unlevered in each year from 1920

through 1950. Thus, the secular increase in leverage was associated with an increase in leverage

across the entire distribution of firms and an increase in the propensity to use debt.

       Also apparent is a thickening left tail of the leverage distribution in recent decades for the

full sample (top left plot). While the third quartile has remained fairly stable, the median and

especially first quartile of the Full Sample leverage distribution have steadily declined since

1980. By the end of the sample period, the first quartile is back near its pre-war level of zero.

Contrasting the full sample distribution to that of NYSE listed firms (upper right plot) suggests

that the decline in the median and first quartile of leverage since 1980 might be related to the

entry of smaller, NASDAQ-listed firms. When we restrict our attention to NYSE firms, all three

quartile breakpoints remain fairly stable from 1970 through the end of the sample period. We

explore this phenomenon in more detail in Section 4 below.




                                                  11
        Panel B of Fig. 3 shows that the increasing trend in leverage was shared by firms of all

sizes. The plots display average debt to capital each year for portfolios of firms constructed from

the first, third and fifth quintiles of the book assets distribution. To mitigate the impact of the

change in sample composition we use two different samples. The left plot shows results using

only NYSE listed firms. The right plot uses an extended sample consisting of all firms reported

in the Moody’s Industrial Manual, regardless of whether they are also covered in CRSP.8 This

sample includes a large number of smaller firms listed on regional exchanges in the first half of

our sample period. Using this extended sample, the average book assets (in real dollars) for the

small firm group is roughly constant over the whole sample period.

        In both samples, we see that the increase in leverage over the century was not confined to

large firms. Firms of all sizes increased their use of debt. In recent decades, there is a reversal

of the trend for small firms, while large firms continue their high leverage policies. This result

mimics that found above in the left plot of Panel A. As mentioned above, we investigate the

cause of this phenomenon below in Section 4.

        Fig. 4 shows that the aggregate leverage pattern is evident in virtually every unregulated

industry, defined by the Fama-French 12-industry classification.9 Each subpanel in the figure

plots the aggregate debt-to-capital ratio for the indicated industry (solid line) and the aggregate

debt-to-capital ratio for all unregulated industries (dashed line) as a point of reference. Industry

leverage is somewhat more volatile than aggregate leverage due in part to smaller sample sizes,

particularly in the first half of the century. What is most notable, though, is the striking

similarity in the leverage time series across every industry. Each industry reveals a strong


8
  Due to data entry costs, Moody’s data for non-CRSP firms (the extended sample) are gathered only once every 10
years, beginning in 1928.
9
  This classification aggregates SIC codes into economic industries and can be found on Ken French’s website at
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/ftp/Siccodes12.zip.


                                                      12
positive trend between 1945 and 1970. Further, this upward trend tends to taper off after 1970.

Thus, the increase in leverage experienced in the middle half of the 20th century was an

economy-wide phenomenon among firms in unregulated industries.



3.3. Net flows of debt and equity



       While the previous evidence is indicative of a structural change in financial policy, the

leverage figures conflate debt growth with possible equity or asset shrinkage. Fig. 5 isolates

financial flows to highlight the effects of financial policy on leverage. Panel A of Fig. 5 plots net

debt and net equity issuances scaled by lagged assets for each year. To ease the interpretation of

the figure, we plot a 5-year moving average of each series. While both series exhibit a great deal

of volatility, the increase in the relative use of debt financing can be seen after 1945 and

especially in the late 1960s. Equity issuances also increase, but never again reach the heights of

the late 1920s. More importantly, at low levels of leverage, and particularly so for the very low

levels in the pre-World War II era, the leverage-increasing effect of net debt issuances is greater

than the leverage-decreasing effect of net equity issuances.

       Also evident in Panel A is the correlation between debt and equity issuance, which is

expected if demand for all types of external capital is driven by investment activity. In Panel B,

we control for investment demand by plotting the fraction of investment financed with debt.

That is, for the subsample of firms with positive investment we divide aggregate net debt

issuance by aggregate investment. Again, we present a five-year moving average. For

comparison, we also plot the aggregate debt-to-capital ratio. The figure highlights the increased

use of debt financing through the first half of the sample period. External debt accounted for




                                                 13
only 5 to 10% of investment in the 1920s and 1930s but steadily increased to over 30% by the

late 1960s. This shift toward a greater reliance on debt as a funding source appears to be a key

factor driving the increase in leverage.



3.4. Reconciling with other leverage aggregates



       Appendix B provides a detailed reconciliation with alternative aggregate data sources,

such as the Flow of Funds and Statistics of Income. Here we briefly mention the key

implications of this exercise. Previous studies relying on these alternative data sources document

a more temporally stable aggregate leverage process than that shown in Fig. 1 (e.g., Sametz,

1964; Wright, 2004; and Frank and Goyal, 2008). One potential explanation for this difference is

sample selection bias generated from our non-random sampling scheme that includes only

publicly-held firms. As we show in Appendix B, however, this is not the reason for the

difference between our aggregate leverage series and that found in previous studies. Rather, the

stability of economy-wide leverage found in previous studies is due to two countervailing forces

at work in the regulated and unregulated sectors of the economy.

       In particular, the leverage for the regulated sector displays a remarkably stable capital

structure. Long-term debt to capital varies between approximately 40% and 50% for 70 years.

Before 1945, the long-term debt to capital ratio in the regulated sector was approximately four

times that of the unregulated sector. Starting in 1950, however, leverage for the unregulated

sector increased rapidly (to the point that regulated and unregulated sectors converged to within

10 percentage points of each other by the end of the century). At the same time, the share of




                                               14
assets for the regulated sector declined from a peak of 43% in 1934 to 26% by 1950. The net

effect is a relatively stable economy-wide aggregate capital structure.



3.5. Summary of financial policy trends



       Our analysis of corporate balance sheet data from 1920 through 2010 reveals the

following stylized facts:



   1. The composition of the aggregate balance sheet of the unregulated industrial sector

       underwent a transformation over the past century, from less than 25% liabilities in the

       1930s to more than 60% by 1990.

   2. This shift was largely driven by a systemic change in financial leverage that affected

       firms of all sizes and all unregulated industries. The median firm was unlevered in 1945

       but had a debt to capital ratio exceeding 30% by 1970.

   3. Cash balances fell from nearly 25% of assets at the end of WW II to 6% of assets in

       1970, leading to an even greater change in net leverage. The aggregate cash ratio has

       rebounded in recent decades but not to previous levels.

   4. Preferred stock accounted for 10 - 15% of assets in the 1920s, but all but disappeared

       from corporate balance sheets by the 1960s. Corporate debt appears to have replaced this

       disappearing preferred equity.

   5. By contrast, the leverage ratio and financial policy of the regulated sector has been

       remarkably stable, with a long-term debt-to-capital ratio that varies between 40% and

       50%. The aggregate debt ratio for the economy also remained relatively stable.




                                                15
       Why did regulated industries’ leverage ratios remain both high and stable for so long?

Why did leverage ratios in unregulated industries increase so dramatically? A complete answer

to either question is beyond the scope of any one paper. In the remainder of our study, we focus

attention on the latter, for which existing theory is most applicable and for consistency with the

existing capital structure literature. The former question requires an investigation into the

industry-specific regulatory structures that govern the behavior of regulated industries, such as

railroads and utilities. We postpone this analysis to future research.



4. Theoretical framework



       While many theories of capital structure have been developed, most are presented in a

cross-sectional, microeconomic context. Because we are interested in understanding changes in

aggregate leverage, we now discuss a model that highlights predictions in an aggregate context.

Taggart (1985) points out that aggregate leverage is determined by the interaction of the supply

of securities by firms and demands for those securities by investors. Fig. 6 presents some

intuition based on a generalization of Miller (1977). On the horizontal axis is the aggregate

quantity of corporate debt (D), and on the vertical axis is the risk-adjusted return on debt (r*D)

and equity (r*E). Using returns on the y-axis instead of prices implies, as in Miller (1977), that

the slopes of the supply and demand curves are reversed from traditional exposition. Investment

is held fixed so that movements along the horizontal axis correspond to substitutions between

debt and equity.




                                                 16
       The supply curve represents the willingness of firms to supply debt at different yields.

The determinants of its shape and level have been discussed at length in prior literature. Frank

and Goyal (2008) provide an excellent review. The tax shield and agency benefits of debt shift

the supply curve up. As leverage increases along the horizontal axis, though, firms begin to

incur expected distress and agency costs and expected tax benefits wane, causing the supply

curve to slope down. As a result, the same frictions expected to influence cross-sectional

differences in firm’s leverage decisions also influence aggregate leverage. For example, if firms’

exposures to the agency costs or the distress costs of debt increase on average, we would expect

a steeper slope of the aggregate supply curve and a decline in equilibrium leverage holding fixed

demand.

       The demand curve represents investors’ willingness to hold corporate debt at different

yields. Demand for corporate debt securities depends on households’ demands for different

return streams, as well as the transaction costs they face in financial markets. For example, if

investors (through financial intermediaries) can costlessly exchange cash flows from one security

for those of another, they will be unwilling to pay a premium for any particular corporate

security, even if it matches their preferred return profile. Thus, in the presence of both investor

heterogeneity and transaction costs, the demand curve need not be perfectly elastic.           For

example, in Miller’s (1977) model, investors face differing personal tax rates and tax arbitrage

restrictions. Low tax bracket investors are willing to hold debt at the same risk-adjusted yield as

equity. Debt investors that face higher personal tax rates on interest income demand higher

yields to compensate for the tax disadvantage of holding debt, leading to an upward-sloping

demand schedule.




                                                17
        As discussed by Taggart (1985), taxes are not the only friction capable of producing an

upward sloping demand curve. More generally, any cost that impedes investors from exchanging

return streams from one security for another can lead to an upward sloping demand curve in the

presence of investor heterogeneity. This heterogeneity across investors may come, for example,

from differences in transaction costs, risk aversion, or cash flow expectations.10

        An imperfectly elastic demand curve has several implications for the determinants of

aggregate leverage. First, investor characteristics, such as risk preferences and tax rates, may

play a role in determining aggregate leverage. As the segment of the population exhibiting high

degrees of risk aversion, pessimistic cash flow expectations, or low personal tax rates grows, the

demand curve will flatten and the aggregate amount of corporate debt will increase. Second,

when different securities are imperfect substitutes, changes in the supply of competing securities

(e.g., government bonds) may affect relative yields and the equilibrium mix of corporate debt

and equity. Specifically, increases in the supply of competing securities shifts the corporate debt

demand curve up and to the left, leading to a reduction in the equilibrium level of corporate debt.

Third, development of the financial intermediation sector should decrease the cost of

transforming return streams from one security to another. All else equal, we expect the demand

curve to become more elastic (and demand factors to matter less) and corporate debt usage to

increase as financial markets develop.

        In sum, the shape and level of the supply and demand curves for corporate debt are

determined by firms’ aggregate exposures to various market frictions, investors’ aggregate

preferences for different return streams, and the transaction costs investors face in financial

markets. In our empirical analysis below, we evaluate these predictions in two steps. We first


10
  See Greenwood, Hansen, and Stein (2010) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgenson (2012) for recent examples
of inelastic demand resulting from alternative sources of investor heterogeneity and arbitrage restrictions.


                                                     18
ask whether changes in the characteristics of publicly traded firms increased their willingness to

supply corporate debt as the 20th century progressed. We then examine whether changes in the

economic environment in which firms operate, such as tax rates, supplies of competing

securities, and development of the financial sector, may have shifted the demand curve (or

supply curve, in the case of corporate taxes) in a way that led to an increase in aggregate

leverage.




5.     Changes in firm characteristics



       In this section we examine the ability of previously identified firm characteristics to

explain the financing trends documented in Section 2. In other words, we ask whether firms have

changed over the last century in a manner that would predict a large increase in leverage.

Previous research has identified a number of firm characteristics that 1) proxy for the frictions

generating an imperfectly elastic supply curve, and 2) correlate with capital structures (e.g.,

Rajan and Zingales, 1995; Frank and Goyal, 2009). Thus, our analysis allows us to comment on

both the empirical relevance of existing models for explaining long-run trends and the role of

supply curve variation in shaping corporate capital structure



5.1. Firm characteristics and leverage trends



       We begin with a visual inspection of average firm characteristics in Fig. 7. In light of the

changing sample composition, we report values separately for NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ




                                                19
firms. We first note that, among NYSE firms, there is a general upward trend in firm size

(measured as log of real sales) through the century. However, relating this trend to the trend in

leverage may be problematic on statistical grounds. With positive economic growth, firm size is

asymptotically non-stationary. We return to this issue in our regressions below. Further, the

increasing size of NYSE firms is offset in recent decades by the introduction of small NASDAQ

firms and the smaller size of Amex firms.

        Profitability increased significantly between 1932 and 1950. For NYSE firms,

profitability then declined gradually from 1950 until 1992, after which it has been fairly stable.

The profitability trends for Amex and NASDAQ firms were similar to that of NYSE firms

during the 1960s and 1970s. However, profitability among Amex and NASDAQ firms declined

precipitously between 1980 and 2000. The steady decline in profitability following WWII can

potentially explain the gradual increase in leverage over the same period. There was also a run-

up in profitability leading up to and during the war associated with a modest decline in leverage

over the same period. Notably though, the level of profitability at the start of our sample period

is virtually identical to that at the end of our period, in contrast to leverage.

        Asset tangibility, despite large fluctuations in the 1940s and 1950s, generally declined

over the century. Not only does this pattern miss some of the important turning points in

leverage, it is also difficult to reconcile with existing empirical evidence (e.g., Frank and Goyal,

2009) and theory (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 1992), which suggests that decreasing asset

tangibility decreases debt capacity because there is less collateral to secure debt. The market-to-

book ratio, despite a sharp drop in the 1970s, was largely flat or modestly increasing over the

century. This pattern is also difficult to reconcile with the large movements in leverage and

existing empirical evidence showing a strong negative correlation between leverage and market-




                                                   20
to-book. Finally, earnings volatility declined between 1950 and 1970, the period over which the

bulk of the leverage increase occurred. However, it has increased somewhat since then, and

dramatically so for Amex and NASDAQ firms.

       Overall, the plots give little indication that characteristics changed in a manner that would

lead to a sustained increase in corporate debt supply. Nonetheless, we undertake a more formal

regression analysis below to estimate the quantitative impact of changes in firm characteristics

on expected leverage ratios.



5.2. Cross-sectional relationships through time



       Table 2 presents the results of panel regressions of the debt-to-capital ratio on firm size

(log of real sales), profitability, tangible assets and the market-to-book assets ratio. To facilitate

comparison of magnitudes, we report marginal effects by multiplying the estimated coefficients

by the standard deviation of each independent variable within each decade. Panel A presents the

results using book leverage as the dependent variable, Panel B using market leverage. This

analysis provides insight into the stability of previously documented relationships.

       The first two columns of Panel A indicate that, with the exception of the 1930s, leverage

has had a consistently positive and negative association with firm size and profitability,

respectively. Both relationships strengthened between the 1920s and 1980s before weakening

somewhat in recent decades. By contrast, the positive and negative associations documented by

prior studies between leverage and, respectively, PP&E and market-to-book are robust features

of the data only in more recent decades. Comparison with the results for the NYSE sample

indicates that the cross-sectional relationships between leverage and tangibility and market-to-




                                                  21
book are primarily driven by the introduction of NASDAQ firms to the sample. More

specifically, NASDAQ firms have, on average, less tangible assets, higher market-to-book ratios,

and lower leverage than firms on the NYSE. This additional variation appears largely responsible

for the increased importance of these relations in recent decades.

        Results in Panel B reveal that these variables are more consistent over time in explaining

market leverage. However, in the case of market-to-book, the negative relationship is likely

dominated by the variation in market equity, which appears in the numerator of the independent

variable and the denominator of the dependent variable.

       With few exceptions, the results in Table 2 suggest that the empirical relations between

leverage and its determinants are relatively stable. As such, we examine in Table 3 and Fig. 8 the

ability of these characteristics to account for the temporal variation in leverage documented

above. The first (sixth) column in Table 3 reports the average debt to capital ratio by decade for

our full (NYSE) sample. In the next column, we first estimate a panel regression, with firm fixed

effects, over the period from 1925 – 1945, of leverage on the set of firm characteristics reported

in Fig. 7 and asset growth. Using these estimated coefficients, we calculate a predicted leverage

ratio for each firm-year after 1945 and in the table report the average within each 5-year period

(we report annually in Fig. 8). The short-dashed line in Fig. 8, labeled “Predicted(1),” displays

average predicted leverage when firm size is defined as total real sales. The results indicate that

a small portion of the leverage increase is explained by variation in firm characteristics (about

one third of the increase from 1945 to 1960 is explained, but very little after 1960).

       Thus far we have defined firm size in a manner consistent with that found in most

previous research focusing on cross-sectional variation. However, this definition is inappropriate

for our aggregate analysis. As the number of time periods gets large, the relation between




                                                 22
leverage and firm size – measured in levels – must converge to zero because these variables have

different orders of integration: leverage is trend-stationary, size is not. So, relating the aggregate

or average level of assets (or sales) with aggregate leverage is theoretically problematic. As a

practical matter, leverage during our sample horizon exhibits a clear trend (see Fig. 1).

Consequently, regressing a trending variable on another trending variable can generate a

spurious correlation, which stems not from a meaningful economic relation but, rather, the

presence of common trends (Granger and Newbold (1974)). Therefore, the long-dashed line

denoted Predicted(2) in Fig. 8 and columns (2) and (7) of Table 3 present results from a

specification in which we scale firm sales by GDP in order to ensure stationarity. (In unreported

results, we examine sales growth and find qualitatively similar results.) The results in columns

(2) and (7) indicate that average predicted leverage is either flat (NYSE sample) or declining

(full sample) from 1945 through 2010. This specification indicates that essentially none of the

increase in leverage over the past century is attributable to changes in characteristics of our

sample firms. Fig. 8 shows that a similar result holds for market leverage.

       One limitation of the prior approach is that it assumes stability in the parameters of the

leverage specification between 1945 and the end of the sample period. While this assumption

seems plausible in light of the results of Table 2, some exceptions were noted above. We take

two approaches to address this concern. First, we estimate a panel regression over the entire

sample period 1925 – 2010 and add indicators for each 5-year period after 1945. Columns (4)

and (9) of Table 4 report the coefficients on these indicators, which measure the average residual

in each period (relative to the omitted period 1925 – 45). The results show that the average

residual increases at approximately the same rate as the average actual leverage. Thus, firm-




                                                 23
specific information has little ability to explain the temporal patterns in average leverage even

when we do not restrict the parameters to be estimated using only pre-WW II data.

       In columns (5) and (10) we alternatively estimate rolling regressions in which the

estimation window is extended for each successive 5-year window. Thus, to predict leverage in

period t to t+4, we estimate the leverage regression over 1925 to t-1. We then calculate the

predicted change in leverage as the average predicted value over t to t+4 minus the average fitted

value from t-5 to t-1. Results are similar. Predicted leverage changes are modest or negative in

each period. In contrast to the observed increased in leverage, cumulative predicted changes over

1945 to 2010 are -8.2% and -3.6% for the full and NYSE samples, respectively.

       While changes in firm characteristics are unable to explain the increase in leverage over

time, the evidence in Fig. 7 suggests they may be able to account for the thickening left tail of

the leverage distribution in recent decades documented in Fig. 3. The 1980s and 1990s saw a

large influx of NASDAQ firms into the Compstat/CRSP sample. As shown in Fig. 7, these firms

are substantially smaller, less profitable, have more volatile earnings and higher growth

opportunities but fewer tangible assets than pre-existing firms. Fig. 9 displays how these features

relate to the changes in the leverage distribution since 1980.

        Panel A demonstrates the effect of new entrants on the leverage distribution. The left

plot shows the annual quartiles of the leverage distribution for the sample of firms in the

database as of 1980 (including NYSE, Amex and NASDAQ firms). In other words, the sample

consists of all surviving firms and varies over time only because of exit (e.g., bankruptcy,

merger, acquisition, buyout). Despite a slight decline since 2000 – possibly due to the sample

selection criterion – this distribution is quite stable over time. Thus, reduction in the lower end of

the full sample leverage distribution was not the result of low leverage firms levering down.




                                                 24
Rather, this decline was driven by new, low-leverage firms entering the sample. The right plot of

Panel A shows the quartiles of the leverage distribution for new entrants into the sample. Thus,

the sample changes each year. Each quartile in almost every year is well below that of the

corresponding quartile for the sample of existing firms.

       Panel B of Fig. 9 indicates that these leverage differences are at least partly driven by

differences in firm characteristics. Using the parameters from a panel regression estimated over

1925 – 1979, we calculate predicted leverage for each firm from 1980 through 2010. The left

plot shows predicted leverage quartiles each year based on the sample of firms in the database as

of 1980. The right plot shows quartiles of the distribution of predicted leverage for the sample of

new entrants each year. Comparing the two plots, we note that the quartiles of predicted leverage

for new entrants are significantly lower than those for existing firms. Thus, new entrants

beginning in 1980 had different characteristics than existing firms, leading them to choose

different leverage ratios.

       Taken together, our evidence suggests that firm characteristics in general do not explain

the increase in leverage over the past century in the U.S., but do help us understand the

thickening left tail of the leverage distribution in recent decades. The differing characteristics of

new entrants in the 1980s and 1990s led to low predicted leverage for these firms, and offers a

natural explanation for the apparent drop in leverage since 1980 among low-levered firms.

Ignoring these new firms, the distribution of leverage has been stable in recent decades. In

contrast, aggregate or average firm characteristics do not change over time in a way that explains

the across-the-board increase in leverage from 1945-1970.



6.     Changes in the economic environment




                                                 25
         Results in the previous section indicate that changes in firm characteristics have limited

ability to explain the trends in capital structure that we document. In this section, we explore

whether changes in the economic environment (taxes, distress costs, information and agency

frictions, and supplies of competing securities) affected the demand and supply of corporate

debt. While the evidence here is largely descriptive, it is suggestive of the economic forces

behind the thus far unexplained shifts in financial policy.



6.1. Graphical analysis



         Fig. 10 presents time series plots of several macroeconomic series that are theoretically

relevant for capital structure. In each figure, we also plot aggregate leverage for comparison.

Panel A displays the (top) corporate tax rate and a measure of the debt tax incentive net of

personal taxes.11 The statutory corporate tax rate underwent 30 changes during the last century.

Rates were relatively low at the start of our sample period, staying below 15% from 1920 until

the late 1930s. By the mid-1950s, however, the corporate income tax rate exceeded 50%. Tax

rates remained near 50% until the mid-1980s, and have been steady near 35% since. The plot

suggests a positive relation between corporate tax rates (or the net tax incentive) and leverage,

particularly in the mid-20th century. Indeed, several past authors have interpreted this visual

association as casual (e.g., Hickman, 1953; Sametz, 1964).


11
   Following Taggart (1985), we define the net debt tax incentive as 1 – (1-tc)/(1-tp), where tc is the corporate tax
rate and tp the personal income tax rate (on interest income). This formula derives from Miller (1977), with the
simplifying assumption that the effective tax rate on income to equityholders is zero. We use the lowest personal tax
rate to quantify tp because few investors actually paid the highest tax rate during the middle of the century. (The top
personal rate exceeded 90% for 16 out of the 20 years from 1944 through 1963.)



                                                         26
        Panel B presents the cross-sectional asset-weighted average of the within-firm standard

deviations of return on assets, which we interpret as a proxy for expected financial distress costs

(e.g. Robichek and Myers, 1966; Scott, 1976). The figure shows visual evidence that the increase

in leverage coincided with a marked reduction in earnings volatility. While the decline in

volatility appears to start after the initial increase in leverage, the pattern is similar, with a higher

and relatively stable level prior to 1950 and a lower and moderately increasing level post-1970.

Alternative measures of economic uncertainty, conditional GDP growth volatility and the equity

market risk premium (Bansal, Coleman, and Lundblad, 2011), are not shown but reveal similar

patterns.

        Panel C plots the business credit and equity component of the financial sector’s output

(Philippon, 2012).12 Financial intermediaries play an important role in facilitating access to

capital by mitigating information asymmetry and agency costs (Diamond, 1984; Leland and

Pyle, 1977), frictions that are central to theories of capital structure (e.g., Myers, 1984; Jensen

and Meckling, 1976; Myers, 1977). The plot shows aggregate leverage and this measure of

financial sector output followed similar patterns. However, consistent with the findings of

Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1996), the financial sector continued to grow in the last two

decades, even as aggregate leverage leveled off, reducing the visual relation between leverage

and financial sector output.

        Finally, Panel D plots government leverage, defined as the ratio of Federal debt held by

the public to gross domestic product (GDP). Fluctuations in the supply of competing securities

shift the demand curve for corporate debt in the opposite direction. One such substitute receiving

significant theoretical attention is government bonds [e.g., Taggart, 1981; McDonald, 1983;


12
    We thank Thomas Philippon for sharing           these   data,   which   can   be   found   on   his   website:
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~tphilipp/research.htm


                                                     27
Friedman, 1978]. During the last century, government debt experienced several notable

transitions, beginning with a dramatic expansion to fund World War II. From its peak of 109% of

GDP in 1946, government debt as a share of income fell steadily until 1972, when it leveled off

at approximately 25% of GDP. The 1980s saw a renewed increase in public sector leverage that

persisted until the mid-1990s. In 2008, public debt-to-GDP began another significant increase in

response to the most recent recession, financial crisis, and wars.

         A negative relation between the two series is apparent. As government leverage increased

sharply from 1920 to 1945, corporate leverage declined from 17% to 11% over this same

period.13 From 1945 to 1970, as government debt fell, corporate leverage increased more than

threefold to 35%. After 1980, the visual association is less clear.

         Though not shown in Fig. 10, we also examine the relation between managerial

incentives, as measured by the structure of executive compensation, and capital structure (e.g.,

Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Hart and Moore, 1994). For compensation to provide an explanation

for the mid-century increase in the use of debt, it should be the case that incentives deriving from

executive pay contracts have become weaker over the past century, particularly from WW II to

1970, increasing the marginal agency benefit of debt. Consistent evidence is provided by Jensen

and Murphy (1990), who argue that pay-performance sensitivity was sharply higher in the 1930s

than in the 1970s and 1980s. More recent studies, however, have reached the opposite

conclusion. Hadlock and Lumer (1997) show that the sensitivity of executive turnover to firm

performance has actually increased since the 1930s. They further demonstrate that after

controlling for firm size, pay-performance sensitivity has been either flat (large firms) or

13
   One aspect of this association is the lack of a decline in leverage associated with the dramatic rise in government
borrowing during WW II. However, this feature is largely attributable to the previously documented fact that most
firms already had low leverage ratios in the early 1940s (with more than half already at zero debt). More striking is
the effect that the flood of Treasuries had on the flow of corporate debt issues, which fell to near or below zero from
1942 until the end of the war.


                                                         28
increasing (small firms) over time. Frydman and Saks (2010) provide the most comprehensive

time-series data on executive compensation to date. They report that the sensitivity of executive

pay to firm performance was similar from the 1930s to the 1980s, a time span that entirely

encompasses the increase in aggregate leverage in our sample.



6.2. Regression analysis



       Table 4 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) regression results for several models of

aggregate corporate leverage. Specifically, we estimate the following regressions

                                (1) 𝐶𝐿! = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐸𝐸! + 𝛤𝑋! + 𝜙𝑡 + 𝜀! ,

and

                                (2) ∆𝐶𝐿! = 𝛼 + 𝛽∆𝐸𝐸! + 𝛤∆𝑋! + 𝜂! .

Corporate leverage is denoted CL, EE represents the proxies for the economic environment

discussed above, and X includes aggregate firm characteristic and macroeconomic control

variables. Our firm-level control variables are motivated by the discussion of Section 4. We

include the growth rate in the CPI as a proxy for expected inflation. The return on the 3-month

Treasury Bill and the credit spread between BAA and AAA bonds are included to capture the

general level of interest rates in the economy and credit conditions. Real GDP growth captures

variation in economic conditions and the equity market return represents the cost of a debt-

alternative financing source.

       We include a time trend, t, in the level specification to absorb any finite sample time

trends. We use Δ to denote the first difference operator (ΔCL = CLt – CLt-1). We focus on

corporate leverage, measured as the ratio of total debt to capital, but note that the results are




                                                29
robust to alternative definitions of leverage discussed earlier. Serial correlation in the error term

of both equations is addressed with Newey-West standard errors assuming a two-period lag

structure.

         The results in Panels A and B of Table 4 reveal the following inferences. First, while the

shift in leverage policy was preceded by a substantial increase in corporate tax rates, there is

little statistical association between tax rates and aggregate leverage once we control for

common trends and other leverage determinants (column 1). Coefficients on the net tax incentive

are insignificant both in levels and first differences.14 Closer inspection of Fig. 10 reveals a

significant delay between changes in tax rates and movements in aggregate leverage.15                                If

recapitalization is costly, corporate leverage may not respond immediately to an increase in tax

rates, but taxes may still affect the choice of security the next time a firm raises external capital.

However, even when we account for the possibility of a delayed reaction to the tax law change

using a distributed lag model with up to eight lags of the corporate tax rate (unreported), we fail

to find a positive relationship between tax rates and aggregate leverage in either the short- or

long-run.

         In column (7), we do find a significant positive relation between corporate tax rates and

the choice between debt and preferred stock financing. Economically, a one percentage point

increase in the net tax incentive is associated with a 57 basis points increase in the ratio of debt

to fixed charge finance. The total increase in net tax incentive between the late 1930s and early

1950s was about 27%. This would translate into an increase of about 15% in the D/(D+P) ratio,

roughly half of the total increase in the ratio over that time span. Statistical significance for the

preferred stock tax effect weakens in the first-difference specification in Panel B. However, in

14
  Results using the raw corporate tax rate as the proxy for tax incentives are similar.
15
  This finding is consistent with that of Miller (1963), who notes little change in aggregate leverage between the
1920s and 1950s, despite the large increase in tax rates over that time.


                                                         30
unreported analysis we find a highly significant long-run multiplier when using the distributed

lag model discussed above.

        In column (2) of Panel A, we find a negative relation between GDP growth volatility and

leverage. However, this is not a robust relation. The coefficient becomes statistically and

economically insignificant when we estimate the model in first differences (Panel B) or when

controlling for other measures of the economic environment (column 6). Results using the other

proxies for uncertainty – earnings volatility and the market risk premium – are similar but

statistically even weaker.

        Turning to proxies for financial market development, in column (4) we find a significant

relation between aggregate leverage and the output of the financial sector from business credit

and equity issuance. This coefficient is significantly positive in both levels and first differences,

and remains significant when controlling for the other measures of the economic environment in

column (6). This suggests an association between the growth of financial intermediation and

corporate leverage. On the other hand, in column (3) we do not find a robust significant

relationship between leverage and an alternate measure of the extent of intermediation, the

fraction of debt held through intermediaries. While this fraction increased sharply between the

1930s and 1950s, much of the change occurred in the decade prior to the shift in leverage

policies.

        Last, we find a robust significant relation between government leverage and corporate

leverage, both in levels and first differences. From column (5) of Panel A, we see that a one

percentage point increase in government leverage is associated with an 8.5 basis point decrease

in corporate leverage. Combined with the summary statistics in Panel A of Table 1, this estimate




                                                 31
implies that a one standard deviation increase in government leverage (17.7%) leads to a 1.5%

decline in aggregate corporate leverage.

        Table 5 presents analysis of net issuance decisions. In particular, we estimate similar

regressions to those of Table 4, but now the dependent variables are aggregate net debt and net

equity issuances scaled by lagged aggregate assets (Panels A and B, respectively) or aggregate

debt issuance as a fraction of aggregate investment (Panel C). The controls consist of both

macroeconomic factors and firm characteristics found in Table 4. Flow control variables are

contemporaneous with the dependent variable, stock and price control variables are lagged one

year to avoid incorporating any future information on the right hand side.16

        Results are generally consistent with those in Table 4. Tax rates, volatility, and the shares

of debt and equity held by intermediaries show no statistically significant relations with debt or

equity issuance decisions. Perhaps unsurprisingly, more output from the financial sector is

associated with more issuance of both debt and equity. More interestingly, in Panel C we find

that firms fund a larger fraction of their investment with debt as the financial sector grows.

        In column (5) we examine the relation between corporate debt and equity issuance and

government debt issuance, defined as the change in federal debt held by the public scaled by

lagged GDP. Panel A shows a significant negative relation between corporate and government

net debt issuing activity. A one percent increase in the relative flow of government debt is

associated with a 4.4 basis point reduction in the flow of corporate debt relative to assets. Panel

B shows that net equity issues are also negatively related to government debt issues. However,

this relation is less than half the magnitude as documented in the net debt issuance specification

and becomes statistically insignificant once we control for firm characteristics. Finally, in Panel

16
   Flow variables include government debt issuance, output of the financial sector, firm profitability, inflation,
market return, and real GDP growth. Stock variables include tax rates, GDP growth volatility, intermediary shares
of debt and equity holdings, interest rates, intangible assets and the market-to-book ratio.


                                                        32
C we partially control for changing investment opportunities by showing that the fraction of

investment funded by debt is also significantly negatively associated with net debt issuances by

the government.

       In sum, we identify several changes in the economic environment that may be relevant

for understanding the large unexplained increase in aggregate corporate leverage – tax rates,

uncertainty, growth in financial intermediation, and variation in government borrowing. Of

these, changes in government borrowing and growth of financial intermediation appear most

statistically robust (although in the latter case, this does not hold for all measures of

intermediation). While a full investigation of these forces is beyond the scope of this paper, the

evidence here suggests these may be fruitful areas for future research.



7.     Conclusions and directions for future research



       We document a substantial shift in corporate financial policy in US firms over the past

century. Aggregate corporate leverage and the leverage of the regulated sector have remained

quite stable over time. In contrast, leverage of unregulated firms has increased significantly,

approaching the level of indebtedness of regulated firms.

       Interestingly, neither changes in the characteristics of firms, nor changes in the

relationships between these characteristics and leverage decisions, are able to explain much, if

any, of the shift in financial policies. Firms appear to have increased their propensity to use debt

financing over the century, with the bulk of this change unexplained by standard leverage

models. We highlight several changes in the economic environment that plausibly increased

firms’ willingness to issue, or investors’ willingness to hold, corporate debt. These include




                                                33
increased corporate tax rates, reductions in aggregate uncertainty, growth in financial

intermediation, and a large reduction in government borrowing in the decades following World

War II. Aggregate regression analysis suggests these latter two relations – those between

leverage and financial intermediation and between corporate debt and supplies of competing

securities – are the most statistically robust and may represent the most promising areas for

future research.

       While the lack of evidence in support of taxes questions the relevance of this friction

behind many theoretical models of leverage determination, our results do not necessarily rule out

a role for taxes. The need to control for common trends in time-series regressions may mask the

underlying relationship. Future research examining cross-sectional implications of changes in tax

rates, incorporating more precise measures of tax incentives, and carefully considering the

political economy surrounding tax changes may be fruitful.

         The relation between leverage and growth of the financial sector suggests that the

monitoring and information-gathering functions of financial intermediaries may have been

important in expanding firms’ debt capacities. However, the precise channels through which this

association occurs, and the mechanisms behind the association, are unclear. Equally important is

the role of financial regulation, which underwent significant changes during our sample period.

Future research integrating an analysis of the development of the financial sector with the

evolution of financial regulation may provide new insight.

       Finally, the negative association documented here between government borrowing and

corporate debt issuance is consistent with the supply of competing securities, such as Treasury

debt, affecting aggregate leverage by shifting the demand curve for corporate debt. Of course,

our evidence cannot entirely rule out contemporaneous debt supply curve shifts or endogenous




                                               34
investment responses. A further unresolved question is which economic mechanisms are behind

the imperfectly elastic demand curve required for a relation between government and corporate

finance to exist. We leave these issues to future research.




                                                35
References

Bates, T., Kahle K., Stulz R., 2009. Why do US firms hold so much more cash than they used to?
Journal of Finance 64, 1985-2021.

Bansal, R., Coleman J., Lundblad C., 2011. Endogenous liquidity supply. Unpublished working
paper. Duke University.

Chava, S.,. Roberts M., 2008. How does financing impact investment? The role of debt
covenants. Journal of Finance 63, 2085-212.

Ciccolo Jr., J., 1981. Changing Balance Sheet Relationships in the US Manufacturing Sector.
NBER Working Paper No. 702.

DeAngelo, H., Roll R., 2012. How Stable Are Corporate Capital Structures?, Journal of Finance,
forthcoming.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic V., 1996. Stock Market Development, and Firm Financing
Choices. World Bank Economic Review, 341-371.

Diamond, D., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Review of Economic
Studies 51, 393-414.

Fama, E., French K., 1991. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance 47,
427-465.

Fama, E., French K., 2005. Financing decisions: Who issues stock? Journal of Financial
Economics 76, 549-582.

Frank, M., Goyal V., 2008, Trade-off and pecking order theories of capital structure, in
Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, ed. Espen Eckbo, Elsevier.

Frank, M., Goyal V., 2009. Capital structure decisions: Which factors are reliably important?
Financial Management 38, 1-37.

Frydman, C., Saks R., 2010. Executive compensation: A new view from a long-term perspective,
1936-2005. Review of Financial Studies 23, 2099-2138.

Graham, J., Leary M., Roberts M., 2012, Financial crowding out, Unpublished working paper.
University of Pennsylvania.

Goldsmith, R., 1958. Financial Intermediaries in the American Economy Since 1900, UMI.

Gordon, R., Malkiel, B., 1981. Taxation and Corporate Finance, in How Taxes Affect Economic
Behavior, eds. H. J. Aaron and J. A. Pechman, The Brookings Institution.




                                             36
Gorton, G., Winton A., 2003, Financial intermediation, in the Handbook of the Economics of
Finance, eds. George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, Elsevier.

Granger, C. Newbold P., 1974. Spurious regression in econometrics. Journal of Econometrics 2,
111-120.

Greenwood, R., Hanson S., and Stein J., 2010. A gap-filling theory of corporate debt maturity
choice. Journal of Finance 65, 993-1028.

Holland, D., Myers, S., 1979. Trends in Corporate Profitability and Capital Costs, In: The
Nation’s Capital Needs: Three Studies, ed. R. Lindsay, Committee for Economic Development.

Hickman, W., 1953. The Volume of Corporate Bond Financing Since 1900. Princeton University
Press.

Huang, R., Ritter J., 2010, Testing theories of capital structure and estimating the speed of
adjustment. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 237-271.

Hurley, E., 1977. The commercial paper market. Federal Reserve Bulletin 63, 525 – 536.

Jensen, M., Meckling W., 1976. A theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs, and
ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen A., 2012. The aggregate demand for Treasury debt.
Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.

Leland, H., Pyle D., 1977. Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial
intermediation. Journal of Finance 32, 371-387.

McDonald, R., 1983. Government debt and private leverage: An extension of the Miller theorem.
Journal of Public Economics 22, 303-325.

Miller, M., 1963. The Corporation Income Tax and Corporate Financial Policies, In:
Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilization Policies, Prentice Hall.

Miller, M., 1977. Debt and taxes. Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.

Modigliani, F., Miller M., 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of
investment. American Economic Review 48, 261-297.

Myers, S., 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147-
175.

Newey, W., West K., 1987. A simple, positive-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703-708.




                                              37
Opler, T., Pinkowitz L., Stulz R., Williamson R., 1999. The determinants and implications of
corporate cash holdings. Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3 – 46.

Philippon, T., 2009. The bond market’s q. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1101-1056.

Philippon, T., 2012. Has the US finance industry become less efficient? Unpublished working
paper, New York University.

Rajan, R., Zingales L., 1995. What do we know about capital structure: Some evidence from
international data. Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.

Robichek, A., Myers S., 1966. Problems in the theory of optimal capital structure. Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 2, 1-35.

Sametz, A., 1964. Trends in the volume and composition of equity finance. Journal of Finance
19, 450-469.

Scott J., 1976. A theory of optimal capital structure. Bell Journal of Economics and Management
Science 7, 33-54.

Stein, J., 2003. Agency, information and corporate investment. In: Constantinides G., Harris M.,
Stulz R. (Ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 111 – 165.

Strebulaev, I. Yang, B., 2013. The mystery of zero-leverage firms. Journal of Financial
Economics 109, 1-23.

Stulz, R., 1985. An analysis of secured debt. Journal of financial Economics 14, 501-521.

Taggart, R., 1985. Secular patterns in corporate finance. In: Friedman B. (Ed.), Corporate Capital
Structures in the United States, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 13 – 80.

von Furstenberg, G., 1977. Corporate Investment: Does Market Valuation Matter in the
Aggregate? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 347-397.

Welch, I., 2011. Two common problems in capital structure research: The financial debt-to-
assets ratio and issuing activity versus leverage changes. International Review of Finance 11, 1-
17.




                                               38
Appendix A: Variable Definitions


This appendix provides details on the data sources, sample construction, and variable
construction. We use the acronym GFD for Global Financial Database, a source for many
macroeconomic series.




A.1 Government debt
       Government leverage in our analyses is defined as the ratio of Federal debt held by the
public to GDP. We focus on Federal debt because it comprises the majority of total government
debt and is responsible for most of its variation over time. This fact is made apparent in Fig. A.1,
which presents a stacked area chart of government debt divided by GDP. In fact, the estimates of
state and local debt are somewhat misleading. A significant fraction of state and local assets
consists of U.S. Treasuries (on average $0.5 trillion between 2000 and 2010). Thus, state and
local governments can act as a pass-through for Federal debt by issuing their own debt claims
against these assets. We focus on the debt held by the public to avoid including in our measure a
significant fraction of U.S. Treasuries held by other government entities, such as the social
security administration.


A.2 Variable definitions
Gross Domestic Product Implicit Price Deflator: Source = GFD, Series = USGDPD, Annual data
from 1947 to 2010.


United States Annualized Exports of Goods and Services: Source = GFD, Series = USEXPGSQ,
Annual data from 1947 to 2010.


United States Annualized Exports of Goods and Services: Source = GFD, Series = USIMPGSQ,
Annual data from 1947 to 2010.


United States Gross Federal Debt Held by the Public (Bil. of $, NA), Source = GFD, Series =
USFYGFDPUBA, Annual data from 1938 to 2010. This series is extended back in time by



                                                39
assuming that total Federal debt is equal to Federal debt held by the public. Pre-1938 Federal
debt data are obtained from,
http://www.usgovernmentspending.com/Federal_state_local_debt_chart.html.


Corporate Income Tax Rate: This rate corresponds to the top corporate income tax rate. Source =
“Corporation Income Tax Brackets and Rates, 1909-2002”, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
soi/02corate.pdf. Annual data from 1909 to 2010.

United States M1 Money Stock: Source = GFD, Series = USM1W, Year-end monthly data from
1929 to 2010.


United States M2 Money Stock: Source = GFD, Series = USM2W, Year-end monthly data from
1947 to 2010.


United   States    State     and   Local   Debt:   Source   =    US    government     spending
(http://www.usgovernmentspending.com/Federal_state_local_debt_chart.html),       Annual    data
from 1902 to 2010.


United States Nominal GDP: Source = GFD, Series = GDPUSA, Year-end annual data from
1790 to 2010.


United States Unemployment Rate: Source = GFD, Series = UNUSAM, Year-end annual data
from 1890 to 1928. Year-end monthly data from 1929 to 2010


International Holdings of US Debt: Source = Flow of Funds, Series = Foreign Holdings of U.S.
Treasuries. Annual data from 1945 to 2010. Prior to 1945 we assume that there are no foreign
holdings of US Treasuries.


USA Government 90-day T-Bills Secondary Market: Source = GDP, Series = ITUSA3D, Year-
end monthly data from 1920 to 2010.




                                              40
USA 10-year Bond Constant Maturity Yield: Source GFD, Series, IGUSA10D, Year-end
monthly data from 1790 to 2010.


United States BLS Consumer Price Index NSA: Source GFD, Series, IGUSA10D, Annual data
from 1820 to 1874. Monthly data from 1875 to 2010 collapsed to an annual series by averaging
within years.


Moody's Corporate AAA Yield: Source GFD, Series, MOCAAAD, Year-end monthly data from
1857 to 2010.


Moody's Corporate BAA Yield: Source GFD, Series, MOCBAAD, Year-end monthly data from
1919 to 2010.


Variable Construction


Inflation = [CPI(t) – CPI(t-1)] / CPI(t) where CPI(t) is the consumer price index in year t
computed as the average monthly CPI for the year.


US Net exports = [US exports – US imports] / US GDP


GDP growth = [GDP(t) – GDP(t-1)] / GDP(t-1) where GDP(t) is US gross domestic product in
year t.


Government Leverage = US public debt held by the public in year t / GDP(t)


Net Debt Issuances by the US Government = Change in US public debt held by the public from
year t-1 to t / GDP(t-1)


Book Leverage = Total Debt / Total book value of assets


Market leverage = Total Debt / (Total Debt + Equity Market Capitalization)



                                              41
Net Debt leverage = (Total Debt – Cash) / Total book value of assets


Net Debt Issuance = [Total Debt(t) – Total Debt(t-1)] / Total book value of assets(t-1)


Net Equity Issuance = [Equity issues(t) – Equity repurchases(t)] / Total book value of assets(t-1)


Market-to-Book Equity Ratio = Equity Market Capitalization / Book Equity


Profitability = operating income before depreciation / total book value of assets


Tangibility = net plant property and equipment / total book value of assets


Firm Size = natural log of total sales in constant (1982) dollars.


Relative Firm Size = natural log of the ratio of total sales to U.S. GDP, in basis points


Earnings Volatility = standard deviation of the ratio of EBIT / total book value of assets,
calculated over the trailing 10 years. We require at least 4 years of trailing EBIT data to
calculate the standard deviation. For firms with at least 4, but less than 10 years of available
data, it is calculated over all available trailing years.


Intangible Assets = [Total Assets – (Net PP&E + cash and marketable securities + accounts
receivable + inventories)] / Total Assets


Asset growth = [Total book value of assets(t) - Total book value of assets(t-1)] / Total book
value of assets(t)


Investment = change in (gross) long-term assets plus the change in inventory from the balance
sheet.




                                                   42
Appendix B: Reconciliation with Alternative Data Sources


        Panel A of Fig. A.2 presents the time series of aggregate leverage from Flow-of-Funds
(solid line). Consistent with Frank and Goyal (2008), the average aggregate book leverage stays
within a fairly narrow band of 0.24 to 0.34 since 1945, the inception of Flow of Funds data, until
2010. The dashed line shows the analogous series from our sample. As in Fig. 1, our series
reveals a near tripling of leverage, from less than 10% in the 1940s to 30% in the 1990s.
        Our sample differs from Flow of Funds data in two important ways that may drive the
different leverage trends. First, Flow of Funds represents an aggregate of all public and privately
held corporations, while our data are limited to publicly traded firms (and NYSE firms prior to
1960). Second, Flow of Funds reports aggregate balance sheets for all nonfinancial corporate
businesses, while our sample excludes regulated industries such as utilities and railroads. In
order to examine which of these differences is behind the different patterns, we use an additional
source of data, Statistics of Income (SOI) collected by the Internal Revenue Service and reported
in Historical Statistics of the United States. SOI reports aggregate balance sheets for all U.S.
firms filing corporate tax returns. Like Flow of Funds, SOI includes private firms.
        Panel B of Fig. A.2 shows that leverage ratios calculated from SOI data are similar to
those calculated from Flow of Funds, both in level and time series pattern.17 However, the SOI
data have two advantages for our purposes. First, they are available from 1926 until 1997, more
closely covering the time span of our sample. Second, SOI reports aggregate balance sheets
separately by 1-digit SIC sector, which allows us to control for differences in industry coverage
between our sample and the Flow of Funds data. A disadvantage of the SOI data is that they
aggregate accounts payable with short-term debt.
        In the left hand plot of Panel C, we compare aggregate debt to capital for all unregulated
sectors (i.e., excluding utilities, transportation and telecommunications) from SOI (dashed line)
to that from our sample (solid line). The two series follow the same time series pattern, though
the SOI series is consistently about 5 percentage points above the series from our sample. This
wedge is likely due to smaller and private firms making heavier use of accounts payable, as
suggested by the similar time series in the right hand plot showing the long-term debt to capital

17
  In these figures, debt includes trade accounts payable because SOI does not report short-term debt separately from
accounts payable.


                                                        43
ratio. Thus, the inclusion of private firms is unlikely responsible for the differences in leverage
stability implied by our data and Flow of Funds.
       Rather, the difference in trends between our sample and Flow-of-Funds is due to the
exclusion of regulated industries – railroads and utilities in particular. Panel D makes this clear
by showing the debt to capital series for utilities, transportation, and communications and for all
other nonfinancial industries, both from SOI data. Unlike the unregulated sectors, leverage for
the regulated sector displays a remarkably stable capital structure that varies between
approximately 40% and 50% for 70 years (40 to 55% for total debt including accounts payable).
Before 1945, the long-term debt to capital ratio in the regulated sector was approximately four
times that of the unregulated sector. By the 1990s, however, leverage for the regulated and
unregulated sectors converged to within 10 percentage points of each other. At the same time,
the share of assets for the regulated sector declines from a peak of 43% in 1934 to 26% by 1950.
The net effect is a relatively stable economy-wide aggregate capital structure that reflects these
two countervailing forces, but masks a significant increase in the use of debt financing and
leverage for much of the corporate sector.




                                                44
                                                                    Panel A: Debt to Capital
                                          50

                                          45

                                          40                                          Total Debt /
                                                                                        Capital
                 Corporate Leverage (%)




                                          35

                                          30

                                          25                                                 Long−term Debt /
                                                                                                 Capital
                                          20

                                          15

                                          10

                                          5

                                          0
                                               1920   1930   1940    1950      1960   1970    1980    1990      2000   2010


                                                               Panel B: Liabilities to Assets
                                          70


                                          60
                 Corporate Leverage (%)




                                          50
                                                               Total Liabilities /
                                          40                       Assets


                                          30
                                                                                               Non−Debt Liabilities/
                                                                                                    Assets
                                          20


                                          10


                                          0
                                               1920   1930   1940    1950      1960   1970    1980    1990      2000   2010



Fig. 1. Annual aggregate leverage ratios. The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered
either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1920 through 2010. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads
are excluded. Panel A presents the annual ratio of aggregate total debt (solid line) and long-term debt (dashed line)
to aggregate ﬁnancial capital, measured as total debt plus book equity. Panel B displays annual ratios of aggregate
total (solid line) and non-debt (dashed) liabilities to total assets.
                                                          Panel A: Alternative Leverage Measures
                                           50

                                                                                    Debt + Preferred /
                                                                                         Capital
                                           40
                  Corporate Leverage (%)




                                           30



                                           20
                                                                                                              Market
                                                                                                             Leverage
                                           10



                                           0
                                                1920   1930    1940      1950   1960      1970      1980    1990   2000        2010


                                                              Panel B: Cash and Net Debt
                                           30

                                                                Cash /                                                    20
                                           25                   Assets
                                                                                                      Net Debt /
                                                                                                       Assets
                                                                                                                                Net Debt / Assets (%)
                                           20                                                                             10
                  Cash / Assets (%)




                                           15
                                                                                                                          0

                                           10

                                                                                                                          −10
                                           5


                                           0                                                                              −20
                                                1920   1930   1940    1950   1960    1970    1980    1990   2000   2010



Fig. 2. Alternative leverage measures. The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered
either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1920 through 2010. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads
are excluded. In Panel A, the solid line shows the aggregate ratio of debt plus preferred stock to total book capital.
The dashed line displays the aggregate ratio of total debt to the sum of book debt and market value of equity. Panel
B displays aggregate cash and short-term investments to assets (solid line) and net debt to assets (dashed line). Net
Debt is total debt minus cash and marketable securities.
                                                                                                             Panel A: Quartile Breakpoints by Year
                                                                                Full Sample                                                                                                                  NYSE Firms
                                            60




                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                           25th Percentile                                                                                                          25th Percentile
                                                           50th Percentile                                                                                                          50th Percentile
                                            50             75th Percentile                                                                                                          75th Percentile




                                                                                                                                                              50
                                            40




                                                                                                                                                      40
                                            30




                                                                                                                                               30
                                            20




                                                                                                                                       20




         Corporate Leverage (%)
                                                                                                                                     Corporate Leverage (%)
                                            10




                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                            0
                                                 1920   1930   1940    1950      1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010                                            1920        1930     1940    1950        1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




                                                                                                         Panel B: Average Leverage by Firm Size
                                                                              NYSE Sample                                                                                               Extended Moodys/Compustat Sample
                                            50                                                                                                                       50
                                                           Small Firms                                                                                                                  Small Firms
                                                           Medium                                                                                                                       Medium
                                                           Large Firms                                                                                                                  Large Firms
                                            40                                                                                                                       40



                                            30                                                                                                                       30



                                            20                                                                                                                       20




               Average Debt / Capital (%)
                                                                                                                                        Average Debt / Capital (%)




                                            10                                                                                                                       10



                                             0                                                                                                                       0
                                                 1920   1930   1940      1950    1960   1970   1980   1990    2000   2010                                                 1920    1930     1940       1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




Fig. 3. Cross-sectional distribution of corporate leverage. Panel A presents, for each year from 1920 to 2010, the cross-sectional median and ﬁrst and third
quartiles of the ratio of total debt (short term plus long term) to capital (total debt plus book value equity). In Panel B, ﬁrms are sorted into quintiles each year
based on book assets and the average debt to capital ratio is computed within the smallest, middle, and upper size quintiles. The sample includes all ﬁrms in the
CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded. The right-hand
plot in Panel B reports data once per decade (years ending in “8”) and includes all ﬁrms covered in the Moody’s Industrial Manuals, regardless of whether they
are covered in the CRSP database.
                           50             Consumer NonDurables                                                                 50             Consumer Durables
                           45             All Industries                                                                       45             All Industries
                           40                                                                                                  40
  Corporate Leverage (%)




                                                                                                      Corporate Leverage (%)
                           35                                                                                                  35

                           30                                                                                                  30

                           25                                                                                                  25

                           20                                                                                                  20

                           15                                                                                                  15

                           10                                                                                                  10

                           5                                                                                                   5

                           0                                                                                                   0
                                1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                                 1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




                           50                                                                                                  50
                                          Manufacturing                                                                                       Oil, Gas, & Coal
                           45                                                                                                  45
                                          All Industries                                                                                      All Industries
                           40                                                                                                  40
  Corporate Leverage (%)




                                                                                                      Corporate Leverage (%)



                           35                                                                                                  35

                           30                                                                                                  30

                           25                                                                                                  25

                           20                                                                                                  20

                           15                                                                                                  15

                           10                                                                                                  10

                           5                                                                                                   5

                           0                                                                                                   0
                                1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                                 1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




                           50                                                                                                  50
                                          Chemicals & Allied Prod                                                                             Business Equip
                           45                                                                                                  45
                                          All Industries                                                                                      All Industries
                           40                                                                                                  40
  Corporate Leverage (%)




                                                                                                      Corporate Leverage (%)




                           35                                                                                                  35

                           30                                                                                                  30

                           25                                                                                                  25

                           20                                                                                                  20

                           15                                                                                                  15

                           10                                                                                                  10

                           5                                                                                                   5

                           0                                                                                                   0
                                1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                                 1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




Fig. 4. Industry leverage. The solid line presents the asset value-weighted average leverage ratio for each of the
12 Fama and French industry classiﬁcations, excluding utilities, telecommunications, and ﬁnance. The dashed line
presents the value-weighted average leverage ratio for all NYSE-listed industrial ﬁrms. Industry-years with fewer
than 10 ﬁrms are excluded.
Fig. 4 (continued )


                                                                                                                                                            50
                                         Wholesale, Retail &                                                                                                               Healthcare, Medical Equip
                          50             Some Services                                                                                                      45             & Drugs
                          45             All Industries                                                                                                     40             All Industries
                          40
 Corporate Leverage (%)




                                                                                                                                   Corporate Leverage (%)
                                                                                                                                                            35
                          35
                                                                                                                                                            30
                          30
                                                                                                                                                            25
                          25
                                                                                                                                                            20
                          20
                                                                                                                                                            15
                          15
                                                                                                                                                            10
                          10

                          5                                                                                                                                 5

                          0                                                                                                                                 0
                               1920   1930   1940   1950   1960               1970                1980   1990   2000   2010                                      1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




                                                                                           50
                                                                                                          Everything Else
                                                                                                          All Industries
                                                                                           45

                                                                                           40
                                                                  Corporate Leverage (%)




                                                                                           35

                                                                                           30

                                                                                           25

                                                                                           20

                                                                                           15

                                                                                           10

                                                                                           5

                                                                                           0
                                                                                                1920   1930   1940   1950   1960               1970                1980   1990   2000   2010
                                                          Panel A: Net Debt and Equity Issuance (% of Assets) − 5 yr MA
                                              6%

                                                                                            Debt


                                              4%
              Issuance / A




                                                                  Equity



                                              2%




                                               0


                                                   1920    1930    1940     1950     1960    1970   1980       1990    2000        2010


                                                              Panel B: Debt Issuance / Investment − 5 yr MA
                                              35                                                                               50
                                                                                                                  Book
                                                                                                                Leverage
                                              30
                                                                                                                               40
                  Issuance / Investment (%)




                                              25

                                                                                                                               30   TD/Capital − All Firms
                                              20


                                              15                                                           Debt /
                                                                                                        Investment             20

                                              10

                                                                                                                               10
                                               5


                                               0                                                                               0
                                                   1920    1930   1940     1950    1960   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010


Fig. 5. Aggregate security issuance. Aggregate net debt issuance is deﬁned each year as the change in balance
sheet debt summed across ﬁrms divided by the sum of lagged book assets. Net equity issuance is deﬁned as the
split-adjusted change in shares outstanding times the average of the beginning and end-of-year stock price. In Panel
B, we calculate investment as the change in (gross) long-term assets plus the change in inventory from the balance
sheet. The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s
Industrial Manuals from 1920 through 2010. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded.
Fig. 6. Supply and demand for corporate debt. The ﬁgure shows theoretical demand and supply curves for corporate
debt. On the horizontal axis of each ﬁgure is the aggregate quantity of corporate debt (D), on the vertical axis the
                               ∗                ∗
risk-adjusted return on debt (rD ) and equity (rE ).
                                                              Debt / Capital                                                                                            Firm Size
                                                                                                                                   8

                           40


                                                                                                                                   6                        NYSE
  Corporate Leverage (%)




                                                                                                            ln(Sales (mm $1982))
                           30                                                                Amex

                                                                                                                                                                                        Nasdaq
                                                                                                                                   4
                           20
                                                                                                 Nasdaq
                                          NYSE
                                                                                                                                                                                        Amex
                                                                                                                                   2
                           10



                            0                                                                                                      0
                                1920    1930    1940   1950     1960   1970    1980   1990   2000    2010                              1920       1930    1940   1950   1960   1970   1980     1990    2000     2010




                                                               Profitability                                                                                        Asset Tangibility
                            20                                                                                                     50




                            10                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                    NYSE
  EBIT / Assets (%)




                                                                                                            PPE / A (%)




                                                                                          Amex
                             0                                                                                                     30
                                         NYSE

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Amex
                                                                                                                                                                                                Nasdaq
                                                                                 Nasdaq
                           −10                                                                                                     20




                           −20                                                                                                     10
                                 1920   1930    1940   1950     1960   1970    1980   1990   2000    2010                                  1920   1930    1940   1950   1960   1970   1980     1990    2000     2010




                                                         Market−to−Book                                                                                            Earnings Volatility
                           3.5
                                                                                                                                   14

                            3                                                                                                                                                                Nasdaq
                                                                                                                                   12


                           2.5                                                   Nasdaq
                                                                                                            sd(EBIT / A) (%)




                                                                                                                                   10
  MA / BA




                            2                                                                                                                                                                         Amex
                                                                                                                                       8

                                           NYSE                                                                                                          NYSE
                           1.5                                                                                                         6


                            1                                                                                                          4
                                                                          Amex
                            .5                                                                                                         2
                                 1920   1930    1940   1950     1960   1970    1980   1990   2000    2010                                  1920   1930    1940   1950   1960   1970   1980     1990    2000     2010




Fig. 7. Firm Characteristics by stock exchange listing. The solid, long-dash, and dashed lines present cross-
sectional averages of each ﬁrm characteristic for, respectively, NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq ﬁrms. See appendix for
variable deﬁnitions. The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat
or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1920 through 2010. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded.
                                                                                                                          Panel A: Full Sample
                                                                   Book Leverage                                                                                                                                      Market Leverage
                                      40                                                                                                                                                  50



                                                                                                                                                                                          40                                      Actual
                                      30                                 Actual


                                                                                                                                                                                          30

                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                          Predicted(1)




        Debt / Capital (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Predicted(1)
                                      10




                                                                                                                                          Debt / (Debt + Mkt Equity) (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                            Predicted(2)                                                                                                                                       Predicted(2)

                                      0                                                                                                                                                   0
                                           1920   1930   1940   1950    1960      1970    1980   1990       2000   2010                                                                        1920   1930   1940   1950   1960     1970    1980    1990     2000      2010




                                                                                                                          Panel B: NYSE Sample
                                                                       Book Leverage                                                                                                                                   Market Leverage
                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                      40

                                                                                                                                                                                          40                                       Actual
                                      30                                  Actual
                                                                                                                                                                                          30


                                      20
                                                                                           Predicted(1)                                                                                                                                                 Predicted(1)
                                                                                                                                                                                          20




                 Debt / Capital (%)
                                      10
                                                                                                                                                         Debt / (Debt + Mkt Equity) (%)




                                                                                             Predicted(2)                                                                                 10                                                          Predicted(2)



                                       0                                                                                                                                                   0
                                           1920   1930   1940   1950     1960      1970   1980    1990      2000   2010                                                                        1920   1930   1940   1950   1960      1970   1980      1990    2000     2010




Fig. 8. Average actual and predicted leverage ratios. Predicted values are calculated as ﬁtted values from panel regression of total debt to capital on ﬁrm size,
proﬁtability, tangibility, market-to-book, earnings volatility and asset growth, estimated over 1925 - 1945. We report predicted values for two speciﬁcations. In
Predicted(1) (short dash), ﬁrm size is deﬁned as the natural log of real sales. In Predicted(2) (short dash), ﬁrm size is deﬁned as the natural log of the ratio of
sales to GDP. The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1920 through
2010. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded.
                                                   Panel A: Actual Leverage Distribution
                            Existing Firms                                                         New Entrants
   60%                                                                   60%


   50%                                                                   50%


   40%                                                                   40%


   30%                                                                   30%


   20%                                                                   20%


   10%                                                                   10%


     0                                                                     0
         1980         1990                  2000                 2010          1980         1990                  2000               2010

                25th Pctl          Median            75th Pctl                        25th Pctl          Median          75th Pctl



                                               Panel B: Predicted Leverage Distribution
                            Existing Firms                                                         New Entrants
   40%                                                                   40%



   30%                                                                   30%



                                                                         20%
   20%


                                                                         10%
   10%


                                                                           0
     0
         1980         1990                  2000                 2010          1980         1990                  2000               2010

                25th Pctl          Median            75th Pctl                        25th Pctl          Median          75th Pctl




Fig. 9. Quartile breakpoints each year of actual (Panel A) and predicted (Panel B) debt to capital for the sample
of ﬁrms in the database in 1980 (left plot) and ﬁrms entering the sample each year (right plot). The sample includes
all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1920
through 2010. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded.
                                                             Panel A: Corporate Tax Rate                                                                                                                 Panel B: Earnings Volatility
                                        60                                                                                                                                         60                                                                                8
                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aggregate
                                        50                                                                                                                                         50                                                     Leverage
                                                                                                                      50                                                                                                                                             6
                                                            Corporate                                                                                                                                   Earnings
                                        40                  Tax Rate                                                                                                               40                   Volatility
                                                                                                                      40

                                        30                                                                                                                                         30                                                                                4
                                                                                                                      30

                                        20                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                   Net Tax            20




                                                                                                                            Corporate Tax Rate(%)




           Corporate Leverage(%)
                                                                                                                                                     Corporate Leverage(%)
                                                                           Aggregate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sd(Earnings / Assets) (%)




                                                                                                  Incentive                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                           Leverage
                                        10                                                                            10                                                           10


                                        0                                                                             0                                                            0                                                                                 0
                                             1920   1930     1940   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                                                                     1920   1930    1940   1950   1960   1970   1980     1990   2000    2010



                                                            Panel C: Financial Sector Output                                                                                                          Panel D: Government Borrowing
                                        60                                                                            2                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                   55                                                                            120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Corporate
                                        50                                                                                                                                         50                                                 Leverage
                                                                                                                      1.5                                                          45                                                                            100
                                                        Output of
                                        40              Finance                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                                                                                   35
                                        30                                                                            1                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                   25




                                                                                                                                 Output of Finance
                                        20                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40




                Corporate Leverage(%)
                                                                                                                                                          Corporate Leverage (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Government Leverage (%)




                                                                                                                      .5                                                           15
                                        10          Aggregate                                                                                                                      10                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Government
                                                    Leverage                                                                                                                                                                 Leverage
                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                         0                                                                            0                                                             0                                                                            0
                                             1920    1930    1940   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010                                                                     1920   1930    1940   1950   1960   1970   1980    1990 2000      2010




Fig. 10. Leverage and macroeconomic factors. The solid line in each panel plots the aggregate ratio of corporate debt to capital, where capital is deﬁned as total
debt plus book equity. Earnings volatility (Panel B) is deﬁned as the cross-sectional asset-weighted average of the within-ﬁrm standard deviation of EBIT/assets
using (up to) the trailing 10 years of data for each ﬁrm-year. Panel C plots an estimate of the business credit and equity component of ﬁnancial sector output
from Phillipon (2012). Government leverage (Panel D) is the ratio of federal debt held by the public to GDP. The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database
that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1920 through 2010. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded.
Table 1
Summary statistics.
   The sample covers the period 1920 - 2010 and includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either
in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded. All variables are
expressed as percentages, with the exception of market-to-book assets and average book assets. In Panel C, averages
are calculated as the equal-weighted mean of all ﬁrm-year observations within each decade.


Panel A: Annual Aggregate Summary Statistics




                                                    count    mean      sd        min         max      ar(1)
                 Firm Characteristics
                      Debt / Capital                  91     26.63    11.81      11.06       47.17    0.990
                      Debt/(Debt + Mkt Equity)        86     20.10     8.14       7.59       36.69    0.898
                      (Debt - Cash)/ Assets           91      8.07     9.93     -16.03       21.47    0.971
                      EBIT / Assets                   91      9.99    2.98      1.83         17.54    0.807
                      Intangible Assets / Assets      91     15.80    9.85      5.88         38.37    0.997
                      Mkt Assets / Book Assets        86     1.27     0.25      0.57         1.90     0.798
                      Avg. Real Sales ($mm)           91     607      242        193         1,213    0.983
                      Investment / Assets             91     7.29     5.61      -6.42        19.64    0.684
                 Macroeconomic Factors
                   Real AAA rate                      91     2.99     4.38      -11.77       16.90    0.558
                      BAA - AAA Yield Spread          91      1.19     0.69      0.37         4.26    0.838
                      Inﬂation                        91      2.92     4.44     -10.94       15.63    0.564
                      Mkt Return                      85     11.69    20.50     -44.36       57.50    0.010
                      GDP growth                      91      3.40     5.41     -13.00       18.52    0.409
                      Corp. Tax Rate                  91     36.18    13.86      10.00       52.80    0.990
                      Govt Debt / GDP                 91     40.79    17.71     16.34    108.82       0.943


Panel B: Panel Data Summary Statistics




                                                   count     mean        sd            min           max
                  Debt / Capital                   214,483   29.45      27.69       0.00           138.00
                  Debt/(Debt + Mkt Equity)         207,853   25.22      25.56       0.00            95.61
                  (Debt - Cash)/ Assets            215,976    5.67      32.97       -85.96          82.82
                  EBIT / Assets                    213,240    3.05      22.14      -115.15          36.62
                  Intangible Assets / Assets       212,145   16.65      17.58      -193.37         100.00
                  Mkt Assets / Book Assets         206,229    1.76     1.62         0.36         10.77
                  Real Sales ($mm)                 212,041   677.88   1919.14       0.00        13834.49
                  Investment / Assets              193,141   17.54     56.28       -71.78        364.97
Panel C: Averages by Decade




                     # obs       Debt /       Debt/(Debt +     (Debt - Cash)/    EBIT /      Intang. /    Mkt Assets /    Avg. Real     Invest/
                               Capital (%)   Mkt Equity) (%)     Assets (%)     Assets (%)   Assets (%)    Bk Assets     Sales ($mm)   Asset (%)
       1921 - 1930    1,580       12.23           20.14              0.56         8.14         15.26          1.14          267           9.97
       1931 - 1940    4,177       11.54           19.60             -4.00         7.41         11.98          1.04          330           0.38
       1941 - 1950    6,197       11.85           14.81            -10.91         14.19         6.56          1.06          529          12.01
       1951 - 1960    6,191       18.20           19.72            -0.45          12.04         5.89          1.18          761          10.90
       1961 - 1970   12,412       27.64           22.65            11.55          10.89         9.31          1.63          762          18.75
       1971 - 1980   28,172       34.68           35.54            17.14          10.57        10.38          1.30          645          16.52
       1981 - 1990   37,181       34.88           27.40            11.16           0.55        13.76          1.81          521          20.44
       1991 - 2000   47,363       30.77           23.69            3.99           -1.34        20.50          2.14          598          24.74
       2001 - 2010    38,171      27.96           21.75            -3.10          -1.92        26.95          1.97          1,015        11.18
       Total         181,444      29.45           25.22             5.67           3.05        16.65          1.76           678         17.54
Table 2
Relation between ﬁrm characteristics and leverage.
   The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or the Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1920 - 2010. Financial
ﬁrms, utilities, and railroads are excluded. In Panel A, cross-sectional regressions are estimated each year of debt to capital on ﬁrm size (log of real assets), EBIT
/ Assets, net PP&E / Assets, and market-to-book assets. Coeﬃcients are then averaged across years within each decade. In Panel B, similar regressions are run
over decade-long panels with the addition of ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects. ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                   Full Sample                                                    NYSE Sample
                             Size      EBIT / A     PP&E / A      MA / BA      Adj. R2      Size      EBIT / A     PP&E / A MA / BA           Adj. R2
                                                                   Panel A: Book Debt / Capital
               1925 - 30    8.19***     -3.25***       1.19         1.23**       0.08      8.19***     -3.25***       1.19         1.23**       0.08
               1931 - 40      0.94       -1.07**       1.93        1.42***       0.02        0.94       -1.07**       1.93        1.42***       0.02
               1941 - 50    7.57***     -3.37***      1.55**         0.28        0.09      7.57***     -3.37***      1.55**         0.28        0.09
               1951 - 60    5.87***     -4.34***        0.26         0.00        0.13     5.87***      -4.34***       0.26          0.00        0.13
               1961 - 70   15.00***     -5.58***      2.24***       -0.22        0.20     15.65***     -7.19***       0.18         0.81**       0.30
               1971 - 80   10.07***     -6.12***      5.69***        -0.28       0.16      7.26***     -5.32***      3.34***         0.70       0.15
               1981 - 90   15.75***     -8.04***      5.62***      -2.04***      0.13      6.94***     -5.08***       -0.60         1.47*       0.06
               1991 - 00   12.54***     -6.92***      5.67***      -1.38***      0.10      8.11***     -5.83***        1.26       -1.80***      0.09
               2001 - 10    7.50***     -5.19***      5.07***      -0.95***      0.04       -0.03      -3.80***       1.46         -0.55        0.04
                                                                     Panel B: Market Leverage
               1925 - 30   12.36***     -5.99***       2.39        -1.83***      0.15     12.36***     -5.99***       2.39        -1.83***      0.15
               1931 - 40      0.42      -3.64***      5.67***      -2.57***      0.09        0.42      -3.64***      5.67***      -2.57***      0.09
               1941 - 50    6.91***     -4.10***      3.25***      -3.40***      0.11      6.91***     -4.10***      3.25***       -3.4***      0.11
               1951 - 60    4.30***     -4.72***        1.16       -4.24***      0.15      4.30***     -4.72***        1.16       -4.24***      0.15
               1961 - 70   13.97***     -6.06***       1.39**      -4.51***      0.30      13.4***     -7.70***       0.15        -4.21***      0.33
               1971 - 80   10.05***     -6.98***      3.99***      -6.41***      0.23      9.44***     -7.36***      1.89**       -3.55***      0.23
               1981 - 90   11.94***     -5.83***      4.10***      -6.29***      0.19      7.81***     -5.40***        0.60       -5.00***      0.18
               1991 - 00   11.14***     -5.00***      3.62***      -4.64***      0.16      9.51***     -6.04***      1.97***      -5.73***      0.24
               2001 - 10    6.06***     -3.85***      5.51***      -4.33***      0.11      2.48**      -4.32***      4.51***      -6.54***      0.19
Table 3
Actual and predicted leverage values.
    The sample includes ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or the Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities, and
railroads are excluded. Predicted leverage in columns (2) and (7) is estimated based on coeﬃcients from a panel regression with ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, estimated over
1925 – 1945, of debt to capital on ﬁrm size, net PP&E / Assets, market-to-book assets, EBIT / Assets, earnings volatility, and asset growth. Firm size is deﬁned
as the log of total sales scaled by GDP. Earnings volatility is the standard deviation of EBIT/Assets over the trailing 10 years, averaged over each 2-digit SIC
industry group. Period ﬁxed eﬀects in columns (4) and (9) are the estimated coeﬃcients on indicators for each given ﬁve-year period from a panel regression of
debt to capital on the same set of control variables, estimated over the whole sample period. *** indicates statistical signiﬁcance at the 1% level. To calculate
the predicted change in leverage in columns (5) and (10) for a given 5-year period t to (t + 4), we ﬁrst estimate the same panel regression described above over
1925 to (t − 1). The predicted change in leverage is then the average predicted value over t to (t + 4) minus the average ﬁtted value over (t − 5) to (t − 1).

                                                 Full Sample                                                 NYSE Sample
                           (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)
                          Avg.     Predicted   Actual -       Period      Predicted     Avg.    Predicted    Actual -      Period      Predicted
                         D/Cap      D/Cap      Predicted    ﬁxed eﬀects   ∆ D/Cap      D/Cap     D/Cap       Predicted   ﬁxed eﬀects   ∆ D/Cap
               1945-49     12.5         10.2       2.3         3.1***        -0.6       12.5       10.2         2.3         3.5***        -0.6
               1950-54     16.9         10.7       6.2         6.7***        0.7        16.9       10.7         6.2         7.0***        0.7
               1955-59     19.2         11.7       7.5         7.8***        1.0        19.2       11.7         7.5         7.7***        1.0
               1960-64     22.5         11.2      11.3         10.5***       -0.7       21.5       12.1         9.4         9.5***         0.5
               1965-69     31.1         10.9      20.2         17.8***       -0.6       30.0       12.8        17.2        16.8***         1.0
               1970-74     33.6         8.8       24.8         20.4***       -3.0       33.7       12.0        21.7        19.6***        -1.2
               1975-79     34.3         7.8       26.5         20.8***       -3.4       33.2       11.5        21.7        19.5***        -2.2
               1980-84     32.9         7.8       25.1         19.9***       -0.8       33.7       11.6        22.1        18.7***        -0.5
               1985-89     35.7         7.0       28.7         25.1***       -2.0       39.1       11.0        28.1        24.9***        -2.8
               1990-94     30.8         7.5       23.3         23.0***       -0.2       38.8       10.8        28.0        25.2***        -0.2
               1995-99     30.3         8.8       21.5         24.6***       0.6        41.4       11.2        30.2        28.2***         0.0
               2000-04     27.8         8.3       19.5         23.6***       0.8        37.9       11.1        26.8        26.7***         0.7
               2005-10     27.9         8.4       19.5         23.8***       -0.0       38.2       11.1        27.1        27.3***         0.0
Table 4
Aggregate corporate leverage and the economic environment.
   The sample includes all unregulated industrial ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Com-
pustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1925 - 2010. The table presents results of OLS regressions of aggregate
corporate book leverage (Debt-to-Capital) on various proxies for changes in the economic environment along with
aggregate ﬁrm characteristics and macroeconomic control variables. See appendix for variable deﬁnitions. The de-
pendent variable in columns (1) through (6) is the annual aggregate debt to capital ratio, and in column (7) is the
aggregate ratio of debt to the sum of debt and preferred stock. The regressions are performed in levels in Panel A
and ﬁrst diﬀerences in Panel B. Newey-West standard errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute all
t-statistics (in parentheses). Statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels are indicated by ***, ** and *,
respectively.



                                            Panel A: Level Regressions
                                                                                                            Debt /
                                                            Debt / Capital                                (Debt+Pref.)
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)
 Net Tax Incentive              -0.113                                                        -0.224∗∗      0.572∗∗∗
                               (-1.23)                                                        (-2.23)        (4.67)
                                                   ∗∗
 GDP growth vol.                          -0.051                                               0.013
                                           (-2.50)                                             (0.86)
 Intermediary Share Debt                                 -0.104                                0.079
                                                         (-1.40)                               (1.35)
 Intermediary Share Equity                               -0.274                              -0.388∗∗∗
                                                         (-1.38)                              (-3.07)
 Output of Finance                                                  13.107∗∗∗                14.210∗∗∗
                                                                      (4.49)                   (4.80)
 Gov’t Leverage                                                                  -0.085∗∗∗    -0.080∗∗
                                                                                  (-2.76)     (-2.09)
 Macroeconomic Factors
 3-month Tbill rate           1.027∗∗∗     0.837∗∗∗      1.099∗∗∗    0.486∗∗      0.618∗∗      0.262        1.017∗∗∗
                                (4.36)      (3.53)        (4.53)      (2.14)       (2.32)      (1.45)        (4.08)
 BAA - AAA Yield Spread       -3.412∗∗∗   -3.559∗∗∗     -4.103∗∗∗   -4.279∗∗∗    -4.527∗∗∗   -4.163∗∗∗      -2.436∗∗
                               (-3.28)     (-3.49)       (-3.65)     (-4.31)      (-4.31)     (-5.37)       (-2.27)
 Inﬂation                      -0.024       0.153        -0.085       0.102        0.103       0.049       -0.484∗∗∗
                               (-0.20)     (1.26)        (-0.84)     (0.95)       (1.02)      (0.45)         (-3.44)
 Market Return                 -0.477      1.577          0.803      2.888∗       1.789      4.893∗∗∗        -1.856
                               (-0.30)     (1.04)        (0.46)      (1.98)       (1.28)      (3.63)         (-1.08)
 Real GDP Growth                0.072      0.086         0.064       0.116∗       -0.003       0.083         -0.126
                                (0.89)     (1.15)        (0.77)      (1.70)       (-0.05)      (1.07)        (-1.16)
 Firm Characteristics
 Proﬁtability                 -1.269∗∗∗   -1.406∗∗∗     -1.270∗∗∗   -1.388∗∗∗    -1.409∗∗∗   -1.186∗∗∗       -0.358
                               (-4.12)     (-4.46)       (-3.72)     (-4.82)      (-4.31)     (-5.27)        (-1.36)
 Intangible Assets             -0.286      -0.109        -0.150     -0.634∗∗∗    -0.210∗     -0.610∗∗∗       -0.033
                               (-1.61)     (-0.93)       (-0.80)     (-4.36)     (-1.71)      (-3.98)        (-0.17)
 Market-to-Book Assets        -5.779∗∗∗   -8.526∗∗∗     -8.470∗∗∗   -13.131∗∗∗   -8.680∗∗∗   -16.690∗∗∗      1.494
                               (-2.66)     (-3.35)       (-3.01)      (-4.95)     (-3.41)      (-6.07)       (0.72)
 Trend                           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
 Observations                    85           85           84           85          85           84            85
 Adjusted R2                    0.940       0.943        0.942        0.958       0.946        0.970         0.972
                                Panel B: First Diﬀerence Regressions
                                                                                              Debt /
                                                  Debt / Capital                            (Debt+Pref.)
                              (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
Net Tax Incentive           0.055                                                0.039         0.207
                            (1.05)                                               (0.58)        (1.63)
GDP growth vol.                       0.001                                      0.019∗
                                      (0.09)                                     (1.84)
Intermediary Share Debt                         -0.047                           -0.001
                                                (-0.55)                          (-0.01)
Intermediary Share Equity                       -0.179                           -0.188
                                                (-1.07)                          (-1.10)
Output of Finance                                         5.508∗∗                5.261∗
                                                           (2.07)                 (1.78)
Gov’t Leverage                                                      -0.078∗∗∗   -0.072∗∗∗
                                                                     (-2.97)     (-2.66)
Macroeconomic Factors
3-month Tbill rate          -0.034    -0.042    -0.042    -0.009     -0.093      -0.052        0.102
                            (-0.25)   (-0.32)   (-0.30)   (-0.07)    (-0.63)     (-0.34)       (0.95)
BAA - AAA Yield Spread       0.918     0.927     0.681     0.849      0.594       0.238        0.370
                             (1.62)    (1.64)   (1.21)    (1.55)     (1.19)      (0.44)        (0.68)
Inﬂation                    0.103∗∗   0.108∗∗   0.097∗    0.095∗     0.077∗      0.040         -0.043
                            (2.15)    (2.10)    (1.81)    (1.84)     (1.76)      (0.82)        (-0.55)
Market Return               -0.593    -0.578    -0.482    0.558      -0.453      0.291          0.082
                            (-0.68)   (-0.64)   (-0.55)   (0.52)     (-0.55)     (0.30)        (0.09)
Real GDP Growth             -0.054    -0.053    -0.051    -0.023    -0.084∗∗     -0.059        -0.058
                            (-1.64)   (-1.57)   (-1.42)   (-0.60)    (-2.62)     (-1.41)       (-1.21)
Firm Characteristics
Proﬁtability                -0.095    -0.103    -0.108    -0.160     -0.150      -0.235        0.178
                            (-0.63)   (-0.68)   (-0.66)   (-1.04)    (-1.11)     (-1.65)       (0.83)
Intangible Assets           0.037     0.007     -0.035    -0.131     -0.036      -0.187        -0.125
                            (0.16)    (0.03)    (-0.15)   (-0.50)    (-0.15)     (-0.64)       (-0.87)
Market-to-Book Assets       -0.275    -0.290    -0.900    -3.423     -0.164      -3.307        -0.716
                            (-0.19)   (-0.20)   (-0.55)   (-1.49)    (-0.13)     (-1.49)       (-0.49)
Observations                  84        84        83        84         84          83            84
             2
Adjusted R                  0.121     0.115     0.112     0.172      0.188       0.198         0.080
Table 5
Aggregate security issuance and economic environment proxies.
   The sample includes all unregulated industrial ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Com-
pustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1925 - 2010. The table presents results of OLS regressions of aggregate
net debt (Panels A and C) and equity issuance (Panel B) on various proxies for changes in the economic environment
along with aggregate ﬁrm characteristics and macroeconomic control variables. See appendix for variable deﬁnitions.
Aggregate issuance is scaled by lagged aggregate assets in Panels A and B and by contemporaneous aggregate in-
vestment in Panel C. Newey-West standard errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute all t-statistics
(in parentheses). Statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels are indicated by ***, ** and *, respectively.

                                              Panel A: Debt Issuance / At−1
                               Net               GDP              Interm. Share Debt    Output of           Gov’t Debt
                          Tax Incentive       growth vol.        Interm. Share Equity    Finance             Issuance
         Proxy               -0.044              -0.001                 0.009             3.198∗∗∗           -0.044∗∗∗
                             (-1.03)             (-0.08)                (0.27)              (2.72)            (-2.65)
                                                                        0.080
                                                                        (0.95)
         Trend                 Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes
         Macro vars            Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes
         Firm controls         Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes
         Observations          85                 84                     85                   85               85
         Adjusted R2          0.453              0.443                  0.442               0.491             0.460
                                              Panel B: Equity Issuance / At−1
                                     Net             GDP             Interm. Share Debt      Output of         Gov’t Debt
                             Tax Incentive        growth vol.       Interm. Share Equity       Finance           Issuance
                                                                                                       ∗∗
     Proxy                       -0.022              -0.003                -0.006              2.100              -0.016
                                 (-0.63)             (-0.72)               (-0.20)              (2.19)            (-1.22)
     Interm. Share Equity                                                   0.033
                                                                            (0.74)
     Trend                           Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes
     Macro vars                      Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes
     Firm controls                   Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes               Yes
     Observations                  85                 84                     85                   85               85
     Adjusted R2                  0.507              0.500                  0.500               0.539             0.507
                                            Panel C: Debt Issuance / Investment
                                      Net               GDP           Interm. Share Debt      Output of         Gov’t Debt
                              Tax Incentive        growth vol.       Interm. Share Equity      Finance            Issuance
      Proxy                       -0.068                0.014               -0.035             14.747∗∗∗          -0.175∗
                                  (-0.32)               (0.30)              (-0.21)              (2.70)           (-1.97)
      Interm. Share Equity                                                     0.390
                                                                               (0.85)
      Trend                           Yes                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes              Yes
      Macro vars                      Yes                 Yes                    Yes                 Yes              Yes
      Firm controls                   Yes                 Yes                    Yes                 Yes              Yes
      Observations                     85                  84                    85                  85                 85
      Adjusted R2                    0.375              0.374                  0.377               0.413             0.385
                                                                                          State               Local
                                          120                                             Federal


                                          100
              Government Debt / GDP (%)




                                          80


                                          60


                                          40


                                          20


                                           0
                                                1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980      1990   2000   2010


Fig. A.1. Government leverage. The ﬁgure presents a stacked area chart of government debt at the federal, state,
and local levels. We normalize these levels by GDP.
                                           Panel A: Moodys/Compustat vs. Flow-of-Funds (Debt / Assets)


                                          40


                                                                                           Flow−of−Funds

                                          30
                     Total Debt / A (%)




                                          20




                                          10
                                                      Moodys/Compustat



                                          0
                                               1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010



Fig. A.2. Comparing aggregate leverage series. In Panel A, the solid line is the aggregate ratio of total debt to
book value of assets (historical cost) for the nonﬁnancial corporate sector from U.S. Flow of Funds. The dashed line
shows the comparable series for our sample of ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat
or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. In Panel B, the solid line shows the aggregate ratio of total debt to assets (left
plot) or total debt to capital (right plot) by year for the nonﬁnancial corporate sector from U.S. Flow of Funds.
The dashed line shows the analogous series from the Statistics of Income data. In both cases, total debt includes
accounts payable. Panel C presents total debt to capital (left plot) and long-term debt to capital (right plot) by year
for industrial sectors excluding utilities, railroads and telecommunications, from Statistics of Income (dashed line)
and the sample of ﬁrms from Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals described in Figure 1. Accounts payable
are included in total debt only. Panel D presents aggregate total debt to capital (left plot) and long-term debt to
capital (right plot) by year from Statistics of Income for utilities, railroads and telecommunications ﬁrms (solid line)
and all other industrial ﬁrms (dashed line).
Fig. A.2 (continued )



                                        Panel B: Flow-of-Funds vs. Statistics of Income (SOI) data

                                  Total Debt / Assets                                                               Total Debt / Capital
  50%                                                                              60%


                                                                                   50%
  40%
                                                                                                                                               Flow−of−Funds
                                                 Flow−of−Funds
                                                                                   40%                   SOI
  30%

                                                                                   30%
                          SOI
  20%
                                                                                   20%

  10%
                                                                                   10%


    0                                                                                0
        1920    1930   1940     1950   1960   1970     1980   1990   2000   2010         1920     1930      1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000     2010




                                   Panel C: Moodys vs. Statistics of Income data: Unregulated sectors

                                 Total Debt / Capital                                                                LT Debt / Capital
  60%                                                                              40%

                                                     SOI
  50%
                                                                                   30%
  40%                                                                                                                                     Moodys/Compustat


  30%                                                                              20%
                                                                                                         SOI


  20%
                                                                                   10%
               Moodys/Compustat
  10%


    0                                                                                0
        1920    1930   1940     1950   1960   1970     1980   1990   2000   2010         1920     1930      1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000     2010




                                 Panel D: Statistics of Income data: Regulated vs. Unregulated sectors

                                 Total Debt / Capital                                                                LT Debt / Capital
  60%                                                                              50%


  50%             Regulated
                                                                                   40%
                                                                                                Regulated

  40%
                                                                                   30%

  30%

                                                                                   20%
                        Unregulated
  20%

                                                                                   10%                      Unregulated
  10%


    0                                                                                0
        1920    1930   1940     1950   1960   1970     1980   1990   2000   2010         1920     1930      1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000     2010
