NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

URBAN POPULATION AND AMENITIES:
THE NEOCLASSICAL MODEL OF LOCATION
David Albouy
Bryan Stuart
Working Paper 19919
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19919

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

For their help and input we thank David Agrawal, Rebecca Diamond, Jesse Gregory, Andrew
Haughwout, Jordan Rappaport, and Will Strange; conference participants at the 2012 Urban
Economics Association annual meeting, 2012 National Tax Association annual meeting, 2013
American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association annual meeting, 2013 Canadian
Economics Association annual meeting, 2013 National Bureau of Economic Research Summer
Institute meeting in Urban Economics, 2013 Housing Urban Labor Macro meeting in Atlanta;
and seminar participants at Calgary, Cornell, the Cleveland Federal Reserve, Georgia State
University, IEB Barcelona, the Kansas City Federal Reserve, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota
(Applied Economics), NYU Abu Dhabi, the Paris School of Economics, Purdue, Sciences
Politiques, and the Toulouse School of Economics. During work on this project, Albouy was
supported by the NSF grant SES-0922340 and Stuart was supported by the NICHD (T32
HD0007339) as a UM Population Studies Center Trainee. This paper was previously presented as
“Urban Quantities and Amenities.” Any mistakes are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by David Albouy and Bryan Stuart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Urban Population and Amenities: The Neoclassical Model of Location
David Albouy and Bryan Stuart
NBER Working Paper No. 19919
February 2014, Revised August 2016
JEL No. H20,R12,R23,R31
ABSTRACT
We analyze a neoclassical general-equilibrium model to explain cross-metro variation in
population, density, and land supply based on three amenity types: quality-of-life, productivity in
tradables, and productivity in non-tradables. We develop a new method to estimate elasticities of
housing and land supply, and local-productivity estimates, from cross-sectional density and landarea data. From wage and housing-cost indices, the model explains half of U.S. density and total
population variation, and finds that quality of life determines locations more than employment
opportunities. We show how changing quality of life, relaxing land-use regulations, or
neutralizing federal taxes can redistribute populations massively.

David Albouy
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801-3606
and NBER
albouy@illinois.edu
Bryan Stuart
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan St.
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
bastuart@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Academics and policy makers have long sought to understand the household location decisions
that shape human geography, such as the decline of the Rust Belt and the rise of the Sunbelt (e.g.,
Blanchard and Katz, 1992; Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Tobio, 2014). For decades, economists have
used the neoclassical model pioneered by Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982) to understand how
amenities — broadly defined — determine wages and housing rents across locations.1 Despite its
widespread application, no one has yet to use it to explain how amenities may determine precise
population levels and densities city by city, nor the possibile inferences such predictions open up.
Below, we develop the neoclassical model analytically and empirically in its full generality. We
find it explains location choices across metropolitan areas rather well based on amenities inferred
from local wages and rents. Moreover, we find that quality-of-life amenities — originating mainly
from climate and geography (Albouy, 2008) — explain location decisions more than employment
opportunities. Housing production possibilities may play an even larger role. Furthermore, we
develop novel methods to estimate local heterogeneity in housing and land supply — separately —
from level differences in population and land area. This method passes specification tests and produces plausible results. Accounting for local heterogeneity, we then infer how urban populations
could change dramatically with shifts in amenities, or reforms in regulatory or federal tax policies.
The theory models a system of cities with three inputs — mobile labor and capital, and immobile land — and two outputs — a good tradable across cities, and a home good that is not.
Local amenities vary in three dimensions: quality-of-life for households, and trade-productivity
and home-productivity for firms. The first two concern the classic problem of whether jobs follow people or people follow jobs, while the third addresses whether both jobs and people follow
housing or other non-traded goods (e.g., Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saks 2006, Saiz 2010). Our crosssectional method assesses the importance of these dimensions, without the timing assumptions
critical to time-series studies (e.g., Carlino and Mills 1987; Hoogstra, Florax, and Dijk 2005).
1
We name this the “neoclassical model” of urban location because of its standard modeling apparatus and its
particular resemblance to the two-sector models of Hecksher (1919) and Ohlin (1924) on trade, Uzawa (1961) and
Stiglitz (1967) on growth, and Harberger (1962) on tax incidence.

1

In section 2, we derive the structural relationships between prices and quantities, such as population, and the three amenity types. Our analytical expressions clarify how these relationships
depend on cost and expenditure shares, tax rates, land supply, and — most notably — substitution
responses in consumption and production. We go beyond work by Roback (1982), Glaeser and
Gottlieb (2009) and Albouy (2016), to show how to use population levels, in addition to wages and
rents, to identify home-productivity, improve estimates of trade-productivity, and infer land values.
Parametrizing the model to reflect the U.S. economy, section 3 demonstrates that density —
population holding land area constant — is more sensitive to amenities than are prices. This is
consistent with how density varies by an order of magnitude more than wages and rents across
metros. The analysis also makes clear how little population can change with local conditions
without flexible production of housing and other non-traded sectors.
In section 4, we map commonly estimated reduced-form elasticities – e.g., of local labor or
housing supply from Bartik (1991) – to underlying structural parameters. We obtain large elasticities that resemble estimates from the literature, implying that the level differences in population
we model may be consistent with long-run changes over time. This suggests the model may be
used credibly to simulate relationships which have yet to be estimated.
In two parts, Section 5 examines the relationship between population densities of 276 U.S.
metro areas with amenities. First — assuming home-productivity is constant — we find the
parametrized model explains half of the observed variation in population density using wage and
rent data, without estimating a single parameter.2 We then demonstrate visually how differences in
home-productivity may be used to explain the remaining lack of fit. Together, our three amenity
measures provide a full accounting for why people live where they do.
Second, we develop a non-linear regression model that uses variation in land-use regulation and
geography to estimate city-specific heterogeneity in productivity and factor substitution in the nontraded sector. These estimates, identified from level data, conform to predictions that regulations
and rugged terrain impede efficiency and reduce substitution. Our approach builds on interesting
2

Albouy (2016) discusses how to use wage and rent data to infer quality-of-life and trade-productivity.

2

work by Saks (2008) and Saiz (2010), but differs by focusing on cross-sectional variation nested
in a general-equilibrium model
Section 6 supplements the housing supply equation in the neoclassical model with a novel
land supply equation. This relaxes its problematic assumption of fixed land, and helps to explain
total population differences across metros, rather than density alone. Estimates imply that land
endowments are determined by local geography, and that the price elasticity of land supply is near
one but falls with local regulations and rugged terrain. The land-supply model explains half the
variation in total population levels using wages and rents alone.
Using these estimates, section 7 conducts simple counterfactual simulations. Quality of life
explains location choices more than trade-productivity, implying jobs follow people more than the
opposite. City-by-city, the implications are provocative: for example, if Chicago had the same
quality-of-life amenities as San Diego, the population of its urban area would quadruple. Finally,
we demonstrate how the model can be used to perform general policy experiments, such as relaxing land-use constraints or neutralizing the geographic impact of federal taxes. These two reforms
would produce mutually reinforcing effects: people would move to larger cities in droves, particularly in the West and Northeast, raising real income and quality of life.
Based on our understanding of the previous literature, we are the first to derive, analyze, and
assess predictions of a flexible neoclassical model for both total population and density in levels
across specific metros. Given its prominence, generality, and orthodoxy, the model is a natural
benchmark. Importantly, its assumptions are transparent and pre-determined: they are all contained in Roback (1982) except for federal taxes, from Albouy (2009), which provides our pre-set
parametrization. Our work here is more of an examination of an established model than an endorsement of it. We make no ad-hoc changes. Our supplementary land-supply equation merely
generalzes it to handle the often-neglected fact that cities vary in land area.
Our analytical presentation helps to assess the role of core urban forces — regarding jobs,
quality of life, and housing — that may themselves depend on deeper causes. It abstracts from
complexities arising from less orthodox elements such as moving costs, search frictions, trade

3

costs, and path dependence. Yet a strength of the model is that it is easily amended to handle
deficiencies, which can sometimes be intuited city by city. For instance, Albouy et al. (2015) show
how to do add heterogeneous skills and preferences, based on observed and unobserved types.
The general neoclassical framework that we develop contributes in several ways to previous
work. First, our model relaxes a number of limiting restrictions, e.g., that productivity in both
home and and traded-production are identical; or, that housing supply elasticities are identical,
greater than 2, or exactly 2. It restricts neither input markets (e.g., labor is used in non-traded
production), nor elasticities of substitution in production and consumption (e.g., as opposed to a
Cobb-Douglas economy). Relaxing these restrictions leads to a deeper understanding of urban
forces and affects the model’s quantitative predictions. Second, we show how to use density data
rather than restrict it to be uniform or to depend strictly on the ratio of wages to rents. Third, the
data we use are widely available, and are not imputed coarsely from other sources. Fourth, we consider population levels for specific cities — not broad distributions, such as Zipf’s Law — taking
amenity estimates for each city seriously. Fifth, our identification is relatively transparent and does
not rely on non-linearities, which are often impossible to specify using economic theory alone.
Sixth, the neoclassical model does not rely on unobservable and inherently untestable differences
in tastes. While taste heterogeneity may explain frictions to mobility, it is a weak explanation for
why so many live in Dallas as opposed to Dothan.3
3

Here we list a few examples; see Appendix G for more details. We do not argue that these papers are unjustified
in making various simplifying assumptions. However, to assess the explanatory power of the baseline model, and to
understand the importance of common simplifying assumptions, it is necessary to consider a general model without
these modifications.
Haughwout and Inman (2001) has no local production and is used for a one-city simulation. Rappaport (2008a,
2008b) assumes equal productivity, fixes land supply, and engages in only a two-city simulation. Glaeser and Gottlieb
(2009) assume unitary elasticities of substitution (and thus uniform housing supply elasticities), fix separate land
supplies in home and traded-production, and consider only a single amenity. Lee and Li (2013) have a similar model
with multiple amenities to explain Zipf’s Law. Saiz (2010) and Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013) use monocentric
city models with constant density, no land in trade-production, no labor in home-production, and inelastic housing
demand. Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg have an elasticity of housing supply of exactly 2, while Saiz’s are merely
constrained to always be above 2. Most of these models conflict with the majority of Saiz’s empirical estimates being
heterogeneous and below 2. Ahlfeldt et al. (2015), who focus on within-city location choices, constrain elasticities of
substitution in demand and traded production to be one. Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2014) and Hsieh and Moretti (2015)
assume unitary elasticities of substitution, and exclude labor from non-traded production. Diamond (2016) fixes land
supply, has no land in traded-production, no labor in home-production, and fixes housing demand. Allen and Arkolakis
(2014), Bartelme (2015), Caliendo et al. (2015), and Fajgelbaum et al. (2015), consider trade costs and monopolistic
competition in models that start from, yet restrict, the neoclassical benchmark in ways already mentioned.

4

2

The Neoclassical Model of Location

2.1

System of Cities with Consumption and Production

The national economy contains many cities, indexed by j, which trade with each other and share
a homogeneous population of mobile households. Cities differ in three attributes, each of which
is an index summarizing the value of amenities; quality-of-life Qj raises household utility, tradeproductivity AjX lowers costs in the traded sector, and home-productivity AjY lowers costs in the
non-traded sector. Households supply a single unit of labor in their city of residence, earning local
wage wj . They consume a numeraire traded good x and a non-traded “home” good y with local
price pj . All input and output markets are perfectly competitive, and all prices and per-capita
quantities are homogeneous within cities.
Firms produce traded and home goods out of land, capital, and labor. Land, Lj , is heterogeneous across cities, immobile, and receives a city-specific price rj . Each city’s land supply
Lj0 L̃j (rj ) depends on an exogenous endowment Lj0 and a supply function L̃j (rj ). The supply of
capital in each city K j is perfectly elastic at the price ı̄. Labor, N j , is supplied by households who
have identical size, tastes, and own diversified portfolios of land and capital, which pay an income
P
P
P
R = j rj Lj /NT OT from land and I = j ı̄K j /NT OT from capital, where NT OT = j N j is
the total population. Total income mj = wj + R + I varies across cities only as wages vary. Out
of this income households pay a linear federal income tax τ mj , which is redistributed in uniform
lump-sum payments T .4 Household preferences are modeled by a utility function U (x, y; Qj )
which is quasi-concave over x, y, and Qj . The expenditure function for a household in city j is
e(pj , u; Qj ) ≡ minx,y {x + pj y : U (x, y; Qj ) ≥ u}. Quality-of-life Q enters neutrally into the
utility function and is normalized so that e(pj , u; Qj ) = e(pj , u)/Qj , where e(pj , u) ≡ e(pj , u; 1).
j
)
Firms produce traded and home goods according to the function X j = AjX FX (LjX , NXj , KX

and Y j = AjY FY (LjY , NYj , KYj ), where FX and FY are weakly concave and exhibit constant returns
to scale, with Hicks-neutral productivity. Unit cost in the traded good sector is cX (rj , wj , ı̄; AjX ) ≡
4

The model can be generalized to allow nonlinear income taxes. Our application adjusts for state taxes and tax
benefits to owner-occupied housing.

5

minL,N,K {rj L + wj N + ı̄K : AjX F (L, N, K) = 1}. Let cX (rj , wj , ı̄; AjX ) = cX (rj , wj , ı̄)/AjX ,
where cX (rj , wj , ı̄) ≡ cX (rj , wj , ı̄; 1) is the uniform unit cost function. A symmetric definition
holds for unit cost in the home good sector cY .

2.2

Equilibrium of Prices, Quantities, and Amenities

Each city is described by a block-recursive system of sixteen equations in sixteen endogenous variables: three prices pj , wj , rj , two per-capita consumption quantities, xj , y j , and eleven city-level
j
production quantities X j , Y j , N j , NXj , NYj , Lj , LjX , LjY , K j , KX
, KYj . The endogenous variables

depend on three exogenous attributes Qj , AjX , AjY and the land endowment Lj0 . As in the HecksherOhlin model, the system first determines prices — where most researchers stop — then, per-capita
consumption quantities and city-level production quantities. The recursive structure vanishes if
amenities depend endogenously on quantities, as described below. We adopt a “small open city”
assumption and take nationally determined variables ū, ı̄, I, R, T as given.
We log-linearize the system, as in Jones (1965), to obtain a model that can be solved analytically with linear methods. The full nonlinear system is explained in Appendix A. In Appendix B,
we verify that the log-linearized model generally offers satisfying approximations. The non-linear
model is too costly to compute with hundreds of cities, for benefits we are not confident of.
The log-linearized model involves several economic parameters, evaluated at the national average. For households, denote the shares of gross expenditures spent on the traded and home good
as sx ≡ x/m and sy ≡ py/m; the shares of income received from land, labor, and capital income
as sR ≡ R/m, sw ≡ w/m, and sI ≡ I/m. For firms, denote the cost shares of land, labor, and
capital in the traded good sector as θL ≡ rLX /X, θN ≡ wNX /X, and θK ≡ ı̄KX /X; the equivalents in the home good sector as φL , φN , and φK . Finally, denote the shares of land, labor, and
capital used to produce traded goods as λL ≡ LX /L, λN ≡ NX /N , and λK ≡ KX /K. To fix
ideas, assume the home good is more cost-intensive in land relative to labor than the traded good,
both absolutely, φL ≥ θL , and relatively, φL /φN ≥ θL /θN , implying λL ≤ λN . For any variable z,
we denote the log differential by ẑ j ≡ ln z j − ln z̄ ∼
= (z j − z̄) /z̄, where z̄ is the national average.
6

2.2.1

Equilibrium Price Conditions for Households and Firms

Since households are fully mobile, they receive the same utility ū across all inhabited cities. Firms
earn zero profits in equilibrium. These conditions imply

−sw (1 − τ )ŵj + sy p̂j = Q̂j

(1)

θL r̂j + θN ŵj = ÂjX

(2)

φL r̂j + φN ŵj − p̂j = ÂjY .

(3)

Equations (1) - (3) simultaneously determine the city-level prices p̂j , r̂j , and ŵj as functions of the
three attributes Q̂j , ÂjX , and ÂjY plus cost and expenditure shares and the marginal tax rate. These
conditions provide a one-to-one mapping between unobservable city attributes and potentially observable prices. Households pay more for housing and get paid less in nicer areas. Firms pay more
to their factors in more trade-productive areas, and they do the same relative to output prices in
more home-productive areas.5

2.2.2

Consumption Conditions for Households

In their consumption x̂j and ŷ j , households face a budget constraint and obey a tangency condition:


sx x̂j + sy p̂j + ŷ j = (1 − τ )sw ŵj
x̂j − ŷ j = σD p̂j

(4)
(5)

where ŵj and p̂j are determined by the price conditions. Equation (5) depends on the elasticity of
substitution in consumption, σD ≡ −e · (∂ 2 e/∂p2 )/[∂e/∂p · (e − p · ∂e/∂p)] = −∂ ln(y/x)/∂ ln p.
Substituting equation (1) into equations (4) and (5) produces the consumption solutions x̂j =
sy σD p̂j − Q̂j and ŷ j = −sx σD p̂j − Q̂j . Because of homothetic preferences, in areas where Qj is
higher, but pj is the same, households consume less of x and y in equal proportions, so the ratio
5

Albouy (2009, 2016) examines these conditions in detail.

7

y/x remains constant — similar to an income effect. Holding Qj constant, areas with higher pj
induce households to reduce the ratio y/x through a substitution effect.
Higher values of σD approximate a more general model with greater taste heterogeneity for
home goods. In such a model, households with stronger tastes for y sort to areas with a lower p.6

2.2.3

Production Conditions for Traded and Home-Good Sectors

j
Given prices and per-capita consumption, output X̂ j , Ŷ j , employment N̂ j , N̂Xj , N̂Yj , capital K̂ j , K̂X
, K̂Yj ,

and land L̂j , L̂jX , L̂jY are determined by eleven equations describing production and market clearing. The first six are conditional factor demands describing how input demands depend on output,
productivity, and relative input prices:


LN
NK j
N̂Xj = X̂ j − ÂjX + θL σX
r̂j − ŵj − θK σX
ŵ

(6)

LN
KL j
L̂jX = X̂ j − ÂjX + θN σX
(ŵj − r̂j ) − θK σX
r̂

(7)

j
KL j
NK j
K̂X
= X̂ j − ÂjX + θL σX
r̂ + θN σX
ŵ

(8)

N̂Yj = Ŷ j − ÂjY + φL σYLN (r̂j − ŵj ) − φK σYN K ŵj

(9)

L̂jY = Ŷ j − ÂjY + φN σYLN (ŵj − r̂j ) − φK σYKL r̂j

(10)

K̂Yj = Ŷ j − ÂjY + φL σYKL r̂j + φN σYN K ŵj

(11)

The dependence on input prices is determined by partial (Allen-Uzawa) elasticities of substitution
LN
in each sector for each pair of factors, e.g., σX
≡ cX · (∂ 2 cX /∂w∂r) / (∂cX /∂w · ∂cX /∂r). Our

baseline model assumes that production technology does not differ across cities, implying constant
elasticities; we relax this assumption for the housing sector below. To simplify, we also assume that
NK
KL
LN
partial elasticities within each sector are the same, i.e., σX
= σX
= σX
≡ σX , and similarly

for σY , as with a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function.
Higher values of σX correspond to more flexible production of the traded good, as firms can
6
At equilibrium utility levels, an envelope of the mobility conditions for each type forms that of a representative
household, with greater preference heterogeneity reflected as more flexible substitution. Roback (1980) discusses this
generalization as well as the below generalizations in production.

8

vary the proportion of inputs they employ. In a generalization with multiple traded goods sold at
fixed prices, firms specialize in producing goods for which their input costs are relatively low.7
A related argument exists for home goods. A higher value of σY means that housing producers
can better combine labor and capital to build taller buildings in areas with expensive land. For
non-housing home goods, retailers may use taller shelves and restaurants would hire extra servers
to make better use of space.8
Three conditions express the local resource constraints for labor, land, and capital under the
assumption that factors are fully employed:

N̂ j = λN N̂Xj + (1 − λN )N̂Yj

(12)

L̂j = λL L̂jX + (1 − λL )L̂jY

(13)

j
K̂ j = λK K̂X
+ (1 − λK )K̂Yj .

(14)

Equations (12)-(14) imply that sector-specific factor changes affect overall changes in proportion
to the factor share. Local land is determined by the supply function in log differences

L̂j = L̂j0 + εjL,r r̂j

(15)

with the endowment differential L̂j0 and the land supply elasticity εjL,r ≡ (∂ L̃j /∂r) · (rj /L̃j ).
Finally, the market clearing condition for home goods that demand equals supply is

N̂ j + ŷ j = Ŷ j .

(16)

Walras’ Law makes redundant the market clearing equation for traded output, which includes percapita net transfers from the federal government.
7

For example, areas with high land costs and low labor costs would produce goods that use labor intensively. A
representative zero-profit condition is formed by an envelope of the zero-profit conditions for each good, with a greater
variety of goods reflected in greater substitution possibilities.
8
If home goods are perfect substitutes, then an envelope of zero-profit conditions would form a representative zeroprofit condition. An alternative sufficient condition, which holds when considering traded goods, is that relative prices
of types of home goods do not vary across cities.

9

2.3

Total Population, Density, and Land

The log-linearized model readily separates intensive population differences holding land supply
constant, i.e. density, from extensive differences driven by land supply. If we define population
density as N∗j ≡ N j /Lj , then the total population differential is a linear function of differentials in
density, the land endowment, and land supply determined by rent:

N̂ j = N̂∗j + L̂j0 + εjL,r r̂j

(17)

where N̂∗j and r̂j depend on amenities Q̂j , ÂjX , ÂjY but the land endowment L̂j0 does not.9

2.4

Solving the Model for Relative Quantity Differences

We express solutions for the endogenous variables in terms of the amenity differentials Q̂j , ÂjX ,
and ÂjY . Only equations (1) - (3) are needed to solve the price differentials.




1
τ
λN
j
j
j
r̂ =
Q̂ + 1 −
sx ÂX + sy ÂY
sR λN − τ λL
λN
h
i
1
1
ŵj =
−λL Q̂j + (1 − λL )sx ÂjX − λL sy ÂjY
sw λN − τ λL
i
h
1
1
j
j
j
j
(λN − λL )Q̂ + (1 − τ ) (1 − λL )sx ÂX − (1 − τ ) λL sy ÂY
p̂ =
sy λN − τ λL
j

(18a)
(18b)
(18c)

Higher quality-of-life leads to higher land and home good prices but lower wages. Higher tradeproductivity increases all three prices, while higher home-productivity increases land prices but
decreases wages and the home good price.
9

In principle, land supply can vary on two different margins. At the extensive margin, an increase in land supply
corresponds to a growing city boundary. Extensive margin differences can be driven by the land endowment L̂j0 or the
supply function εjL,r r̂j . At the intensive margin, an increase in land supply takes the form of employing previously
unused land within a city’s border. The assumption of full utilization in (13) and (15), rules out unmeasured intensive
changes.

10

Putting solution (18c) in equations (4) and (5) yields the per-capita consumption differentials


σD (1 − τ ) σD (λN − λL ) − (λN − τ λL ) j
j
j
x̂ =
Q̂ + (1 − λL )sx ÂX − λL sy ÂY
λN − τ λL
σD (1 − τ )


sx σD (1 − τ ) sx σD (λN − λL ) + sy (λN − τ λL ) j
j
j
j
Q̂ + (1 − λL )sx ÂX − λL sy ÂY
ŷ = −
sy λN − τ λL
sx σD (1 − τ )
j

Households in home-productive areas substitute towards home goods and away from traded goods,
while households in trade-productive areas do the opposite. In nicer (high Q) areas, households
consume fewer home goods; whether they consume fewer traded goods is ambiguous: the substitution effect is positive, and the income effect is negative.
Solutions for the other quantities, which rely on equations (6) - (16), are more complicated
and harder to intuit. To simplify notation, we express the change in each quantity with respect to
amenities using three reduced-form elasticities, each composed of structural parameters. For our
central example, the population differential is written

N̂ j =εN,Q Q̂j + εN,AX ÂjX + εN,AY ÂjY + L̂j0 ,

(20)

where εN,Q is the elasticity of population with respect to quality-of-life; εN,AX and εN,AY are
defined similarly. In terms of structural parameters, the first reduced-form elasticity, εN,Q , is





λN − λL
sx (λN − λL )2
λL
λL λN
εN,Q =
+ σD
+ σX
+
λN
sy λN (λN − λL τ )
λN − λL τ sw
sR
 2


2
λL (1 − λN ) λN (1 − λL ) (λN − λL )
1
+ σY
+
−
λN − λL τ
sw λN
sR
sy λN


λN
+ εL,r
sR (λN − τ λL )

(21)

We provide similar expressions for εN,AX and εN,AY in Appendix C. The full structural solution to
(20) is obtained by substituting in these expressions.
Collecting terms for each structural elasticity in (21) highlights that nicer areas can have higher
population via five behavioral responses. The first term reflects how households consume fewer

11

goods from the income effect, and thus require less land per capita, e.g. by crowding into existing
housing. The second term, with σD , captures how households substitute away from land-intensive
goods, accepting additional crowding. The third, with σX , expresses how firms in the traded sector
substitute away from land towards labor and capital, freeing up space for households. The fourth,
with σY , reflects how home goods become less land intensive, e.g., buildings get taller. The fifth,
with εL,r , provides the population gain on the extensive margin from more land being used.
Each reduced-form elasticity between a quantity and amenity-type has up to five similar structural effects. Unlike the price solutions, (18a-18c), the quantity solutions require more epistemically demanding knowledge of substitution elasticities, i.e., of behavioral responses to prices.
Below we initially focus on quantity differences holding geography constant, i.e., focusing on
density. This case sets L̂j = 0. In section 6, we consider how to estimate εjL,r and L̂j0 .

2.5

Endogenous Amenities

The above set-up readily admits simple forms of endogenous amenities.10 We consider two common forms: positive economies of scale in traded production (or “agglomeration”), and negative economies in quality-of-life (or “congestion”). For simplicity, we assume that both processes follow a conventional power law and depend on density alone: AjX = AjX0 (N∗j )α and
Qj = Qj0 (N∗j )−γ , where AjX0 and Qj0 represent “natural advantages,” and α ≥ 0 and γ ≥ 0 are
reduced-form elasticities. Natural advantages may be determined by local geography or policies.
Economies of scale in productivity may be due to non-rival input sharing, improved matching in
labor markets, or knowledge spillovers (e.g., Jaffe et al. 1993, Glaeser 1999, Arzaghi and Henderson 2008, Davis and Dingel 2012, Baum-Snow 2013); diseconomies in quality-of-life may be due
to congestion, pollution, or crime.
10

Our model incorporates aspects of both locational fundamentals and increasing returns; see Davis and Weinstein
(2002). Its unique predictions make it less capable of representing historical path dependence (e.g., Bleakley and Lin
2012, 2015). However, mobility frictions discussed in appendix C.5 can help conserve it since population levels may
depend on past amenity levels levels that differ from current ones. The greater the frictions, the more populations may
depend on past amenities, or differences in how amenities were valued relative to now.

12

The feedback effects on density are easily expressed using the reduced-form notation:

N̂∗j = εN∗ ,Q (Q̂j0 − γ N̂∗j ) + εN∗ ,AX (ÂjX0 + αN̂∗j ) + εN∗ ,AY ÂjY 0


1
εN∗ ,Q Q̂j0 + εN∗ ,AX ÂjX0 + εN∗ ,AY ÂjY 0
=
1 + γεN∗ ,Q − αεN∗ ,AX
≡ ε̃N∗ ,Q Q̂j0 + ε̃N∗ ,AX ÂjX0 + ε̃N∗ ,AY ÂjY 0 ,

(22)

where εN∗ ,Q is the reduced-form elasticity of density with respect to quality-of-life, and AjY = AjY 0
is fixed. Equation (22) simply modifies the reduced-form elasticities to incorporate the multiplier
(1 + γεN∗ ,Q − αεN∗ ,AX )−1 , which determines whether the impacts of natural advantages are magnified by positive economies or dampened by negative ones.
This framework could be used to study more complicated forms of endogenous amenities, although these typically require more complicated solutions. Interesting extensions which deserve
attention in future work include accounting for spillovers across cities and examining the implications of a city’s internal structure. Appendix C.5 discusses an extension to the model with
imperfect mobility and preference heterogeneity. This reveals that decreasing willingness-to-pay
for a marginal resident to live in a city operates like — and may be confused for — congestion
costs.

2.6

Identification of Production Amenities and Land Values

While cross-metro data on wages and housing rents (which proxy for home-good prices) are readily
available, land values are not. As a result, we cannot identify trade and home-productivity from
(2) and (3).11 Our proposed solution is to use widely available data on population density as a
replacement for land values. Consider combining equations (2) and (3) to eliminate r̂j :


θL
θL j
θL j
p̂ + θN − φN
ŵj = ÂjX −
Â .
Inferred costs =
φL
φL
φL Y
j

(23)

Albouy, Ehrlich, and Shun (2016) estimate r̂j using transaction purchase data, which is only available for recent
years. Their analysis discusses several conceptual and empirical challenges from this approach. Moreover, land-value
data is generally not available in most years in most countries.
11

13

The left hand side of (23) equals traded producer costs inferred from wages and home good
prices. Trade-productivity raises these inferred costs, while home-productivity lowers them. Albouy (2016) assumes that home-productivity is constant, ÂjY = 0, so that land values may be
inferred from (3), and ÂjX equals the inferred costs. The ensuing estimates are biased downwards
in home-productive areas, although ÂX is only slightly biased if θL << φL .
Combining equations (1) and the analog of equation (20) for density yields the following expression, which says that “excess density” not explained by quality-of-life, on the left, must be
explained by either trade or home-productivity, on the right:

Excess densityj = N̂∗j − εN∗ ,Q [sy p̂j − sw (1 − τ )ŵj ] = εN∗ ,AX ÂjX + εN∗ ,AY ÂjY .
{z
}
|

(24)

Q̂j

Equations (23) and (24) are exactly identified: the inferred amenities perfectly predict density.
Solving these equations identifies each productivity from observable differentials N̂∗j , ŵj , and p̂j :
ÂjX
ÂjY

=
=

θL [N̂∗j − εN∗ ,Q (sy pj − sw (1 − τ )wj )] + φL εN∗ ,AY [ φθLL pj + (θN − φN φθLL )wj ]
θL εN∗ ,AX + φL εN∗ ,AY
φL [N̂∗j − εN∗ ,Q (sy pj − sw (1 − τ )wj )] − φL εN∗ ,AX [ φθLL pj + (θN − φN φθLL )wj ]
θL εN∗ ,AX + φL εN∗ ,AY

(25a)
(25b)

High excess density and high inferred costs imply high trade-productivity. Low inferred costs and
high excess density imply high home-productivity, with the latter effect stronger as φL > θL . We
solve for the value of land by substituting the above solutions into (2) or (3).

r̂j =

N̂∗j − εN∗ ,Q (sy p̂j − sw (1 − τ )ŵj ) − εN∗ ,AX θN ŵj − εN∗ ,AY (φN ŵj − p̂j )
θL εN∗ ,AX + φL εN∗ ,AY

(25c)

As seen in the numerator of (25c), this rent measure depends on density not explained either by
quality-of-life or productivity differences inferred from non-land prices.
The critical step underlying this approach is use of an observed quantity, population density, in
place of unobserved land rents. In principle, we could use data on population and land instead of

14

density, but our results would depend on the value of the land supply elasticity εL,r . There is no
consensus on the appropriate value of this parameter, although we attempt to estimate it below.

3
3.1

Parameter Choices and Reduced-Form Elasticities
Parameter Choices

The main parametrization we use, shown in Table 1, was set in Albouy (2009), who based it on
a literature review, without referring to density or population data. We focus on the substitution
elasticities, set to σD = σX = σY = 0.667. This is consistent with higher housing expenditures
in high-rent areas and a higher cost-share of land for housing in high-value areas. We choose
α = 0.06 for agglomeration economies in trade-productivity and γ = 0.015 for congestion effect
on quality-of-life, which are large for illustration purposes. Appendix D contains additional details
on the parametrization. Given the number of parameters, an exhaustive sensitivity analysis is not
feasible; we focus on sensitivity to substitution elasticities as they are the least-known and most
relevant.

3.2

Parametrized Reduced-Form Elasticities

Panel A of Table 2 demonstrates how the three reduced-form elasticities for population depend on
the structural elasticities, ignoring feedback effects. For example, the five ways that quality-of-life
increases population from (21) are given by: εN,Q ≈ 0.77+1.14σD +1.95σX +8.00σY +11.84εL,r .
Substitution in the housing sector stands out as the most important dimension for the response of
population density to amenities. The intuition is straightforward: increasing population density
without building densely strains other substitution margins: higher densities are accommodated
solely by increasing the occupancy of existing structures or releasing land from the traded-good

15

sector. When σD = σX = 0.667 and L̂j = 0, density and amenities are related through σY as:
N̂∗j ≈ (2.84 + 8.00σY )Q̂j + (0.79 + 2.06σY )ÂjX + (1.15 + 2.61σY )ÂjY .

(26)

Setting σY = 0.667 produces N̂∗j ≈ 8.17Q̂j + 2.16ÂjX + 2.88ÂjY . The elasticity of substitution in
non-traded production accounts for about two-thirds of the reduced-form elasticities.
A one-point increase in Q̂j has the value of a one-point increase in income, while one-point
increases in ÂjX and ÂjY have values of sx and sy of income due to their sector sizes. To compare
the effects of the three attributes, we normalize them to have equal value:

N̂∗j ≈ 8.17Q̂j + 3.38sx ÂjX + 8.01sy ÂjY .

(27)

Quality-of-life and home-productivity have large impacts on local population density: increasing
their value by one-percent of income results in a density increase of eight percentage points. Tradeproductivity’s impact is less than half as large. As a result, funds spent to attract households directly
may be more effective at boosting density than funds spent to attract firms.
Setting the marginal tax rate τ to zero reveals that taxes cause much of these asymmetries:
N̂∗j ≈ 6.32Q̂j +5.81sx ÂjX +7.55sy ÂjY . Taxes push workers away from from trade-productive areas
towards high quality-of-life and home-productive areas (Albouy 2009). Remaining asymmetries
arise mainly from the income effect from quality-of-life, crowding individuals into existing space,
and an output effect from home-productivity, providing additional residential space.
In a Cobb-Douglas economy, σD = σX = σY = 1, the implied elasticities are 35-50 percent
higher than if σ = 0.667. If substitution margins are inelastic, then assuming a Cobb-Douglas
economy – as many do – may inflate quantity predictions and associated welfare calculations.
Parametrizing the multiplier in (22) reveals the effects of agglomeration feedback:

(1 + γεN∗ ,Q − αεN∗ ,AX )−1 ≈ (1 + (0.015)(8.17) − (0.06)(2.16))−1 ≈ 1.01.

16

In this case, the positive and negative economies are small and largely offset each other, and so
biases from ignoring agglomeration feedback appear to be modest.
Table 3 displays the reduced-form elasticities for all endogenous prices and quantities: Panel A
for the baseline parametrization, and Panel B with geographically neutral federal taxes. Appendix
Table A.1 contains results with agglomeration effects. While we focus on population and density
here, many other quantities — such as capital stocks — deserve investigation. A key challenge for
these other quantities is that accurate data on them are generally unavailable across metro areas.

4

General Equilibrium Elasticities and Existing Estimates

Elasticities characterizing how population and housing respond to changes in prices are commonly
estimated and are often predicated on simpler models. The general equilibrium model here analyzes consumption and labor markets simultaneously, complementing empirical work in two
distinct ways. First, it clarifies restrictions used to identify estimates. Second, it may simulate
long-run effects that cannot be credibly estimated. The comparative statics of the neoclassical
model requires adjustments that may take decades, including adjustments in the housing stock, the
amortization of moving costs, and adaptation to local conditions.

4.1

Local Labor Supply and Demand

In partial equilibrium, increasing demand traces out a local labor supply curve. The immediate
analogy of an increase in labor demand here is an increase in trade-productivity; the following
ratio provides a general equilibrium elasticity of labor supply:
∂ N̂∗
∂ ŵ

=
Q̂,ÂY

∂ N̂∗ /∂ ÂX
∂ ŵ/∂ ÂX

≈ 0.66σD + 0.43σX + 1.88σY ≈ 1.98.

(28)

The resulting labor supply curve slopes upwards as higher density raises demand for home goods
and their prices, requiring higher wage compensation. A ceteris paribus increase in the wage,

17

holding home-good prices constant, does not identify a labor supply elasticity in this model. Since
trade-productivity increases home-good prices, a constant home-good price requires either a simultaneous decrease in quality-of-life, shifting in labor supply, or an increase in home-productivity,
shifting out housing supply.
Labor supply elasticity estimates in Bartik (1991), Blanchard and Katz (1992), and Notowidigdo
(2012) are in the range of 2 to 4, close to the values predicted in (28), especially if substitution elasticities are higher. Empirical estimates may be biased upwards if higher demand (AX ) is positively
correlated with higher supply (Q).12
Increasing supply traces out a local labor demand curve. The closest analogy to a shift in supply
is an increase in quality-of-life. The resulting labor demand curve slopes downward: holding
productivity (and agglomeration economies) constant, a larger work force pushes down wages, as
firms complement labor with ever scarcer land. The parametrized elasticity of labor demand is
∂ N̂∗
∂ ŵ

=
ÂX ,ÂY

∂ N̂∗ /∂ Q̂
∂ ŵ/∂ Q̂

≈ −2.15 − 3.18σD − 5.44σX − 22.31σY ≈ −22.78

This prediction might be seen as consistent with the weak effects on relative wages of immigrationinduced changes in relative labor supply, predicted by immigrant enclaves (e.g., Bartel 1989, Card
2001). Relative wages at the city level are fairly unresponsive to increases in relative labor supply,
broadly consistent with the large elasticity above.13
12

Estimates in Notowidigdo (2012) reveal an increase in housing costs, along with higher wages, that are consistent with a slight decrease in quality-of-life. As explained in Appendix C.5, heterogeneity in worker tastes would
increase the slope of the supply curve, as higher wages attract those with weaker tastes for the location, although the
heterogeneity parameter, “ψ”, cannot be readily identified separately from the congestion parameter γ.
13
If demand for the traded good is not perfectly elastic, as in a model with heterogeneous traded output, then the
elasticity of labor demand will be lower. To illustrate this in a partial equilibrium setting, let demand for the local
traded good be X̂ j = −η p̂jX where pjX is its price, formerly fixed. Let land supply for traded-good firms be provided
j
in a segmented market by L̂jX = L̂j0X + εX r̂X
. We may then derive a general form of Marshall’s Rule for labor
demand in the trade sector, that includes trade-productivity and the land endowment:
j
N̂X
=

− [σX (η + εX ) + θN εX (η − σX ) − θK (η − σX ) σX ] ŵj + (η − 1) (σX + εX ) ÂjX + (η − σX ) θL L̂j0X
ηθL + σX (1 − θL ) + εX

The coefficient on wages increases with η, meaning labor demand is more elastic when product demand is elastic.
If we take εX = 1, then a value of η = 4 produces a labor demand elasticity of -3.2, while η = ∞ produces a
an elasticity of -22. We also see that wages here rise with the endowment of land, comparable to a fixed capital, as
in Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008). A number of papers estimate the relationship between immigration-induced (total)

18

Panel A of Figure 1 illustrates how general equilibrium elasticities of labor supply and demand
vary with elasticities of substitution in consumption and production, assumed to be equal (σD =
σX = σY ≡ σ). When substitution responses are shut down, σ = 0, labor supply is perfectly
inelastic, and labor demand has an elasticity of -2.15, due only to income effects. The structural
substitution elasticities have large impacts on the demand and supply elasticities.

4.2

Local Housing Supply and Demand

A city’s housing stock is closely tied to population and density, with the difference due to substitution and income effects in consumption:

Ŷ j = N̂ j − sx σD p̂j − Q̂j = 6.19Q̂j + 2.41sx ÂjX + 8.20sy ÂjY

(29)

Relative to population, housing responds less to quality-of-life and trade-productivity and more to
home-productivity. The same relationship holds when considering housing and population for a
given supply of land.
Two potential demand shifts may trace out a housing supply curve. The elasticity generally is
greater if quality-of-life rather than trade-productivity shifts demand:
∂ Ŷ
∂ p̂
∂ Ŷ
∂ p̂

=
ÂX ,ÂY

=
Q̂,ÂY

∂ Ŷ /∂ Q̂
∂ p̂/∂ Q̂

∂ Ŷ /∂ ÂX
∂ p̂/∂ ÂX

≈ −0.09 − 0.13σD + 0.77σX + 3.15σY + 4.66εL,r

(30a)

≈ −0.13σD + 0.29σX + 1.28σY + 2.50εL,r

(30b)

These equal 2.44 and 0.96 when εL,r = 0. These numbers reflect a standard production response
through σY . Supply also expands from land growth on the extensive margin, through εL,r , as more
land is incorporated into the city, and on the intensive margin through σX , with land released from
the traded-good sector. The elasticities also incorporate reductions in household demand, seen
labor supply changes and (average) wage changes. In fact, this is the closest empirical analog to (∂ N̂ /∂ ŵ)|ÂX ,ÂY .
However, results from such regressions vary widely, as discussed by Borjas (1999).

19

in the negative constant and coefficient on σD . Assuming σY or εL,r vary considerably due to
geography or land restrictions, these general-equilibrium elasticity formulae are consistent with
the range of estimates seen in Malpezzi et al. (2005) and Saiz (2010), for different cities. The two
formulae also point out that source of the demand shock can greatly affect the measured elasticity,
as the underlying parameters differ.14
Shifts in supply due to home-productivity arguably identify metro-level housing demand curves.
Higher home-productivity greatly increases the amount of housing, while lowering prices slightly:
∂ Ŷ
∂ p̂

=
Q̂,ÂX

∂ Ŷ /∂ ÂY
∂ p̂/∂ ÂY

≈ −4.48 − 0.13σD − 3.69σX − 15.12σY − 22.36εL,r

When εL,r = 0, this is -17.11. Increasing the supply of housing stock requires a greater number of
workers to build, maintain, and refresh this stock, which increases the demand for land and housing. This suggests that improvements to housing productivity, such as from reducing regulations,
will be seen much more in quantities than prices.
Panel B of Figure 1 illustrates how general equilibrium elasticities of housing supply and demand vary with elasticities of substitution in consumption and production. As elasticities of substitution increase, the difference between housing supply elasticities identified by quality-of-life
and trade-productivity grows.
14

Consider again a partial equilibrium setting with fixed wages and a segmented land market with L̂jY = L̂j0Y +
. Then the supply of housing is increasing in prices and productivity and land endowments, and falling in wages:


σX (1 − φL ) + εY j
σX (1 − φL ) + εY
φN j
j
Ŷ =
p̂ + 1 +
ÂjY − (εY + σY )
ŵ + L̂j0Y
φL
φL
φL

εY r̂Yj

Parametrized, Ŷ = (2.2 + 4.3εY ) p̂j − (1.8 + 2.6εY ) ŵj + (3.2 + 4.3εY ) ÂjY The base coefficient of 2.2 is similar
to many estimates, however, the formula highlights the role of land supply in εY and L̂j0Y , productivity in ÂjY , as well
as local costs in ŵj in determining supply. Local wages play a particular role as Q̂j and ÂjY lower wages, while ÂjX
raises them. As covered in Appendix C.5, with heterogeneous preferences, the total elasticity, net of demand, is lower
(Aura and Davidoff, 2008).

20

5

The Relationship between Density, Prices, and Amenities

5.1

Data

We define cities at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level using 1999 Office of Management
and Budget consolidated definitions (e.g., San Francisco is combined with Oakland and San Jose),
of which there are 276. We use the 5-percent sample of the 2000 United States Census from
Ruggles et al. (2004) to calculate wage and housing price differentials, controlling for relevant
covariates (see Appendix E for details). Population density is calculated from the 2000 Census
Summary Tract Files. For each census tract, we take the ratio of population to land area, and then
population average these densities to form metro-level densities, shown in figure 2. We use MSA
population weights throughout.
Figure 3 displays estimated densities of wage, housing price, and density series across MSAs.
Here we see that population density varies by an order of magnitude more than wages and prices.

5.2

Predicting and Explaining Population Density

We first consider how well the model predicts population density using price information alone. As
in Albouy (2016), we use estimates of Q̂j and ÂjX based on ŵj and p̂j , from equations (1) and (23)
assuming ÂjY = 0. With the parametrized reduced-form elasticities, predicted population density
is simply εN∗ ,Q Q̂j +εN∗ ,AX ÂjX . We denote the specification error ξ j = N̂∗j −εN∗ ,Q Q̂j −εN∗ ,AX ÂjX .
Figure 4 plots actual and predicted density for the 276 MSAs along with a 45 degree line.
Overall, 49 percent of density variation is explained by the restricted neoclassical model without
fitting a single parameter.15 The restricted model underpredicts density for a number of large,
relatively old cities — such as New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia — as well as large Texan
metros — including Houston, Dallas, and Austin. The model overpredicts density for a number
of metros in California and Florida, including San Francisco and Naples. Figure 3 shows that the
15

We assess model fit by reporting the square of a linear correlation coefficient, from a linear fit with an imposed
slope of one.

21

restricted model underestimates density in the tails of the distribution.
To see if other elasticities of substitution fit the data better, we consider how well combinations
of σD , σX , and σY predict density. Figure 5 graphs the variance of the prediction error, V ar(ξ j ),
as a function of these elasticities. If we restrict σD = σX = σY = σ, V ar(ξ j ) is minimized at
σ = 0.710, very close to the value of 0.667 from the pre-set parametrization. The common CobbDouglas case σ = 1 fits notably worse. Fixing σX = 0.667 reduces V ar(ξ j ) for all other values of
σD = σY . Fixing both σD = σX = 0.667, as in the lowest curve, reduces V ar(ξ j ) by roughly the
same amount. The greatest reduction comes from setting σY = 0.667, underlining the importance
of housing in accommodating population responses to differences in amenities.

5.3

Using Density to Estimate Trade and Home Productivity

We next relax the restriction ÂjY = 0 by using density data to separately identify trade and homeproductivity, as described in Section 2.6. Panel A of Figure 6 displays estimated measures of
inferred cost and excess density (relative to quality-of-life) for MSAs from the left hand sides of
equations (23) and (24) under the parametrization with σD = σX = σY = 0.667. The figure
includes iso-productivity lines for both traded and home sectors.
To understand the estimates, consider the downward-sloping iso-trade-productivity line, along
which cities have average trade-productivity. Above and to the right of this line, cities have higher
excess density or inferred costs, indicating above-average trade-productivity. Above and to the left
of the upward-sloping iso-home-productivity line, cities have high excess density or low inferred
costs, indicating high home-productivity. Vertical deviations from this line equal what we called
specification error ξ j in section 5.2. Since the first line is almost vertical, and the second almost
horizontal, excess density, or specification error for N∗j , has a small impact on trade-productivity
measures and a large impact on home-productivity measures. The slopes increase with the structural substitution elasticities, as the effects of either productivity on density increases.
Panel B of Figure 6 graphs trade and home-productivity directly, through a change in coordinates of Panel A. Examining each quadrant in turn, Chicago and Philadelphia have high levels
22

of both trade and home-productivity, while New York is the most productive overall. San Francisco has the highest trade-productivity, but low home-productivity. San Antonio has low tradeproductivity and high home-productivity. Santa Fe and Myrtle Beach are unproductive in both
sectors.16
Home-productivity estimates deserve several comments. First, they strongly reflect density
measures and weakly reflect prices.17 Second, the relative dependence of the home-productivity
estimate on inferred costs relative to excess density increases with σY . Third, home-productivity is
strongest in large, older cities. While this may be specification error, the core of these cities were
largely built prior to World War I, when most land-use regulations were absent. Thus, their high
densities may have grandfathered in high home-productivities of a former time.18
To summarize the data and findings, Table 4 contains estimates of population density, wages,
housing costs, inferred land values, and attribute differentials for a selected sample of metropolitan
areas. Table A.2 contains a full list of metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas and compares
inferred costs with trade-productivity estimates.

5.4

City-Specific Elasticities of Substitution

Because of heterogeneous geographic and regulatory environments, the ability of housing producers to substitute between land, labor and capital may vary considerably across cities. This
16

Panel B of Figure 6 also includes isoclines for excess density and inferred costs, which correspond to the axes in
Panel A. Holding quality-of-life constant, trade-productivity and home-productivity must move in opposite directions
to keep population density constant. Holding quality-of-life constant, home-productivity must rise faster than tradeproductivity to keep inferred costs constant.
17
According to the parametrization, ÂjY ≈ 0.32N̂∗j + 0.73ŵj − 0.93p̂j , which largely reflects density since density
varies so greatly and prices and wages are positively correlated. Trade-productivity is ÂjX ≈ 0.03N̂∗j + 0.84ŵj +
0.01p̂j . Quality-of-life depends only on the price measures: Q̂j ≈ −0.48ŵj + 0.33p̂j . Land values reflect all three
measures positively, r̂j ≈ 1.37N̂∗j + 0.49ŵj + 0.32p̂j , although density is key. See Appendix Table A.3.
18
Albouy and Ehrlich (2016) use data on land values to infer productivity in the housing sector, which comprises
most of the non-traded sector. While the two approaches generally agree on which large areas have high homeproductivity, the land values approach suggests that larger, denser cities generally have lower, rather than higher housing productivity. This apparent contradiction actually highlights what the two methodologies infer differently. Productivity measures based on current land values provide a better insight into the marginal cost of increasing the housing
supply, by essentially inferring the replacement cost. Productivity measures based on density are more strongly related
to the average cost of the housing supply, thereby reflecting the whole history of building in a city. The distinction
matters particularly for older cities where older housing was built on the easiest terrain, and in decades prior strict
residential land-use regulations, which typically grandfather pre-existing buildings.

23

heterogeneity is of direct interest and can impact the model’s ability to explain location decisions.
To proceed, we assume that σYj is a linear function of the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index (WRLURI) from Gyourko et al. (2006), denoted by I j , the average slope of land from
Albouy et al. (2016), denoted by S j , and a residual: σYj = σY 0 + σY I I j + σY S S j + v j . We normalize I j and S j to have mean zero and standard deviation one. We assume that home-productivity
is also a linear function of these observed variables and a residual: ÂjY = aI I j + aS S j + uj . As
shown in Appendix F, these assumptions yield the following equation:

N̂ej =σY 0 Ĝj + σY I I j Ĝj + σY S S j Ĝj + aI (k1 + σY 0 k2 )I j + aS (k1 + σY 0 k2 )S j
+ σY I aI k2 (I j )2 + σY S aS k2 (S j )2 + (σY I aS + σY S aI )k2 I j S j + ej ,

(31)

where N̂ej ≡ N̂∗j −1.00p̂j +0.77ŵj is density explained by all but σYj and ÂjY , Ĝj ≡ 2.82p̂j −2.37ŵj
captures observable demand shifts from Q̂j and ÂjX , k1 and k2 are known positive constants, and
ej is a residual. We can consistently estimate the parameters of equation (31) using non-linear least
squares under orthogonality conditions for uj and v j discussed in Appendix F.
The estimator here differs from competing estimates of labor and housing supply in several
ways. First, it is identified from level differences in population, not changes. Second, as implied
by (30a) and (30b), it handles demand shifts asymmetrically, putting more weight on quality of
life than trade-productivity. Third, it accounts for all demand shifts, absent specification error.
This eliminates the need for instrumenting demand shifts (e.g. with January temperature or Bartik
employment shares) that are ostensibly exogenous to supply. The only remaining concern is that
S and I are correlated with unobserved supply shifters in v j or wj . As a way of testing the specification, the model provides three over-identifying restrictions. The linear reduced-form equation
of (31) has eight terms {Ĝj , I j , S j , I j Ĝj , S j Ĝj , I j S j , (I j )2 , (S j )2 }, with coefficients that depend
non-linearly on the five structural parameters, {σY 0 , σY I , σY S , aI , aS }.
We do not reject the implied structural restrictions of the model (p = 0.13), providing support
for our estimates of (31), shown in table 5. In column 2, ÂjY = 0, but σYj varies and is neg-

24

atively related to both regulations and average slope — corresponding to intuition – with a one
standard-deviation increase in either measure reducing the elasticity by roughly 0.3. The predicted
elasticities σYj have a mean of 0.93, higher than without the interactions, with a standard deviation
of 0.51. This model explains 62 percent of density variation, an improvement over the 49 percent
explained with uniform σY . Column 3 holds σYj constant and lets ÂjY vary, finding it falls by about
7 percent with a one standard deviation increase in slope. Column 4 presents the full model and
produces results consistent with columns 2 and 3.
Estimates of σYj imply city-specific elasticities of housing supply according to the formulae
from section 4. For comparision, we calculate these assuming demand variation from tradeproductivity and constant geography (εL,r = 0), with σD = σX = 0.667 and σYj as the predicted
value from column 3 of Table 5. A regression of the supply elasticities from Saiz (2010) on our
elasticities yields a slope of 0.95 (s.e. 0.15) and an intercept of 0.34 (s.e. 0.21), with a correlation coefficient of 0.52. The slope is indistinguishable from one, and the intercept is close to the
value predicted in (29) from the consumption response, sx σD = 0.43, due to Saiz using data on
population, N , rather than housing, Y .19 The similarity is remarkable as given how different his
estimation strategy is from ours.

6

Land Area and the Total Population of Cities

The neoclassical model does a fairly good job of explaining density. Yet, to explain a metro’s
full population, it must also model land area, which varies tremendously across metro areas. The
model as delineated by Rosen and Roback takes land as homogeneous — abstracting away from
the internal structure of cities — and supply as exogenous. We add a simple land supply function
from equation (15), which depends on an unknown, and possibly heterogeneous, land endowment,
19

Saiz’s empirical strategy examines temporal variation using industrial composition, immigrant enclaves, and sunshine as sources of exogenous variation in demand. By combining quality-of-life and productivity shifters, the estimates may not be directly comparable, although we suspect that productivity shifters are more important in his
analysis. Saks (2008) also estimates lower elasticities in more regulated markets, focusing on labor supply, although
her results are not as comparable.

25

L̂j0 , and supply elasticity, εjL,r . To our knowledge, we are the first to try to estimate both intensive
(density) and extensive (land) margins of urban growth separately. The neoclassical model allows
this type of estimation because of its separable structure with homogeneous land.
For estimation, we model these as linear functions of covariates X j , with L̂j0 = X j βL0 +uj and
εjL,r = ε̄ + X j βε + v j . X j includes I j , S j , and also the log land share (i.e., the share which is not
water) from Saiz (2010). We measure land using the number of square miles in the Census urban
area; metropolitan areas, defined by counties, contain a considerable amount of land for non-urban
use, which we exclude. Panel A of Figure 7 plots land area against the land rent inferred from (3)
when ÂjY = 0, i.e., r̂j = (p̂j − φN ŵj )/φL . Since cities are small and open to mobile labor and
capital, the demand for land is perfectly elastic at each city’s price r̂j . The slope of the regression
line then provides a supply elasticity, given here by ε̄ = 0.82 with no other covariates.
Table 6 reports results from the full specification (summary statistics are in appendix table
A.4). A one standard deviation increase in slope lowers the land endowment by almost a half,
while a one standard deviation in land not covered by water increases it by almost a quarter. In the
fully interacted model, the average elasticity of land is 1.4 but is reduced by about 0.25 from a one
standard deviation increase in slope and regulation. While these results are not as well identified as
those in table 5, they do accord with intuition, suggesting that the land measure and inferred land
rents do contain valuable information.
To examine how well the model explains cross-metro population differences, we use equation
(17) to predict the total population differential as the sum of the predicted land differential L̂j , conditional on r̂j , I j , and S j , from column 2, and the simple predicted density differential, conditional
on p̂j and ŵj . This prediction explains 53 percent of cross-metro population variation, without using data on either density or population. For the neoclassical model built on price theory to value
amenities, this seems rather successful.

26

7

Population Determinants and Counterfactual Exercises

7.1

Why Do People Live Where They Do?

To answer the question of whether people follow jobs or jobs follow people, we use simple variance
decompositions to measure the relative importance of quality-of-life, trade-productivity, and homeproductivity in explaining cross-metro differences in density and population. Column 1 of Table
7 considers the restricted model of population density with constant home-productivity ÂY = 0,
and uniform substitution elasticities σ = 0.667, to keep the accounting parsimonious. Quality-oflife accounts for nearly half of the explained variance, dominating trade-productivity (i.e., inferred
costs), even though the latter shows greater cross-sectional variation in value (see Appendix Figure
A.2). Quality-of-life and trade-productivity are positively correlated.
In the model allowing AY to vary across metros, column 2 decomposes the variance of observed
(which now equals predicted) population density across all three attributes. As before, quality-oflife dominates trade-productivity, yet both are dominated by home-productivity. While all three
attributes are important in explaining density, it appears that people and jobs follow housing more
than anything else. Given the residual nature of the home-productivity measure, this conclusion
should be treated with caution, but it complements the finding that heterogeneous substitution in
housing production is key to explaining the responsiveness of population to amenities.
The decompositions in columns 3 and 4 bring in land supply to account for total population. To
keep the accounting tractable, we use the specification from column 2 of table 6, with a uniform
price elasticity of 1.12 for land, and allow base land endowments to vary. In column 3, we see
quality-of-life continues to dominate trade-productivity, while both dominate the land endowment.
Finally, column 4 considers the full model for population. As in column 2, home-productivity
dominates quality-of-life and trade-productivity. The largest interaction is the positive one between
home and trade-productivity.
One of the more stimulating results from this table is that quality of life is negatively related
to land and home productivity. It seems rather unfortunate that many of the most attractive areas

27

of the United States are difficult to build on. This appears to stem mainly from two causes. First,
coastlines and rugged terrain are associated with higher quality of life (Albouy 2008) but lower
land supply and ability to build densely, as shown above. Second, higher quality of life areas tend
to have more land-use restrictions although these restrictions do not actually improve quality of life
by very much (Albouy and Ehrlich 2016). Of course, the equilibrium model ignores that people
are gradually moving to areas with nicer weather (Rappaport 2007, Glaeser and Tobio 2008).
Appendix Table A.6 explores how the results are affected by endogenous amenity feedback and
non-neutral federal taxation. Feedback reinforces the role of natural advantages in quality-of-life,
as the observed values are reduced through congestion. On the other hand, natural advantages in
trade-productivity are less important, as they are created partly from other amenities that cause
agglomeration. On the policy side, if federal taxes were made neutral, trade-productivity would
determine locations more than quality of life; people would follow jobs more than the opposite.20

7.2

What if Chicago was as Nice as San Diego?

As quality of life is so important in determining where people live, we consider what would happen
if the city with the largest growth potential, Chicago, were given the quality of life of one of
America’s nicest cities, San Diego. In this counter-factual, Chicago receives none of the other
determinants that lower San Diego’s population. According to the estimates seen in Tables 5
and 8, Chicago has a very elastic home-good sector, with σY = 1.39, which from (26), implies
N̂∗ = 13.96Q̂j . The difference in quality of life between San Diego and Chicago is 0.11, explained
entirely by climate and geography (Albouy 2008), making it “exogenous” in a sense. Therefore,
the model predicts that the population of Chicago would expand by a factor e13.96(0.11) − 1 = 3.64
times. Based on the 2000 numbers, this implies a population of 43 million, double that of New York
20

In particular, we use our amenity estimates and parametrized model to predict prices and quantities (including
population density) for each city in the absence of location-distorting federal income taxes. Because we estimate
amenities using observed density, wage, and housing price data, we cannot estimate amenities in the absence of
distortionary federal taxes.

28

City!21 A sunny and beautiful “City of Broad Shoulders” would be full of gleaming skyscrapers,
packed with residents.
On the other hand, if we were to reduce San Diego’s quality of life to that of Chicago’s, the
long-run effect would be much less dramatic, given how unresponsive its home-good sector is.
With σY = 0.13, we have N̂∗ = 3.88Q̂j , so that its population would fall by 37 percent, from 2.8
to 1.8 million.

7.3

The Effect of Relaxing Land-Use Regulations and Neutralizing Taxes

The parametrized model readily permits nationwide counter-factual policy exercises. Below, we
consider two possibilities. One is to lower land-use regulations in cities for inhabitants with aboveaverage regulation. This is somewhat similar to Hsieh and Moretti (2015) — who lower regulations
more dramatically — although we examine levels instead of growth.22 The second is to neutralize
tax differences — similar to Albouy (2009), but with heterogeneous home-good supply according
to estimated σYj . Most interestingly, we combine the two reforms to envision what more “ideal”
American cities would look like based on their amenities.
Table 8 presents results from these counter-factual exercises. Column 2 shows the estimated
elasticity of substitution in housing, and column 3 shows the predicted elasticity when lowering
land-use regulations in cities with above-average regulation. Column 5 shows the impact of lowering land-use regulations on population (the resulting population is the product of columns 1 and
5). The elasticities in several coastal cities, notably San Francisco, Los Angeles, and San Diego
grow substantially, permitting many more people to take advantage of their amenities. Because the
population must balance, less attractive cities, such as Detroit, Atlanta, and Dallas, lose population
regardless of changes in their elasticity. As seen in Panels B and C, the West would gain population
from the South and Midwest, and people would live in more amenable and productive places.
21

A change of this kind would increase the welfare of the country, which would lower the population increase by
about 10 percent.
22
We use the regulation experienced by a median inhabitant, who lives in a metro of 2.6 million. Hsieh and Moretti
(2015) lower regulation to that of the median city, half a standard deviation lower (in our data), corresponding to a
metro with 0.8 million.

29

Column 4 shows the federal tax differential paid by residents of each city, which is driven by
above-average wages. As seen in column 6, neutralizing federal taxes increases population levels
in cities with both high federal tax burdens and elastic home supply. New York, Detroit, and
Chicago are the biggest gainers from this reform. This reform would draw the population towards
the Northeast, and in the most productive cities more generally.
Making both reforms would dramatically alter the urban landscape, as seen in columns 7 and
8. San Francisco would more than double in size and surpass Chicago as the third largest metro.
New York would eclipse Tokyo as the largest city in the world. In general, many of the largest
cities, amenable to both households and firms — such as Boston and Los Angeles — would grow
substantially. Most minor cities, such as St. Louis and Cleveland would shrink, although the
changes depend on more than just city size. In all, this would cause the Northeast and West to gain
population, and the South to lose.

8

Conclusion

The neoclassical model provides intuitive micro-foundations for explaining urban population, using a familiar framework based on price theory. The off-the shelf parametrized model fits the data
surprisingly well, revealing that location choices are driven more by quality of life than by jobs,
although both are only possible with housing. Agglomeration effects, as modeled here, reinforce
this conclusion. However we show that in this class of model, they lack the magnitude for multiple
equilibria or path dependence.
Our econometric estimates provide even more compelling evidence that the model produces
meaningful predictions, which link together cross-sectional population differences with large estimated elasticities of labor and housing supply. Using simple data and insights from generalequilibrium modeling, we find that geography and regulations influence both the intensive, density
margin of urbanization, as well as the extensive, land margin. This both reinforces and clarifies
existing work. Moreover, our city-specific analysis gives us better insight into meanings of partic-

30

ular numbers, and allows us to make precise predictions about urban population. A small change
in quality of life can lead to a large change in population, especially in cities with permissive
building environments, such as Chicago. Our counter-factual predictions of city size with neutral
federal taxation and moderated land-use restrictions, imply that Boston, San Francisco, and other
amenable cities should be considerably larger, while many other could be effectively abandoned.
The neoclassical framework accounts for the most basic factors that affect urban life. It is
remarkably versatile for adding features, such as agglomeration, multiple types and preference
heterogeneity. At the same time, the flexible form we examine, which shies away from simplifications — such as unit or zero elasticities, or iso-elastic housing supplies — may reveal alternative
models are under-identified without non-linearities. We hope this paper will help to unify the
disparate literature on urban population and amenities and help push it forward.

References
[1] Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Stephen J. Redding, Daniel M. Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. 2015. “The
Economics of Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall.” Econometrica 83: 2127-2189.
[2] Albouy, David. 2008. “Are Big Cities Really Bad Places to Live? Improving Quality-of-Life
Estimates across Cities” NBER Working Paper No. 14981.
[3] Albouy, David. 2009. “The Unequal Geographic Burden of Federal Taxation.”Journal of Political Economy 117: 635-667.
[4] Albouy, David. 2016. “What Are Cities Worth? Land Values, Local Productivity, and the
Total Value of Amenities.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98(3): 477487.
[5] Albouy, David, John Bound, and Bryan Stuart. 2015. “Household Heterogeneity in Location
Models: Building Structure from Reduced-Form Intuition.” Mimeo
[6] Albouy, David, and Gabriel Ehrlich. 2016. “Housing Productivity and the Social Cost of Land
Use Restrictions.” NBER Working Paper No. 18110.
[7] Albouy, David, Gabriel Ehrlich, and Minchul Shun. 2016. “Metropolitan Land Values.”
Mimeo.
[8] Albouy, David, Walter Graf, Ryan Kellogg, and Hendrik Wolff. 2016. “Climate Amenities,
Climate Change, and American Quality of Life.” Journal of the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists 3(1): 205-246.
31

[9] Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. 2014. “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129: 1085-1140.
[10] Arzaghi, Mohammad, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2008. “Networking Off Madison Avenue.”
Review of Economic Studies 75: 1011-1038.
[11] Aura, Saku and Thomas Davidoff. 2008. “Supply Constraints and Housing Prices.” Economics Letters 99: 275-277.
[12] Bartel, Anne P. 1989. “Where Do the New U.S. Immigrants Live?” Journal of Labor Economics 7: 371-391.
[13] Bartelme, Dominick. 2015. “Trade Costs and Economic Geography: Evidence from the U.S.”
Mimeo, University of Michigan.
[14] Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Kalamazoo: Upjohn Institute.
[15] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2013. “Urban Transport Expansions, Employment Decentralization,
and the Spatial Scope of Agglomeration Economies.” Mimeo, Brown University.
[16] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Ronni Pavan. 2012. “Understanding the City Size Wage Gap.”
Review of Economic Studies 79: 88-127.
[17] Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-75.
[18] Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. “Portage and Path Dependence.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127: 587-644.
[19] Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2015. “History and the Sizes of Cities.” American Economic
Review 105(5): 558-563.
[20] Borjas, George J. 1999. “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol. 3, edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, 1697-1760. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
[21] Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline. 2013. “Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of a Prominent Place-Based Policy.” American Economic Review 103: 897-947.
[22] Caliendo, Lorenzo, Fernando Parro, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. 2015.
“The Impact of Regional and Sectoral Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy.” Mimeo.
[23] Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19: 22-64.
[24] Carlino, Gerald, and Edwin S. Mills. 1987. “The Determinants of County Growth” Journal
of Regional Science 20: 39-54.

32

[25] Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from
the Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy 113: 376-424.
[26] Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall. 1996. “Productivity and the Density of Economic
Activity” American Economic Review 86: 54-70.
[27] Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, and Laurent Gobillon. 2012. “The Costs of Agglomeration: Land Prices in French Cities.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 7027.
[28] Davis, Donald R., and Jonathan I. Dingel. 2012. “A Spatial Knowledge Economy.” NBER
Working Paper No. 18188.
[29] Davis, Donald R., and David E. Weinstein. 2002. “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The
Geography of Economic Activity.” American Economic Review 92: 1269-1289.
[30] Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2013. “Urban Accounting and Welfare.” American Economic Review.
[31] Diamond, Rebecca. 2016. “The Deteminants and Welfare Implications of U.S. Workers Diverging Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000.” American Economic Review
[32] Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen Zidar. 2015.
“State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation.” Mimeo.
[33] Fox, Tyler and Don Fullerton (1991) “The Irrelevance of Detail in a Computable General
Equilibrium Model Economics Letters: 36 (1991) 67-70.
[34] Glaeser, Edward L. 1999. “Learning in Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 46: 254-277.
[35] Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2008. “The Economics of Place-Making Policies.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring: 155-253.
[36] Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2009. “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration
Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States Policies.” Journal of Economic Literature 474: 983-1028.
[37] Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks. 2006. “Urban Growth and Housing
Supply.” Journal of Economic Geography 6: 71-89.
[38] Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. “Urban Decline and Durable Housing.” Journal of Political Economy 113: 345-375.
[39] Harberger, Arnold “The Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax.” Journal of Political Economy, 70(3): 215-240
[40] Haughwout, Andrew F., and Robert Inman. 2001. “Fiscal Policies in Open Cities with Firms
and Households.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 31: 147-180.
[41] Heckscher, Eli (1919): The Effect of Foreign Trade on the Distribution of Income. Ekonomisk
Tidskrift: 497-512.
33

[42] Hoogstra, Gerke J., Raymond J.G.M. Florax, and Jouke van Dijk. 2005. “Do ‘jobs follow
people’ or ‘people follow jobs’? A meta-analysis of Carlino-Mills studies.” Paper prepared
for the 45th Congress of the European Regional Science Association.
[43] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti (2015) “Why Do Cities Matter? Local Growth and
Aggregate Growth” NBER Working Paper No. 21154.
[44] Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. “Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108: 577-598.
[45] Jones, Ronald W. 1965. “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models.” Journal of
Political Economy 73: 557-572.
[46] Kennan, John, and James R. Walker. 2011. “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual
Migration Decisions.” Econometrica 79: 211-251.
[47] Lee, Sanghoon, and Qiang Li. 2013. “Uneven Landscapes and the City Size Distribution.”
Journal of Urban Economics.
[48] Green, Richard, Stephen Malpezzi and Stephen Mayo, 2005. “Metropolitan-Specific Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Supply of Housing, and Their Sources” American Economic
Review 95: 334-339.
[49] Moretti, Enrico. 2011. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b,
edited by D. Card and O. Ashenfelter, 1237-1313. Amsterdam: North Holland.
[50] Moretti, Enrico. 2013. “Real Wage Inequality.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5: 65-103.
[51] Notowidigdo, Matthew. 2012. “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks.” Mimeo, University of Chicago.
[52] Ohlin, Bertil (1924) The Theory of Trade. Handelns Teory.
[53] Rappaport, Jordan. 2008a. “A Productivity Model of City Crowdedness.” Journal of Urban
Economics 65: 715-722.
[54] Rappaport, Jordan. 2008b. “Consumption Amenities and City Population Density.” Regional
Science and Urban Economics 38: 533-552.
[55] Roback, Jennifer. 1980. “The Value of Local Urban Amenities: Theory and Measurement.”
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Rochester.
[56] Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy 90: 1257-1278.
[57] Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. “Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life.” In Current Issues in
Urban Economics, edited by P. Mieszkowski and M. Straszheim. Baltimore: John Hopkins
Univ. Press.
34

[58] Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William C. Strange. 2004. “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of
Agglomeration Economies.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4, edited
by J.V. Henderson and J-F. Thisse, 2119-2171. Amsterdam: North Holland.
[59] Ruggles, Steven; Matthew Sobek; Trent Alexander; Catherine A. Fitch; Ronald Goeken;
Patricia Kelly Hall; Miriam King; and Chad Ronnander. (2004) Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center.
[60] Saiz, Albert. 2010. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125: 1253-1296.
[61] Saks, Raven E. 2008. “Job Creation and Housing Construction: Constraints on Metropolitan
Area Employment Growth.” Journal of Urban Economics 64: 178-195.
[62] Shapiro, Jesse M. (2006) “Smart Cities: Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Growth Effects
of Human Capital.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88: 324-335.
[63] Stiglitz, Joseph (1967) “A Two Sector Two Class Model of Economic Growth” Review of
Economic Studies 34(2): 227-238
[64] Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen Zidar. 2014. “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax
Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms.” Mimeo.
[65] Uzawa, Hirofimu, 1961 “A Two Sector Model of Economic Growth.” Review of Economic
Studies 29(1): 40-47

35

Table 1: U.S. Constant Geography Parametrization
Parameter Name

Notation

Value

sy
sR
sw
θL
θN
φL
φN
λL
λN

0.36
0.10
0.75
0.025
0.825
0.233
0.617
0.17
0.70

τ
δ

0.361
0.291

σD
σX
σY
εL,r

0.667
0.667
0.667
0.0

Cost and Expenditure Shares
Home good expenditure share
Income share to land
Income share to labor
Traded good cost share of land
Traded good cost share of labor
Home good cost share of land
Home good cost share of labor
Share of land used in traded good
Share of labor used in traded good
Tax Parameters
Average marginal tax rate
Average deduction level
Structural Elasticities
Elasticity of substitution in consumption
Elasticity of traded good production
Elasticity of home good production
Elasticity of land supply
Parametrization pre-set in Albouy (2009). See Appendix D for details.

36

Table 2: Relationship between Reduced-Form and Structural Elasticities, Population and Housing
A: Reduced-Form Population Elasticity with Respect to:

σD
σX
σY
εL,r
Constant

Quality of Life
εN,Q

trade-productivity
εN,AX

Home Productivity
εN,AY

1.141
1.951
8.004
11.837
0.773

0.719
0.468
2.056
4.016
0.000

-0.077
0.636
2.607
3.856
0.773

B: Reduced-Form Housing Elasticity with Respect to:

σD
σX
σY
εL,r
Constant

Quality of Life
εY,Q

trade-productivity
εY,AX

Home Productivity
εY,AY

-0.336
1.951
8.004
11.837
-0.227

-0.212
0.468
2.056
4.016
0.000

0.023
0.636
2.607
3.856
0.773

Table 2 decomposes reduced-form elasticities into substitution elasticities in consumption (σD ), traded good
production (σX ), home good production (σY ), and the elasticity of land supply (εL,r ). For example, the reducedform elasticity of population with respect to quality-of-life is εN,Q = 0.773 + 1.141σD + 1.951σX + 8.004σY +
11.837εL,r .

37

Table 3: Parametrized Relationship between Amenities, Prices, and Quantities
A: With Taxes (current regime)

Price/quantity
Land value
Wage
Home price
Trade consumption
Home consumption
Population density
Capital
Land
Trade production
Home production
Trade labor
Home labor
Trade capital
Home capital
Trade land
Home land

B: Neutral Taxes (counterfactual)

Notation

Quality
of Life
Q̂

Trade
Productivity
ÂX

Home
Productivity
ÂY

Quality
of Life
Q̂

Trade
Productivity
ÂX

Home
Productivity
ÂY

r̂
ŵ
p̂
x̂
ŷ
N̂
K̂
L̂
X̂
Ŷ
N̂X
N̂Y
K̂X
K̂Y
L̂X
L̂Y

11.837
-0.359
2.540
-0.446
-1.985
8.175
7.931
0.000
7.957
6.189
8.196
8.123
7.957
7.884
0.061
-0.012

4.016
1.090
1.609
0.349
-0.621
2.164
2.866
0.000
3.339
1.543
2.279
1.889
3.006
2.616
0.328
-0.062

3.856
-0.117
-0.172
-0.037
0.067
2.884
2.779
0.000
2.934
2.951
3.012
2.581
2.934
2.503
0.362
-0.069

10.001
-0.303
2.146
-0.916
0.515
6.319
6.182
0.000
5.815
5.402
6.017
7.036
5.815
6.834
-0.856
0.163

6.400
1.018
2.121
-0.905
0.509
3.721
4.385
0.000
4.805
2.816
3.793
3.551
4.472
4.230
0.203
-0.039

3.600
-0.109
-0.227
0.097
-0.055
2.718
2.616
0.000
2.777
2.815
2.850
2.403
2.777
2.330
0.376
-0.072

Each value in Table 3 represents the partial effect that a one-point increase in each amenity has on each price or
quantity, e.g., N̂ j = 8.175Q̂j + 2.164ÂjX + 2.884ÂjY under the current U.S. tax regime. Values in panel A are
derived using the parameters in Table 1. Values in panel B are derived using geographically neutral taxes. All
variables are measured in log differences from the national average.

38

Table 4: List of Selected Metropolitan Areas, Ranked by Population Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

Population
Density
N̂ j

Wage
ŵj

Home
Price
p̂j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

39

New York, Northern New Jersey, Long Island, NY-NJ-CT-PA
Honolulu, HI
Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County, CA
San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA
Chicago-Gary-Kenosha, IL-IN-WI
Miami-Fort Lauderdale, FL
Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City, PA-NJ-DE-MD
San Diego, CA
Salinas (Monterey-Carmel), CA
Boston-Worcester-Lawrence, MA-NH-ME-CT
...
Myrtle Beach, SC
Florence, SC
Johnson City-Kingsport-Bristol, TN-VA
Gadsden, AL
Goldsboro, NC
Dothan, AL
Anniston, AL
Ocala, FL
Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC
Rocky Mount, NC

2.294
1.302
1.258
1.218
1.200
0.972
0.967
0.881
0.847
0.806

0.217
-0.012
0.134
0.259
0.134
0.010
0.115
0.061
0.102
0.121

0.430
0.614
0.452
0.815
0.227
0.124
0.059
0.483
0.600
0.341

3.405
1.953
1.946
2.050
1.789
1.372
1.409
1.439
1.443
1.278

0.031
0.208
0.080
0.137
0.007
0.036
-0.038
0.122
0.141
0.050

0.272
0.039
0.163
0.273
0.160
0.043
0.134
0.088
0.123
0.136

0.504
-0.166
0.088
-0.171
0.276
0.202
0.343
-0.108
-0.198
0.035

-1.393
-1.397
-1.409
-1.437
-1.500
-1.524
-1.570
-1.573
-1.615
-1.631

-0.188
-0.140
-0.190
-0.136
-0.197
-0.189
-0.202
-0.170
-0.135
-0.122

-0.128
-0.339
-0.354
-0.424
-0.291
-0.406
-0.428
-0.298
-0.222
-0.243

-2.026
-2.115
-2.149
-2.194
-2.229
-2.323
-2.399
-2.364
-2.358
-2.386

0.050
-0.039
-0.020
-0.068
0.002
-0.037
-0.038
-0.010
-0.005
-0.018

-0.212
-0.173
-0.217
-0.172
-0.225
-0.220
-0.234
-0.205
-0.175
-0.165

-0.466
-0.244
-0.269
-0.175
-0.356
-0.257
-0.262
-0.363
-0.414
-0.392

Standard Deviation

0.870

0.116

0.283

1.322

0.052

0.129

0.200

Table 4 includes the top and bottom ten metropolitan areas ranked by population density. The first three columns are estimated from Census data, while the last
four columns come from the parametrized model. See text for estimation procedure. Standard deviations are calculated among the 276 metropolitan areas using
metro population weights. All variables are measured in log differences from the national average.

Table 5: The Determinants of Substitution Possibilities and Productivity in the Home Sector
Dependent variable: Population density not explained by home sector
(1)
(2)
(3)
Elasticity of Substitution in Home Sector
Baseline

σY 0

Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)

σI

Average slope of land (s.d.)

σS

Housing Productivity
Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)
Average slope of land (s.d.)

0.693***
(0.247)

0.934***
(0.261)
-0.309***
(0.0855)
-0.335*
(0.189)

aI
aS

Observations

274

274

(4)

0.861***
(0.327)

1.068***
(0.342)
-0.289**
(0.129)
-0.279
(0.177)

0.0163
(0.0380)
-0.0715***
(0.0178)
274

-0.00362
(0.0165)
-0.0527***
(0.0188)
274

Table 5 presents results of estimating equation (31) by nonlinear least squares. All explanatory variables are
normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

Table 6: The Determinants of Land Supply
Dependent variable: Log urban area, square miles
(1)
(2)
Inferred land rent

0.816***
(0.185)

Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)
Average slope of land (s.d.)
Log land share (s.d.)

1.123***
(0.219)
0.134
(0.0990)
-0.641***
(0.110)
0.223**
(0.106)

1.397***
(0.151)
-0.0469
(0.0929)
-0.563***
(0.0850)
0.261***
(0.0833)

6.702***
(0.109)
227
0.522

-0.248***
(0.0922)
-0.234**
(0.0936)
0.104
(0.116)
6.965***
(0.10)
227
0.596

Interaction between inferred land rent and
Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)
Average slope of land (s.d.)
Log land share (s.d.)
Constant

6.634***
(0.145)
276
0.353

Observations
R-squared

(3)

Inferred land rent is constructed without using density data. All explanatory variables are normalized to have
mean zero and standard deviation one. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

Table 7: Fraction of Density and Population Explained by Quality of Life, Trade Productivity,
Home Productivity, and Land
Variance/Covariance Component

Notation

Quality-of-life
Trade-productivity
Home-productivity
Land
Quality-of-life and trade-productivity
Quality-of-life and home-productivity
Quality-of-life and land
Trade and home-productivity
Trade-productivity and land
Home-productivity and land

Var(εN,Q Q̂)
Var(εN,AX ÂX )
Var(εN,AY ÂY )
Var(L̂0 )
Cov(εN,Q Q̂, εN,AX ÂX )
Cov(εN,Q Q̂, εN,AY ÂY )
Cov(εN,Q Q̂, L̂0 )
Cov(εN,AX ÂX , εN,AY ÂY )
Cov(εN,AX ÂX , L̂0 )
Cov(εN,AY ÂY , L̂0 )

Total variance of prediction
Data used to construct attributes
Wages and housing prices
Density
Predicted land intercept

Density
(1)
(2)

Population
(3)
(4)

0.501
0.183
0.315
-

0.238
0.103
0.439
0.137
-0.153
0.236
-

0.577
0.295
0.164
0.447
-0.389
-0.095
-

0.225
0.136
0.390
0.064
0.161
-0.135
-0.152
0.254
-0.029
0.084

0.359

0.757

2.075

5.322

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Predicted land intercepts come from column 3 of table 6 and do not include the interactions between inferred land
rent and explanatory variables.

42

Table 8: Changes in Population from Relaxing Land-Use Regulations and Neutralizing Federal
Taxes, Allowing Both Density and Land Supply to Change
Panel A: Metro-Level
Pop. in

Main city in MSA
San Francisco
New York
Los Angeles
Detroit
Boston
Philadelphia
Chicago
Washington-Baltimore
San Diego
Houston
Atlanta
Minneapolis
Dallas
Seattle
Denver
Phoenix
St. Louis
Cleveland
Miami

Home Subs.
Elastic. σY

Northeast
Midwest
South
West

Pop.
Under

2000
Mill.
(1)

Estimated
(2)

Lower
Regul.
(3)

Tax
Diff
(4)

Lower
Regul.
(5)

Neut.
Tax
(6)

Both
Refs
(7)

Both
Reforms
(8)

7.0
21.2
16.4
5.5
5.8
6.2
9.2
7.6
2.8
4.7
4.1
3.0
5.2
3.5
2.6
3.3
2.6
3.0
3.9

0.13
0.95
0.33
1.23
0.52
0.81
1.39
0.85
0.12
1.33
0.99
1.06
1.31
0.00
0.27
0.54
1.57
1.21
1.03

0.41
1.03
0.58
1.23
1.02
1.11
1.39
0.99
0.47
1.33
1.04
1.12
1.31
0.28
0.77
0.88
1.57
1.21
1.30

0.05
0.05
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00

1.57
1.03
1.29
0.93
1.15
1.02
0.93
0.94
1.46
0.93
0.90
0.92
0.93
1.05
1.06
0.95
0.93
0.93
0.99

1.41
1.66
1.10
1.50
1.15
1.27
1.42
1.32
0.85
1.21
1.22
1.20
1.12
0.97
0.94
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.81

2.29
1.69
1.40
1.36
1.35
1.30
1.30
1.24
1.18
1.10
1.08
1.08
1.02
1.00
0.97
0.82
0.81
0.80
0.76

16.1
35.9
22.9
7.4
7.9
8.1
11.9
9.4
3.3
5.2
4.4
3.2
5.3
3.5
2.5
2.7
2.1
2.4
3.0

Panel B: Effect on Regional Distribution
Relative Pop.

Census Region

Fed.

Relative Pop.
with Reform

Panel C: Change in Amenity Dist.
Amenity Change

Lower
Regul.
(1)

Neut.
Tax
(2)

Comb.
Both
(3)

1. 01
0.93
0.92
1.16

1.28
1.02
0.81
1.01

1.20
0.92
0.72
1.20

Amenity Type

Lower
Regul.
(1)

Neut.
Tax
(2)

Comb.
Both
(3)

Quality of Life
Trade-Product.
Home-Product.
Total Value

0.006
0.013
0.011
0.018

0.004
0.043
0.030
0.042

0.011
0.057
0.042
0.063

Estimated home substitution elasticity from column 2 of Table 5. Lower WRLURI reduces those with WRLURI
above the average to the population-weighted mean. Federal tax differential from Albouy (2009) determined by
wage level times marginal tax rate, minus discounts for owner-occupied houisng. Elasticity of land supply given
0.77 from Table 6. The first counterfactual exercise raises the home substitution elasticity in high WRLURI cities.
The second counterfactual exercise neutralizes the effect of federal taxes.

43

5
0

-50

1

2
3
4
Labor Supply Elasticity

Labor Demand Elasticity
-40
-30
-20
-10

0

Figure 1: Relationship between Labor and Housing General Equilibrium Elasticities and Substitution Possibilities

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.2

1.4

σ
Labor Demand Elasticity (Q)
Labor Supply Elasticity (AX)

6
0

-30

2
4
Housing Supply Elasticity

Housing Demand Elasticity
-20
-10

0

(a) Labor

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

σ
Housing Demand Elasticity (AY)
Housing Supply Elasticity (Q)
Housing Supply Elasticity (AX)

(b) Housing

Panel (a) displays ∂ N̂ /∂ ŵ, where the change in both density and wages is due to a change in the indicated amenity,
as a function of the substitution elasticity σD = σX = σY ≡ σ. Panel (b) displays similar results for the elasticity of
housing with respect to housing prices.

44

Figure 2: Metropolitan Population Density, Thousands per Square Mile, 2000

<1
1-2
2-4
4-8
8 - 16
> 16

0

.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 3: Distribution of Wages, House Prices, and Population Density, 2000

-2.5

-1.5
0
1.5
Percent deviation from national average, hundreds (1=100%)
Wages
Population Density

2.5

House Prices
Predicted Population Density

Predicted population density, calculated under the assumption of equal home-productivity across metros, depends only
on wages and housing prices.

45

Figure 4: Actual and Predicted Population Density, 2000

16

Chicago

8

Observed Population Density, Thousands of People per Square Mile

New York

Philadelphia

Honolulu
San Francisco

Los Angeles

Miami
Boston

San Diego
Monterey
Santa Barbara

New
Orleans
Las Vegas
Washington-Baltimore

2

4

Phoenix
Denver
Sacramento
El Paso
Detroit
Cleveland
Seattle
Houston Dallas
Reno
Portland
San
Antonio Minneapolis
Norfolk
Bakersfield
Columbus
Springfield
Bloomington
Tucson
Pittsburgh
Albuquerque
Tampa
Hartford
Austin
St. Louis
Brownsville
Cincinnati
Fort Collins
Orlando
Syracuse
Kansas
Oklahoma
CityCityYuma
Sarasota
Sioux Falls
Atlanta
Fort Walton Beach
Decatur Great Falls
Bismarck
Naples
Fort Myers Medford
San Luis Obispo
GrandMissoula
Junction
Beaumont
Nashville
McAllen
Kokomo
Fort Pierce
Santa Fe
Killeen
Huntington
Steubenville
Johnstown

1

Punta Gorda
Wilmington
Jacksonville

Texarkana

Flagstaff

Joplin

Cape Cod

Myrtle Beach

Gadsden
Ocala
1

2
4
8
Predicted Population Density, Thousands of People per Square Mile

DENSITY

16

45 degree line

High Density

Medium Density

Low Density

Very Low Density

R2 = 0.49

See text for estimation details. High density metros have population density which exceeds the national average by 80
percent, medium density metros are between the national average and 80 percent. Low density and very low density
metros are defined symmetrically.

46

Variance of Error
.6
.7

.8

.9

Figure 5: Variance of Error in Fitting Population Density using Quality of Life and Tradeproductivity, as Function of Substitution Elasticities

.4

.5

Cobb-Douglas

0

.2

.4

.6

σ

.8

1

1.2

Variance of Log Density

σD=σX=σY Free

σX = .667, σD = σY Free

σD = σX = .667, σY Free

47

1.4

2.00

Figure 6: Results of Parametrized Model, 2000

New York

1.50

0.40

New York

BrownsvilleEl Paso

Flagstaff

Home Productivity
-0.20
0.00

Naples
San Luis Obispo
Santa Fe

Santa
FeLuis Obispo
San

-0.60

-1.50
-2.00

Myrtle Beach

San Francisco

Cape Cod

-0.80

-2.50

Cape Cod

-3.00

48

Joplin Grand JunctionMedford
Punta Gorda
Missoula
OcalaWilmington
Jacksonville

McAllen
Bismarck

-0.40

Excess Density
-1.00
-0.50
0.00

0.50

Houston
Las Vegas
Washington-Baltimore
Detroit
El Paso
Miami
New Orleans
BakersfieldDallas
Bloomington
Los Angeles
Brownsville
SyracuseCleveland
San Antonio
Pittsburgh
Minneapolis Boston
Phoenix
Columbus
St.
Louis
Decatur
Beaumont
Cincinnati
Hartford
Kokomo
Kansas
City Sacramento
McAllen
Springfield
Tampa
Denver
Oklahoma CityNorfolk
Atlanta
Bismarck
Austin San Diego
Portland
Yuma Orlando
Reno Seattle
Huntington
Tucson
Albuquerque
Monterey
Sioux Falls
Johnstown
Honolulu
Steubenville
Nashville
Fort Collins
Great FallsTexarkana
Sarasota
Santa Barbara
Fort
Pierce
Fort
Myers
Gadsden
Fort Walton
KilleenBeach

Philadelphia

Chicago
Houston
New Orleans
San Antonio
Las Vegas
Bakersfield
Syracuse
Miami
Bloomington
Pittsburgh
Dallas
Decatur
Washington-Baltimore
Detroit
Beaumont
Cleveland
St.
Louis
Columbus
Phoenix
Oklahoma City
Los
Angeles
Minneapolis
Cincinnati
Tampa City
Huntington
Kokomo
NorfolkKansas
Springfield
Boston
Johnstown
Yuma
Steubenville
Sacramento
Hartford
Sioux Falls
Great Falls
Orlando
Denver
Tucson
AustinAtlanta
Texarkana
Albuquerque
Portland
Reno
San
Diego
Seattle
Killeen
Nashville
Fort Walton Beach
Honolulu
Fort
Collins
San Francisco
Gadsden
Joplin
Fort Pierce
Sarasota
Monterey
Fort Myers
Grand Junction
Missoula
Jacksonville Punta GordaMedford
Santa Barbara
Ocala
Wilmington
Naples
Myrtle BeachFlagstaff

0.20

1.00

Philadelphia
Chicago

-0.30

-0.20

-0.10

0.00
Inferred Cost

0.10

0.20

0.30

-0.30

-0.20

-0.10

0.00
Trade Productivity

0.10

0.20

0.30

DENSITY

High Density

Average Trade-Productivity, slope = -26.92

DENSITY

High Density

Idential Inferred Costs, slope = 9.33

Medium Density

Low Density

Average Home-Productivity, slope = 2.16

Medium Density

Low Density

Identical Excess Density, slope = 0.75

Very Low Density

Non-Metro Areas

Very Low Density

Non-Metro Areas

(a) Excess Density and Inferred Cost Estimates

(b) Trade and Home Productivity Estimates

See note to figure 4 for metro density definitions.

6400

Figure 7: Urban Land Area and Inferred Land Rents

3200

New York
Los Angeles
Boston

Seattle

San Francisco

800

Minneapolis
Pittsburgh
St. Louis
Tampa Phoenix

50

100

200

400

San Diego
Cincinnati
Miami
Denver
Orlando
HartfordPortland
Nashville
Norfolk
Columbus
Sacramento
San Antonio
Las VegasAustin
Oklahoma City
New Orleans
Tucson
McAllen
Albuquerque
Sarasota
Springfield
Fort Myers
Syracuse
El Paso
Honolulu
BakersfieldFort Pierce
Cape Cod
Beaumont
Santa Barbara
Ocala
Naples
Wilmington
Reno
Killeen
Monterey
PuntaBeach
Gorda
Myrtle
Jacksonville
San Luis Obispo
Fort Walton Beach Fort Collins
Santa Fe
Joplin
Medford
Gadsden
Grand Junction
Yuma
Steubenville
Decatur
Flagstaff
Sioux Falls
Kokomo
Bloomington

Missoula

Great Falls

25

Urban Land Area, Square Miles

1600

Chicago
Washington-Baltimore
Philadelphia
Atlanta
Detroit
Dallas
Houston

-2

-1

0
1
Inferred Land Rent

DENSITY

2

Linear Fit: slope = 0.82 (s.e.= 0.19)

High Density

Medium Density

Low Density

Very Low Density

R2 = 0.35

See note to figure 4 for metro density definitions.

49

32

.0

0

Figure 8: Actual and Predicted Population

New York

16

.0

0

Los Angeles

4.
00
2.
00
1.
0.

50

Syracuse
El Paso
Bakersfield
McAllen

Sarasota

Fort Myers
Santa Barbara
Reno
Fort Pierce
Killeen
Ocala
Fort
Collins
San
Luis Obispo

Beaumont

25
0.
12
0.

Tucson
Albuquerque
Springfield

San Francisco

Myrtle Beach
MedfordFort Sioux
Falls
Walton
Beach
Yuma
Joplin
Bloomington
Steubenville
Flagstaff
Grand
Junction
Decatur
Gadsden

Monterey
Naples

Santa Fe

Cape Cod

06

Great Falls

Predicted Population, Millions
DENSITY

45 degree line

High Density

Medium Density

Low Density

Very Low Density

See note to figure 4 for metro density definitions.

50

R2 = 0.51

0
64

.0

0
32

.0

0
.0
16

00
8.

00
4.

00
2.

00
1.

50
0.

25
0.

12
0.

0.

06

0.

Actual Populaton, Millions

00

8.

00

Chicago
Washington-Baltimore
Philadelphia
Boston
Detroit
Dallas
Houston
Atlanta
Miami
Seattle
Phoenix
Minneapolis
San Diego
St. Louis
Denver
Tampa
Pittsburgh
Portland
Cincinnati
Orlando
San
Antonio
Norfolk
Las
Vegas
Columbus
New Orleans
Nashville
Hartford Austin
Oklahoma City

Appendix - For Online Publication
A

Full Nonlinear Model

This appendix lists the 16 nonlinear equilibrium conditions used to drive the log-linearized conditions discussed in the text.
Equilibrium Price Conditions:
e(pj , ū)/Qj = (1 − τ )(wj + R + I) + T

(1*)

cX (rj , wj , ı̄)/AjX = 1

(2*)

cY (rj , wj , ı̄)/AjY = pj

(3*)

Consumption Conditions:
xj + pj y j = (1 − τ )(wj + R + I) + T
(∂U/∂y) / (∂U/∂x) = pj

(4*)
(5*)

Production Conditions:
∂cX /∂w = AjX NXj /X j

(6*)

AjX LjX /X j
j
AjX KX
/X j
AjY NYj /Y j
AjY LjY /Y j
AjY KYj /Y j

(7*)

∂cX /∂r =
∂cX /∂i =
∂cY /∂w =
∂cY /∂r =
∂cY /∂i =

(8*)
(9*)
(10*)
(11*)

Local Resource Constraints:
N j = NXj + NYj

(12*)

Lj = LjX + LjY

(13*)

j
K j = KX
+ KYj

(14*)

Lj = Lj0 L̃(rj )

(15*)

Y j = N j yj

(16*)

Land Supply:

Home Market Clearing:

i

B

Comparison of Nonlinear and Log-linear Models

To assess the error introduced by log-linearizing the model, we employ a two-step simulation
method to solve a nonlinear version of the model.23 We assume that utility and production functions
display constant elasticity of substitution,
U (x, y; Q) = Q(ηx xα + (1 − ηx )y α )1/α
FX (LX , NX , KX ; AX ) = AX (γL Lβ + γN N β + (1 − γL − γN )K β )1/β
FY (LY , NY , KY ; AY ) = AY (ρL Lχ + ρN N χ + (1 − ρL − ρN )K χ )1/χ
where
σD − 1
σD
σX − 1
β≡
σX
σY − 1
χ≡
σY

α≡

Throughout, we assume that σD = σX = σY = 0.667. We first consider a “large” city with attribute values normalized so that Q = AX = AY = 1. We fix land supply, population, and the
rental price of capital ῑ. We then solve a nonlinear system of fifteen equations, corresponding to
equations (1*)-(14*) and (16*), for fifteen unknown variables: (ū, w, r, p, x, y, X, Y, NX , NY , LX ,
LY , KX , KY , K). We simultaneously choose values of (ηx , γL , γN , ρL , ρN ) so that the model
matches values of (sy , θL , θN , φL , φN ) in Table 1. The large city solution also yields values for
(R, I, T ).24
We then consider a “small” city, which we endow with land equal to one one-millionth of the
large city’s land.25 The population for the small city is endogenous, and the reference utility level
ū is exogenous. The baseline attribute values of the small city are Q = AX = AY = 1. While
holding two attributes fixed at the baseline, we solve the model after setting the third attribute to
be somewhere between 0.8 and 1.2. We solve the same system as for the large city, but now solve
for (w, r, p, x, y, X, Y, NX , NY , LX , LY , KX , KY , N, K).
For comparison, we simulate a one-city log-linear model using parameter values from Table 1,
but set the marginal tax rate τ = 0 and deduction level δ = 0. The baseline attribute differences
are Q̂ = ÂX = ÂY = 0. As with the nonlinear model, we vary a single attribute while holding the
other amenities at their baseline value. We can express the entire log-linear system of equations
(1)-(16):
23

Rappaport (2008a, 2008b) follows a similar procedure.
To simulate the model, we solve a mathematical program with equilibrium constraints, as described in Su and
Judd (2012).
25
We do this to avoid any feedback effects from the small city to the large one. In particular, this permits use of
values of ū, ῑ, R, I, and T from the large city calibration, which simplifies the procedure considerably.
24

ii



100
0
0 1 0
−θ
L

0 0 1
−φL

0 0 0
0

0 0 0
0

 0 1 0 −θL σX

 0 1 0 (1 − θL )σX

 0 1 0 −θL σX

 0 0 1 −φL σY

 0 0 1 (1 − φL )σY

 0 0 1 −φL σY

0 0 0
0

0 0 0
0

0 0 0
0

0 0 0
εL,r
000
0

0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
sx sy 0
1 −1 0
0 0 1
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 λN
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 −1 0





 Q̂
−sw (1 − τ )ŵ + sy p̂
0 0 0
0
0
0
0 0 0 


 ÂX  
θN ŵ
0 0 0
0
0
0
0 0 0 

  Â  

 Y  
φ
ŵ
−
p̂
0 0 0
0
0
0
0 0 0 
N

  r̂  
  sw (1 − τ )ŵ − sy p̂ 

0 0 0
0
0
0
0 0 0 

  x̂  

 

σD p̂
0 0 0
0
0
0
0 0 0 

  ŷ  
  −(1 − θN )σX ŵ 

0 0 −1 0
0
0
0 0 0 

 


 N̂  
θN σX ŵ
1 0 −1 0
0
0
0 0 0 

 X  

 L̂X  
θ
σ
ŵ
0 1 −1 0
0
0
0 0 0 
N
X

=

 K̂X   −(1 − φN )σY ŵ 
0 0 0
1
0
0 −1 0 0 

 


 

φN σY ŵ
0 0 0
0
1
0 −1 0 0 

  X̂  

 N̂  
φ
σ
ŵ
0 0 0
0
0
1 −1 0 0 
N
Y

 Y  

 

N̂
0 0 0 1 − λN
0
0
0 0 0 

  L̂X  

 

0
λL 0 0
0 1 − λL
0
0 −1 0 

  K̂X  

 

0
0 λK 0
0
0 1 − λK 0 0 −1 

  Ŷ  
 

0
0 0 0
0
0
0
0 −1 0  
 L̂ 
0 0 0
0
0
0
1 0 0
N̂
K̂

or, in matrix form, as Av = C. The first three rows of A correspond to price equations, the
second two to consumption conditions, the next six to factor demand equations, and the final five
to market clearing conditions. The above form demonstrates that, given a parametrization and
data on wages, home prices, and population, the matrices A and C are known, so we can solve
the above system for the unknown parameters v. In our simulation, we use a slightly different
formulation, where the right hand side vector consists only of known attribute differentials. Figure
A.3 presents results of both models in terms of reduced-form population elasticities with respect to
each amenity.26 The log-linear model does quite well in approximating density responses to trade
and home-productivity differences of up to 20-percent, and approximates responses to quality-oflife quite well for differences of up to 5-percent, the relevant range of estimates for U.S. data in
Figure A.2.

C

Additional Theoretical Details

C.1

Reduced-Form Elasticities

The analytic solutions for reduced-form elasticities of population with respect to amenities are
given below.





λN − λL
sx (λN − λL )2
λ2L
λL λN
εN,Q =
+ σD
+ σX
+
λN
sy λN (λN − λL τ )
sw (λN − λL τ ) sR (λN − λL τ )


λ2L (1 − λN )
λN (1 − λL )
(λN − λL )2
+ σY
+
−
sw λN (λN − λL τ ) sR (λN − λL τ ) sy λN (λN − λL τ )


λN
+ εL,r
sR (λN − λL τ )


26

We normalize the elasticities in Figure A.3 for trade and home-productivity by sx and sy .

iii




s2x (λN − λL )(1 − λL )(1 − τ )
sx λL (λN − τ )
sx λL (1 − λL )
εN,AX = σD
+ σX
−
+
sy λN (λN − λL τ )
sR (λN − λL τ ) sw (λN − λL τ )


sx (1 − λL )(λN − τ ) sx λL (1 − λL )(1 − λN ) sx (1 − λL )(λN − λL )(1 − τ )
σY
−
−
sR (λN − λL τ )
sw λN (λN − λL τ )
sy λN (λN − λL τ )


sx (λN − τ )
+ εL,r
sR (λN − λL τ )







−sx λL (λN − λL )(1 − τ )
sy λN λL
sy λ2L
λN − λL
+ σD
+ σX
+
=
λN
λN (λN − λL τ )
sR (λN − λL τ ) sw (λN − λL τ )
 


λN − λL
sy λ2L (1 − λN )
sy λN (1 − λL )
λL (λN − λL )(1 − τ )
+ σY −
+
+
+
λN
sw λN (λN − λL τ ) sR (λN − λL τ )
λN (λN − λL τ )


sy λN
+ εL,r
sR (λN − λL τ )


εN,AY

C.2

Special Case: Fixed Per-Capita Housing Consumption

Consider the case in which per-capita housing consumption is fixed, ŷ j = 0. The model then yields
N̂ j = ε̃N,Q Q̂j + ε̃N,AX ÂjX + ε̃N,AY ÂjY , where the coefficients are defined as:



λ2L
λL λN
λN
ε̃N,Q = σX
+
+ εL,r
sw (λN − λL τ ) sR (λN − λL τ )
sR (λN − λL τ )


2
λN (1 − λL )
(λN − λL )2
λL (1 − λN )
+
−
+ σY
sw λN (λN − λL τ ) sR (λN − λL τ ) sy λN (λN − λL τ )




sx λL (λN − τ )
sx λL (1 − λL )
sx (λN − τ )
−
ε̃N,AX = σX
+ εL,r
sR (λN − λL τ ) sw (λN − λL τ )
sR (λN − λL τ )


sx (1 − λL )(λN − τ ) sx λL (1 − λL )(1 − λN ) sx (1 − λL )(λN − λL )(1 − τ )
−
−
+ σY
sR (λN − λL τ )
sw λN (λN − λL τ )
sy λN (λN − λL τ )




2
sy λN λL
sy λL
sy λN
ε̃N,AY = σX
+
+ εL,r
sR (λN − λL τ ) sw (λN − λL τ )
sR (λN − λL τ )


2
sy λL (1 − λN )
sy λN (1 − λL )
λL (λn − λL )(1 − τ )
+ σY
+
+
sw λN (λN − λL τ ) sR (λN − λL τ )
λN (λN − λL τ )


These reduced-form elasticities no longer depend on the elasticity of substitution in consumption
σD . In addition, above-average quality-of-life and/or home-productivity no longer lead to higher
population independently of the substitution elasticities, as seen by the term (λN − λL )/λN dropping out of the elasticities.

iv

C.3

Deduction

Tax deductions are applied to the consumption of home goods at the rate δ ∈ [0, 1], so that the tax
payment is given by τ (m − δpy). With the deduction, the mobility condition becomes
Q̂j = (1 − δτ 0 )sy p̂j − (1 − τ 0 )sw ŵj
dτ j
= sy p̂j − sw ŵj +
m
where the tax differential is given by dτ j /m = τ 0 (sw ŵj − δsy pj ). This differential can be solved
by noting
λL dτ j
sw ŵj = sw ŵ0j +
λ m

N
λL dτ j
j
j
sy p̂ = sy p̂0 − 1 −
λN m
and substituting them into the tax differential formula, and solving recursively,


dτ j
λL
j
j
0
0
0
= τ sw ŵ0 − δτ sy p̂0 + τ δ + (1 − δ)
m
λN
= τ0

sw ŵ0j − δsy p̂j0
1 − τ 0 [δ + (1 − δ)λL /λN ]

We can then solve for the tax differential in terms of amenities:




λL
(1 − δ)λL + δλN j
1
1 − λL
dτ j
j
j
0
sx ÂX −
s y AY −
Q̂
=τ
(1 − δ)
m
1 − τ 0 [δ + (1 − δ)λL /λN ]
λN
λN
λN
This equation demonstrates that the deduction reduces the dependence of taxes on productivity and
increases the implicit subsidy for quality-of-life.

C.4

State Taxes

The tax differential with state taxes is computed by including an additional component based on
wages and prices relative to the state average, as if state tax revenues are redistributed lump-sum
to households within the state. This produces the augmented formula

dτ j
= τ 0 sw ŵj − δτ 0 sy p̂j + τS0 [sw (ŵj − ŵS ) − δS sy (p̂j − p̂S )]
m

(A.1)

where τS0 and δS are are marginal tax and deduction rates at the state-level, net of federal deductions, and ŵS and p̂S are the differentials for state S as a whole relative to the entire country.

v

C.5

Imperfect Mobility from Preference Heterogeneity

The model most accurately depicts a long-run equilibrium, for which idiosyncratic preferences or
imperfect mobility seem less important. Yet, the model may be appended to include such features,
which could be used to rationalize path dependence. Suppose that quality-of-life for household i
in metro j equals the product of a common term and a household-specific term, Qji = Qj ξij . In
addition, assume that ζij comes from a Pareto distribution with parameter 1/ψ > 0, common across
metros, and distribution function F (ζij ) = 1 − (ζ/ζij )1/ψ , ζij ≥ ζ. A larger value of ψ corresponds
to greater preference heterogeneity; ψ = 0 is the baseline value.
For each populated metro, there ezetasts a marginal household, denoted by k, such that
e(pj , ū)
= (1 − τ )(wj + R + I) + T.
j j
Q ζk

(A.2)

j
j
, population density in each metro can be written N j = Nmax
Pr[ζij ≥
For some fixed constant Nmax
j
ζkj ] = Nmax
(ζ/ζkj )1/ψ . Log-linearizing this condition yields ψ N̂ j = −ζ̂kj . The larger is ψ, and the
greater the population shift N̂ j , the greater the preference gap in between supra- and infra-marginal
j
j
residents. Log-linearizing the definition of Qjk yields Q̂jk = Q̂ + ζ̂kj = Q̂jk = Q̂ − ψ N̂ j . Ignoring
agglomeration, the relationship between population density and amenities with is now lower



j
1
j
j
N̂ =
εN,Q Q̂ + εN,AX ÂX + εN,AY ÂY
1 + ψεN,Q
j

This dampening effect occurs because firms in a city need to be paid incoming migrants an increasing schedule in after-tax real wages to have them overcome their taste differences. With a value
of ψ, we may adjust all of the predictions. The comparative statics with imperfect mobility are
indistinguishable from congestion effects: ψ and γ are interchangeable. The welfare implications
are different as infra-marginal residents share the value of local amenities with land-owners.27
j

Note that log-linearizing equation (A.2) yields sw (1 − τ )ŵj − sy p̂j = ψ N̂ j − Q̂ . It is straightforward to show
that the rent elasticities in (18a) is equal to 1/(1 + ψεN,Q ) ≤ 1 its previous value. The increase in real income is given
by sw (1 − τ )dŵj − sy dp̂j = ψ N̂ j = −sR dr̂j , where “d” denotes price changes between actual and full mobility. The
main challenge in operationalizing imperfect mobility is specifying the baseline level of population that deviations N̂ j
are taken from, as a baseline of equal density may not be appropriate. Differences in baseline population together with
the frictions modeled here, may provide a way of introducing historical path-dependence in the model.
27

vi

D

Parametrization Details
TABLE 1: MODEL PARAMETERS AND CHOSEN VALUES
Parameter Notation Parametrized Value
Home-goods share
sy
0.36
Income share to land
sR
0.10
Income share to labor
sw
0.75
Traded-good cost-share of land
θL
0.025
Traded-good cost-share of labor
θN
0.825
Home-good cost-share of land
φL
0.233
Home-good cost-share of labor
φN
0.617
Share of land used in traded good (derived)
λL
0.17
Share of labor used in traded good (derived)
λN
0.70
Elast. of subs. in consumption
σD
0.667
Elast. of subs. in traded production
σX
0.667
Elast. of subs. in home production
σY
0.667
0
Average marginal tax rate
τ
0.361
Deduction rate for home-goods
δ
0.291
Agglomeration parameter
α
0.060
Congestion parameter
γ
0.015

All but the agglomeration and congestion parameter are chose in Albouy (2009); all but the
elasticities of substitution reappear in Albouy (2016).
Ciccone and Hall (1996) estimate an elasticity of labor productivity with respect to population
density of 0.06. Rosenthal and Strange (2004) argue that a one percent increase in population
leads to no more than a 0.03-0.08 percent increase in productivity. For γ we combine estimated
costs of commuting and pollution. First, we estimate an elasticity of transit time with respect to
population density of 0.10 (unreported results available by request). Assuming that the elasticity
of monetary and after-tax time costs of commuting as a fraction of income is 9 percent, commuting contributes (0.09)(0.010) ≈ 0.009 to our estimate of γ. Second, Chay and Greenstone
(2005) estimate that the elasticity of housing values with respect to total suspended particulates,
a measure of air quality, lies between −0.2 and −0.35; we take a middle estimate of −0.3. The
Consumer Expenditure Survey reports the gross share of income spent on shelter alone (no utilities) is roughly 0.13. We estimate an elasticity of particulates with respect to population density
of 0.15 (unreported results available by request). Together, this implies that the contribution of air
quality is |(0.13)(−0.6)(0.15)| ≈ 0.006. Population density affects quality-of-life through more
than commuting and air quality, but if we assume these effects cancel out, then a plausible value
of estimate of γ = 0.009 + 0.006 = 0.015. Estimates from Combes et al. (2012), using data on
French cities, suggest a larger value of γ = 0.041, but their emphasis is on population, not density.
See Rosenthal and Strange (2004) and Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) for recent discussions of issues
in estimating agglomeration elasticities.

vii

E

Data and Estimation

The wage and housing cost parameters are from the 2000 Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS), from Ruggles et al. (2004), to calculate wage and housing price differentials. They
are identical to hose in Albouy (2016). They depend on the logarithm of hourly wages on worker
characteristics (education, experience, race, immigrant status, etc.) and indicator variables for
each metro area. The population-demeaned coefficients on the indicator variables are taken as
the city wage differentials. The regression for housing costs is analagous, controlling for housing
characteristics (type and age of structure, number of rooms, etc.) combining gross rents with
imputed rents from owner-occupied units. Imputed rents are the sum of utility costs and a usercost imputed from housing values.

F

City-Specific Estimates of Home-Productivity and Substitution

This section derives the equation used to estimate city-specific elasticities of substitution in the
housing sector. Recall the parametrized relationship between density and attributes from equation
(26) with variable σY in the text. We generalize it here to allow for alternative parametrizations
and the specification error ξ j
N̂∗j = (ε0N∗ ,Q + dY,Q σYj )Q̂j + (ε0N∗ ,AX + dY,AX σYj )ÂjX + (ε0N∗ ,AX + dY,AY σYj )ÂjY + ξ j .

(A.3)

ε0N,Q is the density elasticity component common across cities, with σYj = 0, while dY,Q is the
coefficient on σYj , parametrized in the third row of Panel A, in Table 2. The remaining notation is
similar.
Substituting in equations (1) and (23) we create an equation in terms of the observable ŵj and
p̂j . This involves collecting on the right all terms involving σYj or ÂjY , while on the left we create
an alternate measure of excess density based on known parameters,
N̂ej = Ĝj σYj + (k1 + k2 σYj )ÂjY + ξ j ,

(A.4)

where we define the generalized excess density measure as






θL
θL j
0
0
j
0
0
j
p̂ − εN∗ ,AX θN − φL
− εN∗ ,Q (1 − τ )sw ŵj ; (A.5)
N̂e ≡ N̂∗ − εN∗ ,Q sy + εN∗ ,AX
φL
φL
the demand shifter, which depends on quality of life and observable trade-productivity, is






θL j
θL
j
Ĝ ≡ dY,Q sy + dY,AX
p̂ + dY,AX θN − φL
− dY,Q (1 − τ )sw ŵj ;
φL
φL

viii

(A.6)

and the two constants for the level of AjY and its interaction with σYj are:
θL
,
φL
θL
+ dY,AX .
φL

k1 ≡ ε0N,AY + ε0N,AX
k2 ≡ dY,AY

To identify heterogeneity in either σYj or AjY , we need observable variables that change them.
Here, we consider a two variable model (which can easily be extended) to account for regulatory
and geographic variables. First, assume that the elasticity of substitution in the home good sector
is given by the linear function of I j and S j :
σYj = σY 0 + σY I I j + σY S S j + v j .

(A.7)

Second, assume that differences in home-productivity are also a linear function of the same two
variables:
ÂjY = aI I j + aS S j + uj .

(A.8)

Substituting equations (A.7) and (A.8) into (A.4) and simplifying yields an equation with several quadratic interactions,
N̂ej = σY 0 Ĝj + σY I Ĝj I j + σY S Ĝj S j + (k1 + k2 σY 0 )aI I j + (k1 + k2 σY 0 )aS S j
+ k2 σY I aI (I j )2 + k2 σY S aS (S j )2 + k2 (σY 1 aS + σY S aI )S j I j + ej

(A.9)

and the heteroskedastic error term:
ej ≡ v j [Gj + k2 (aI I j + aS S j )] + uj [k1 + k2 (σY 0 + σY I I j + σY S S j )] + k2 v j uj + ξ j

(A.10)

The following orthogonality conditions permit consistent estimation of the parameters in equation
(A.9) using standard non-linear least squares:
E[v j |Ĝj , Ĝj I j , Ĝj S j , I j , S j , (I j )2 , (S j )2 , I j S j , uj ] = 0
j

j

j j

j

j

j

j

j

j

j 2

j 2

j

j

(A.12)

j

(A.13)

E[u |Ĝ , Ĝ I , Ĝ S , I , S , (I ) , (S ) , I S , v ] = 0
j

j

j j

j

j

j 2

j 2

j

(A.11)

j

E[ξ |Ĝ , Ĝ I , Ĝ S , I , S , (I ) , (S ) , I S ] = 0

We do not use higher-order moments from the heteroskedastic error term to estimate the model.
The 8-parameter reduced-form specification of equation (A.9) is given by
N̂ej = π1 Ĝj + π2 Ĝj I j + π3 Ĝj S j + π4 I j +
+ π5 S j + π6 (I j )2 + π7 (S j )2 + π8 S j I j + ej

ix

(A.14)

It may be used to test the model by checking if these three constraints hold:
π6 (k1 + k2 π1 ) = k2 π2 π4 ,
π7 (k1 + k2 π1 ) = k2 π3 π5 ,
π8 (k1 + k2 π1 ) = k2 (π2 π5 + π3 π4 ).
We can consider more restricted models. The first set of models assumes that AjY = 0. These
correspond to the first two regressions in table. In that case, the estimates of AjX remain accurate.
The error ej is due either to specification error, ξ j , or unobserved determinants of σYj . This is the
model we use to assess the predictive power of the model.
The second set of models allows for variable AjY . The initial version of this model, with fixed
σY , also assumes ξ j = 0, applying all deviations to AjY . σYj to vary, (25b) still applies so long as
v j = ξ j = 0. If not, an alternative is to assume uj = 0, and infer AjY from what is predicted in
(A.8). In either case, estimates of AjX should be updated using (23).

G
G.1

Models in the Literature
Rappaport (2008a, 2008b)

Rappaport’s model most resembles our own. Most importantly it imposes the restriction that ÂjX =
ÂjY . It also imposes the restriction that i) traded production is Cobb-Douglas, σX = 1, and ii) home
production is a nested CES.

G.2

Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009)

The differences between Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009) and the general neoclassical model include
that the former imposes i) unit elasticities of substitution, i.e., σD = σX = σY = 1 and ii) separate
land markets in the traded and non-traded sector, implying separate prices rX and rYj . In addition,
Glaeser and Gottlieb impose that all non-labor income is taken by absentee landlords, sw = 1 and
that federal taxes are zero τ = 0.
Following the order of our own system, this simplifies the first mobility condition to −ŵj +
sy p̂j = Q̂j , and leaves the other two unaltered. The simplified budget constraint and tangency
condition implies x̂j = ŵj = sy p̂j − Q̂j , and ŷ j = ŵj − p̂j = −(1 − sy )p̂j − Q̂j .
Production in the traded sector is simplified. With zero profits, the factor demands are just
j
j
= X̂ j . Land in traded production is fixed so that r̂X
= X̂ j = N̂Xj + ŵj .
N̂Xj = X̂ j − ŵj , K̂X
Substituting this rent solution into the zero-profit condition, ÂX = θL N̂Xj + (θL + θN )ŵj .
In the non-traded or housing sector, factor demands under zero profits are N̂Yj = Ŷ j + p̂j −
ŵj , KYj = Ŷ j + p̂j − wj . Since land supply is exogenous, it makes sense to rearrange the demand
as Y j = r̂Yj + L̂j − p̂j . Using the zero profit condition to infer land rents and substituting it in
provides the relevant housing supply function:
rYj =

p̂j + ÂjY − φN wj
1 − φL j
1 j
φN j
⇒Yj =
p̂ +
ÂY −
ŵ + L̂jY
φL
φL
φL
φL

x

The partial-equilibrium elasticity of housing supply is η = (1 − φL )/φL , with additional terms for
productivity, local wages, and land supply, which all matter in general equilibrium.
The market clearing condition for housing is that N̂ j + ŷ j = Y j . Substituting in the conditions
for household demand and the demand for labor, this means N̂Yj + ŵj − p̂j = N̂ j + ŵj − p̂j , or
just N̂Yj = N̂ j . Through the resource constraint from labor this also means that N̂Xj = N̂ j . This
j
simplification follows from sw = 1.28 . Combined these conditions imply X̂ j = K̂ j = K̂X
=
j
j
j
j
j
j
K̂Y = N̂ + ŵ = Ŷ + p̂ = r̂X = r̂Y + L̂Y . The last part of the expression implies how the
wages are different. The resulting inference measures are
Q̂j = sy p̂j − ŵj
ÂjX = θL N̂ j + (θL + θN )ŵj
ÂjY = φL N̂ j + (φL + φN )ŵj − p̂j − φL L̂jY
The last equation is now under-identified unless we use density, in which case it is
ÂY = φL (N̂ − L̂) + (φL + φN )ŵ − p̂
which is much different than what we have derived before. From the solutions we have
N̂ =

[sφK + (1 − s)]ÂjX + (1 − θK )Q̂j + s(1 − θK )(ÂjY + φL L̂jY )
θL + s(θN φL − θL φN )

ŵ =

sφL ÂjX − θL Q̂j − sθL (ÂjY + φN L̂jY )
θL + s(θN φL − θL φN )

φL ÂjX + (θN φL − θL φN )Q̂j − θL (ÂjY + φN L̂jY )
p̂ =
θL + s(θN φL − θL φN )
Note that there is no difference between AY and L for those numbers. The prediction for density
is that it falls with land supply at a different rate
N̂ − L̂ =

[sφK + (1 − s)]ÂjX + (1 − θK )Q̂j + s(1 − θK )ÂjY − θL [1 − s(φL + φN )]L̂j
θL + s(θN φL − θL φN )

The density is restriction is more easily examined using the data arranged in the housing supply
function:
1
φL + φN
1
N̂ − L̂ =
p̂ −
ŵ +
ÂY
φL
φL
φL
In the data the unadjusted RMSE error is 0.87021. The fit is poor in the fully restricted model in
28

Note that the authors state that NY =sy φN N, which
 implies that absentee income is paid entirely in the traded
j
j
j
good. More generally, (1 − sw )ŵ = λL N̂X − NY , so that the proportion of labor in the traded sector rises with
the wage.

xi

this paper’s parametrization, but does better with Glaeser and Gottlieb’s
φL βw RM SE R2
0.223 −3.64 0.7255 0.305
0.333 −2.33 0.5761 0.562
1.125 −0.62 0.5607 0.937
The last row corresponds to a one restriction restricted fit that the coefficient on ŵ has to be −(1 −
φK ) that on p̂. It does produces an estimate for φL greater than one.
For heterogeneous housing supply, take the density equation and substitute in 1/φL = 1 + η.
N̂ − L̂ = (1 + η)p̂j − (1 + (1 + η)φN ) ŵj + (1 + η)ÂjY
Restricting AjY to be uniform, we get
ηj =

(N̂ j − L̂j ) + ŵj
−1
p̂j − φN ŵj

In the data this produces a large number of negative supply elasticities. This suggests the model
is not appropriate for inferring heterogeneous supply elasticities. Incidentally, the model handles
agglomeration economies with ÂX + γ N̂ = (1 − θK )ŵ + (1 − θK − θN )N̂ .

G.3

Lee and Li (2013)

The authors’ iso-elastic housing production function is equivalent to the case with φN = 0, σY = 1,
and uniform AY = 1, but with variable land endowments, L.
Ŷ =

1 − φL
p̂ + L̂
φL

Although the model does not address land directly, it implies p̂j = φL r̂j . Furthermore, N̂ j = N̂Xj .
Households have Cobb-Douglas utility, σD = 1. There are no taxes τ = 0, and non-labor
income is given to absentee landlords. Thus Q̂j = sy p̂j − ŵj , x̂j = ŵj = sy p̂j − Q̂j , and
ŷ j = ŵj − p̂j = −(1 − sy )p̂j − Q̂j .
The greatest departure from the Roback model is that firms purchase housing directly, so that
traded production: X = AX NXθN YX1−θN . In this Cobb-Douglas economy, this simplification is
(1−θ )(1−φN ) (1−θN )φL
easy to untangle, since we can think of YX1−θN = KX N
LX
. Therefore, the main
imposition is that θK = (1 − φN ) (1 − θN ), and θL = φL (1 − θN ), or that factor proportions in
the traded-sector should mirror those in the housing sector with θL /θK = φL / (1 − φL ), which
is not self evident. By virtue of zero profits and Cobb-Douglas production, X̂ j = N̂ j + ŵj ,
YXj = X̂ j − p̂j = N̂ j + ŵj − p̂j .
Market-clearing in the housing market simplifies as both households and firms have housing
demand that obeys Ŷ = N̂ j + ŵj − p̂j . Setting supply equal to demand, we have that N̂ j + ŵj =
L̂j + p̂j /φL = L̂j + r̂j , the same as in the Glaser and Gottlieb model.

xii

Summing up, the model imposes
ÂX = θN ŵ + (1 − θN ) p̂j
Q̂ = sy p̂j − ŵj
L̂j = N̂ j + ŵj − p̂j /φ
The last equation may be seen as an imposition of the data, or a way of inferring true land supply.
It implies that density should be equal to the ratio of the inferred rent to the wage:
N̂ j − L̂j = p̂j /φ − ŵj
Solving, the model inverts easily to
p̂j =

φL ÂjX + θN φL Q̂j
θL + sy θN φL

ŵj =

φL ÂjX + θN φL Q̂j
θL + sy θN φL

[sy φK + (1 − sy )]ÂjX + (1 − θK )Q̂j
N̂ =
θL + sy θN φL
j

The model is equivalent in most ways to the Glaeser Gottlieb model. Lee and Li (2013) concern
themselves with fitting Zipf’s Law rather than specific cities.

G.4

Saiz (2010) Model

This monocentric city around a CBD cannot be easily mapped to our framework. There is no
mobile capital, and land is only in the housing sector. The initial wage, w0 , quality of life, Q0 , and
arc of expansion Θ are exogenous. The key endogenous variables are p̄, N . Housing demand per
person is perfectly inelastic with respect to income and price: y = 1, Y = N . Households at a
distance of z from the CBD pay tz for commuting. There is only labor income, so x = w − p − tz.
Quality of life enters additively with wages, making it indistinguishable from what is effectively
trade productivity: U = (x + Q) I[y ≥ 1], and V = Q + w − p − tz. Agglomeration diseconomies
in production and consumption imply w = w0 − αN 1/2 , Q = Q0 − ψN 1/2 . With mobility, the
downtown rent at p(0) declines with population p(0) = w0 + Q0 − (α + ψ)N 1/2 , while rent at z is
p(z) = p(0) − tz.
Housing supply is based on fixed coefficients with land and non-land costs Y = min{v, L/γ̃}
where the price of v = 1 or i and γ̃ is
of the city with
pa fixed population density. The land area p
fringe,
r(0)
=
t
N/(γ̃Θ), r̄ =
radius z is L = Θz 2 = N/γ̃ ⇒ z = N/(γ̃Θ). r(z) = 0 at the


p
r(0) = t/3 N/(γ̃Θ). Log-linearized we get r̂ = t̂ + (1/2) N̂ − Θ̂ − γ̂ . This restricts the
elasticity of land supply to 2. The price of a house is the capitalized value of the rent plus the
construction costs. This has the inverse supply equation
s
√
t N
r̄
t N
√
p̄ = v + r̄ = v +
, and φ̄L =
√
3 γ̃Θ
v + r̄ 3v γ̃Θ + t N
xiii

is the typical cost share of land, which ranges from 0 to 1 as N goes from 0 to infinity.

G.5

Desmet Rossi-Hansberg (2013)

The authors impose a Cobb-Douglas production function for X, with θL = 0, and σX = 1. Housing is produced directly from land, which is supplied through a monocentric city. This imposes
φL = 1 and Θ = 1. Household demand for land is completely inelastic, thus, the elasticity of
population as well as housing supply is always 2:
N̂ = Ŷ = 2.
At the household level, workers supply leisure in Cobb-Douglas utility function, unlike our
model. They use data on non-housing consumption, C, capital, K, and hours worked, H. Their
basic measures are




j
\
j
j
j
j
Q̂ = Ĉ − N̂ + ψ (1 − H) − N̂
 j
j
j
K̂X − θN ĤX
ÂjX = X̂ j − 1 − θN
 \ j
H
j
\
j
j
(1 − τ ) = Ĉ − X̂ +
1−H
The model imposes other restrictions in the steady state, such as ÂjX = (1 − θN ) ŵj , which does
not hold exactly in the data.

xiv

Table A.1: Parametrized Relationship between Amenities, Prices, and Quantities, with Feedback Effects
A: Trade-productivity Feedback
I: Current Regime

Price/quantity

xv

Land value
Wage
Home price
Trade consumption
Home consumption
Population density
Capital
Land
Trade production
Home production
Trade labor
Home labor
Trade capital
Home capital
Trade land
Home land

B: Quality of Life Feedback

II: Neutral Taxes

I: Current Regime

II: Neutral Taxes

Trade
Productivity
ÂX0

Home
Productivity
ÂY

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Notation

Quality
of Life
Q̂

Q̂

ÂX0

ÂY

Q̂0

ÂX

ÂY

Q̂0

ÂX

ÂY

r̂
ŵ
p̂
x̂
ŷ
N̂
K̂
L̂
X̂
Ŷ
N̂X
N̂Y
K̂X
K̂Y
L̂X
L̂Y

14.101
0.256
3.448
-0.249
-2.335
9.394
9.546
0.000
9.839
7.059
9.481
9.188
9.651
9.358
0.246
-0.047

4.615
1.253
1.849
0.401
-0.713
2.486
3.293
0.000
3.838
1.773
2.619
2.171
3.455
3.006
0.377
-0.072

4.655
0.100
0.148
0.032
-0.057
3.315
3.349
0.000
3.598
3.258
3.465
2.957
3.532
3.023
0.427
-0.081

13.125
0.194
3.182
0.764
-1.358
8.135
8.322
0.000
8.160
6.777
7.868
8.770
7.997
8.899
-0.757
0.144

8.240
1.311
2.731
0.656
-1.166
4.791
5.645
0.000
6.186
3.625
4.883
4.572
5.757
5.446
0.261
-0.050

4.944
0.105
0.218
0.052
-0.093
3.499
3.537
0.000
3.786
3.406
3.646
3.148
3.716
3.218
0.418
-0.080

10.544
-0.320
2.263
-0.397
-1.768
7.282
7.064
0.000
7.088
5.513
7.301
7.236
7.088
7.023
0.055
-0.010

3.674
1.101
1.536
0.362
-0.563
1.927
2.637
0.000
3.109
1.364
2.042
1.654
2.776
2.388
0.326
-0.062

3.400
-0.103
-0.270
-0.020
0.143
2.569
2.473
0.000
2.627
2.712
2.696
2.268
2.627
2.199
0.360
-0.069

9.136
-0.277
1.961
0.471
-0.837
5.772
5.647
0.000
5.311
4.935
5.496
6.427
5.311
6.242
-0.782
0.149

5.890
1.034
2.012
0.483
-0.859
3.399
4.070
0.000
4.508
2.540
3.486
3.193
4.175
3.882
0.246
-0.047

3.228
-0.098
-0.307
-0.074
0.131
2.482
2.386
0.000
2.561
2.613
2.626
2.141
2.561
2.076
0.407
-0.078

Each value in Table A.1 represents the partial effect that a one-point increase in each amenity has on each price or quantity. The values in Panel A include
feedback effects on trade-productivity, where AjX = AjX0 (N j )α and α = 0.06. The values in Panel B include feedback effects on quality-of-life, where
Qj = Qj0 (N j )−γ and γ = 0.015. Each panel includes values for the current regime and geographically neutral taxes. All variables are measured in log
differences from the national average.

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xvi

New York, Northern New Jersey, Long Island, NY-NJ-CT-PA
Honolulu, HI
Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County, CA
San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA
Chicago-Gary-Kenosha, IL-IN-WI
Miami-Fort Lauderdale, FL
Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City, PA-NJ-DE-MD
San Diego, CA
Salinas (Monterey-Carmel), CA
Boston-Worcester-Lawrence, MA-NH-ME-CT
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Lompoc, CA
New Orleans, LA
Las Vegas, NV-AZ
Washington-Baltimore, DC-MD-VA-WV
Providence-Fall River-Warwick, RI-MA
Milwaukee-Racine, WI
Stockton-Lodi, CA
Laredo, TX
Phoenix-Mesa, AZ
Denver-Boulder-Greeley, CO
Buffalo-Niagara Falls, NY
Provo-Orem, UT
Champaign-Urbana, IL
Sacramento-Yolo, CA
Reading, PA
Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT
Modesto, CA
El Paso, TX
Detroit-Ann Arbor-Flint, MI
Madison, WI
Lincoln, NE
Cleveland-Akron, OH

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

2.294
1.302
1.258
1.218
1.200
0.972
0.967
0.881
0.847
0.806
0.722
0.697
0.693
0.693
0.593
0.582
0.538
0.533
0.517
0.476
0.457
0.456
0.445
0.442
0.411
0.402
0.398
0.395
0.356
0.342
0.339
0.338

3.405
1.953
1.946
2.050
1.789
1.372
1.409
1.439
1.443
1.278
1.299
0.875
0.998
1.069
0.850
0.804
0.813
0.531
0.729
0.734
0.625
0.577
0.569
0.716
0.522
0.530
0.590
0.345
0.570
0.498
0.318
0.453

0.031
0.208
0.080
0.137
0.007
0.036
-0.038
0.122
0.141
0.050
0.181
0.005
-0.016
-0.009
0.012
-0.005
-0.002
-0.009
0.015
0.049
-0.052
0.014
-0.011
0.032
-0.050
0.025
-0.008
-0.040
-0.046
0.058
0.017
-0.015

0.218
0.056
0.154
0.292
0.130
0.021
0.097
0.100
0.145
0.132
0.117
-0.063
0.050
0.120
0.019
0.032
0.082
-0.192
0.026
0.065
-0.046
-0.044
-0.076
0.075
-0.010
-0.017
0.048
-0.166
0.107
-0.027
-0.118
0.006

0.272
0.039
0.163
0.273
0.160
0.043
0.134
0.088
0.123
0.136
0.082
-0.036
0.075
0.137
0.035
0.051
0.095
-0.157
0.038
0.063
-0.012
-0.029
-0.052
0.075
0.018
-0.009
0.060
-0.129
0.124
-0.030
-0.102
0.021

0.504
-0.166
0.088
-0.171
0.276
0.202
0.343
-0.108
-0.198
0.035
-0.324
0.255
0.229
0.162
0.146
0.179
0.121
0.329
0.109
-0.022
0.316
0.139
0.225
0.005
0.270
0.075
0.115
0.347
0.161
-0.025
0.146
0.145

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xvii

Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton, WA
Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, TX
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA
State College, PA
Reno, NV
Portland-Salem, OR-WA
Lafayette, IN
West Palm Beach-Boca Raton, FL
Fresno, CA
San Antonio, TX
Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport News, VAMinneapolis-St. Paul, MN-WI
Anchorage, AK
Bakersfield, CA
Omaha, NE-IA
Columbus, OH
Erie, PA
Springfield, MA
Bloomington-Normal, IL
Tucson, AZ
Pittsburgh, PA
Albuquerque, NM
Toledo, OH
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
Iowa City, IA
Hartford, CT
Lubbock, TX
Corpus Christi, TX
Austin-San Marcos, TX
Non-metro, RI
Bryan-College Station, TX

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

0.334
0.332
0.327
0.317
0.301
0.272
0.250
0.245
0.244
0.241
0.231
0.218
0.213
0.198
0.198
0.174
0.165
0.161
0.152
0.135
0.131
0.128
0.122
0.122
0.118
0.112
0.108
0.084
0.083
0.078
0.074
0.072

0.597
0.453
0.472
0.422
0.346
0.468
0.387
0.274
0.383
0.332
0.193
0.239
0.316
0.382
0.233
0.090
0.210
0.099
0.244
0.164
0.132
0.098
0.088
0.104
0.090
0.088
0.294
-0.057
-0.021
0.147
0.222
0.002

0.062
-0.072
-0.041
-0.021
0.037
0.057
0.050
-0.014
0.020
-0.004
-0.034
0.031
-0.023
0.021
-0.056
-0.014
-0.027
-0.037
0.005
-0.061
0.051
-0.043
0.051
-0.043
0.002
0.038
-0.019
-0.008
-0.032
0.020
0.062
0.027

0.094
0.043
0.044
-0.006
-0.123
0.037
0.040
-0.059
0.045
-0.023
-0.100
-0.094
0.068
0.083
0.008
-0.084
0.011
-0.115
-0.006
0.003
-0.086
-0.058
-0.066
-0.034
-0.055
-0.075
0.117
-0.164
-0.112
0.014
0.068
-0.121

0.081
0.072
0.064
0.011
-0.114
0.028
0.032
-0.042
0.045
-0.012
-0.075
-0.088
0.077
0.078
0.030
-0.068
0.024
-0.091
-0.002
0.025
-0.090
-0.037
-0.072
-0.015
-0.047
-0.076
0.117
-0.147
-0.092
0.010
0.048
-0.117

-0.122
0.265
0.182
0.160
0.085
-0.088
-0.078
0.155
-0.004
0.103
0.232
0.053
0.082
-0.048
0.206
0.150
0.115
0.228
0.041
0.201
-0.031
0.194
-0.050
0.175
0.069
-0.011
0.002
0.163
0.187
-0.037
-0.187
0.036

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xviii

Colorado Springs, CO
St. Louis, MO-IL
Brownsville-Harlingen-San Benito, TX
Rochester, NY
Fargo-Moorhead, ND-MN
Spokane, WA
Pueblo, CO
Lancaster, PA
Cincinnati-Hamilton, OH-KY-IN
Lawrence, KS
Louisville, KY-IN
Bloomington, IN
Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY
Amarillo, TX
Memphis, TN-AR-MS
Fort Collins-Loveland, CO
Scranton–Wilkes-Barre–Hazleton, PA
Orlando, FL
Syracuse, NY
Altoona, PA
Visalia-Tulare-Porterville, CA
Green Bay, WI
South Bend, IN
Corvalis, OR
Lexington, KY
Yuma, AZ
Des Moines, IA
Kansas City, MO-KS
Oklahoma City, OK
Waterloo-Cedar Falls, IA
Sarasota-Bradenton, FL
Dayton-Springfield, OH

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

0.069
0.061
0.057
0.033
0.024
0.019
0.009
0.006
0.005
0.004
-0.003
-0.006
-0.019
-0.019
-0.026
-0.039
-0.040
-0.048
-0.072
-0.073
-0.078
-0.085
-0.085
-0.102
-0.104
-0.112
-0.118
-0.121
-0.123
-0.123
-0.130
-0.137

0.058
0.022
-0.188
0.061
-0.161
-0.075
-0.144
-0.006
-0.017
-0.110
-0.083
-0.083
0.003
-0.179
-0.111
-0.044
-0.163
-0.119
-0.126
-0.268
-0.132
-0.157
-0.221
-0.168
-0.266
-0.263
-0.246
-0.259
-0.365
-0.346
-0.196
-0.238

0.051
-0.034
-0.063
-0.040
-0.022
0.006
0.002
-0.011
-0.035
0.028
-0.021
0.031
-0.031
-0.008
-0.055
0.067
-0.024
0.008
-0.071
-0.044
-0.019
-0.007
-0.048
0.076
-0.023
0.008
-0.009
-0.033
-0.017
-0.017
0.073
-0.031

-0.063
-0.008
-0.213
-0.032
-0.172
-0.091
-0.150
-0.015
0.019
-0.119
-0.050
-0.114
-0.022
-0.146
-0.014
-0.026
-0.111
-0.041
-0.058
-0.160
-0.033
-0.029
-0.075
-0.074
-0.094
-0.109
-0.043
-0.020
-0.137
-0.142
-0.056
-0.029

-0.070
0.004
-0.177
-0.017
-0.152
-0.085
-0.139
-0.011
0.028
-0.118
-0.041
-0.114
-0.012
-0.134
0.001
-0.044
-0.097
-0.042
-0.036
-0.138
-0.028
-0.028
-0.059
-0.093
-0.084
-0.107
-0.041
-0.014
-0.126
-0.131
-0.077
-0.023

-0.068
0.115
0.330
0.137
0.186
0.052
0.103
0.042
0.081
0.010
0.088
-0.005
0.091
0.117
0.145
-0.169
0.128
-0.009
0.204
0.203
0.049
0.013
0.149
-0.181
0.093
0.019
0.015
0.061
0.100
0.103
-0.194
0.056

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xix

Odessa-Midland, TX
Sioux City, IA-NE
Eugene-Springfield, OR
Dubuque, IA
Indianapolis, IN
Appleton-Oshkosh-Neenah, WI
Boise City, ID
Wichita, KS
Davenport-Moline-Rock Island, IA-IL
Merced, CA
Lansing-East Lansing, MI
Harrisburg-Lebanon-Carlisle, PA
Richmond-Petersburg, VA
Elmira, NY
Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland, MI
Portland, ME
Abilene, TX
Rockford, IL
Jacksonville, FL
Cedar Rapids, IA
Muncie, IN
Sioux Falls, SD
York, PA
Yakima, WA
Atlanta, GA
Tulsa, OK
Burlington, VT
Gainesville, FL
Binghamton, NY
Sheboygan, WI
Lewiston-Auburn, ME
Canton-Massillon, OH

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-0.145
-0.149
-0.150
-0.160
-0.175
-0.176
-0.176
-0.178
-0.205
-0.206
-0.209
-0.213
-0.219
-0.221
-0.225
-0.235
-0.247
-0.253
-0.256
-0.257
-0.264
-0.264
-0.269
-0.278
-0.282
-0.285
-0.287
-0.292
-0.293
-0.293
-0.298
-0.313

-0.387
-0.404
-0.230
-0.412
-0.274
-0.314
-0.366
-0.402
-0.387
-0.287
-0.298
-0.328
-0.348
-0.377
-0.319
-0.405
-0.568
-0.401
-0.430
-0.460
-0.506
-0.549
-0.422
-0.435
-0.371
-0.570
-0.489
-0.543
-0.460
-0.479
-0.590
-0.515

-0.064
-0.025
0.087
-0.027
-0.036
-0.019
0.010
-0.047
-0.034
-0.015
-0.054
-0.028
-0.033
-0.057
-0.046
0.057
0.004
-0.064
-0.009
-0.005
-0.043
0.006
-0.030
-0.005
-0.033
-0.026
0.054
0.022
-0.055
-0.016
-0.013
-0.026

-0.137
-0.156
-0.081
-0.149
-0.004
-0.056
-0.079
-0.083
-0.089
-0.008
-0.002
-0.022
-0.009
-0.149
-0.010
-0.054
-0.228
-0.031
-0.051
-0.074
-0.124
-0.147
-0.041
-0.035
0.063
-0.100
-0.076
-0.134
-0.125
-0.066
-0.120
-0.082

-0.114
-0.143
-0.105
-0.136
0.001
-0.053
-0.082
-0.070
-0.080
-0.011
0.007
-0.020
-0.007
-0.129
-0.004
-0.074
-0.220
-0.020
-0.054
-0.076
-0.112
-0.147
-0.039
-0.041
0.058
-0.095
-0.096
-0.140
-0.111
-0.067
-0.117
-0.079

0.215
0.127
-0.220
0.122
0.041
0.033
-0.028
0.124
0.084
-0.021
0.077
0.020
0.022
0.182
0.055
-0.188
0.068
0.109
-0.023
-0.019
0.115
0.001
0.020
-0.052
-0.046
0.046
-0.181
-0.060
0.138
-0.005
0.021
0.024

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xx

Rochester, MN
Charlottesville, VA
Billings, MT
Savannah, GA
St. Joseph, MO
Topeka, KS
Melbourne-Titusville-Palm Bay, FL
Pocatello, ID
Casper, WY
Utica-Rome, NY
Fort Walton Beach, FL
Decatur, IL
Bismarck, ND
La Crosse, WI-MN
Yuba City, CA
Janesville-Beloit, WI
Peoria-Pekin, IL
Columbia, MO
Evansville-Henderson, IN-KY
Victoria, TX
Naples, FL
Great Falls, MT
Medford-Ashland, OR
Springfield, IL
Lawton, OK
Waco, TX
Richland-Kennewick-Pasco, WA
Chico-Paradise, CA
Columbus, GA-AL
San Angelo, TX
Tallahassee, FL
Fort Myers-Cape Coral, FL

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-0.316
-0.320
-0.321
-0.327
-0.338
-0.340
-0.351
-0.362
-0.362
-0.366
-0.374
-0.377
-0.381
-0.385
-0.386
-0.386
-0.390
-0.392
-0.396
-0.403
-0.415
-0.416
-0.416
-0.422
-0.425
-0.430
-0.431
-0.436
-0.436
-0.441
-0.442
-0.446

-0.491
-0.479
-0.664
-0.506
-0.656
-0.642
-0.606
-0.743
-0.757
-0.571
-0.669
-0.635
-0.848
-0.634
-0.546
-0.610
-0.595
-0.688
-0.667
-0.720
-0.483
-0.881
-0.606
-0.654
-0.858
-0.755
-0.632
-0.564
-0.740
-0.812
-0.714
-0.678

-0.066
0.049
0.008
0.004
-0.028
-0.029
-0.001
-0.060
-0.011
-0.068
0.062
-0.087
-0.041
-0.010
0.004
-0.049
-0.064
0.013
-0.032
-0.073
0.106
0.022
0.092
-0.038
-0.021
-0.044
-0.052
0.053
-0.026
-0.024
0.025
0.049

0.001
-0.084
-0.164
-0.078
-0.169
-0.133
-0.100
-0.150
-0.208
-0.123
-0.177
-0.086
-0.257
-0.126
-0.059
-0.024
-0.038
-0.155
-0.106
-0.110
0.020
-0.264
-0.098
-0.085
-0.251
-0.129
0.014
-0.066
-0.150
-0.184
-0.104
-0.083

0.008
-0.103
-0.165
-0.085
-0.160
-0.126
-0.104
-0.134
-0.202
-0.107
-0.194
-0.068
-0.240
-0.127
-0.069
-0.021
-0.030
-0.160
-0.102
-0.095
-0.026
-0.265
-0.131
-0.082
-0.241
-0.122
0.013
-0.091
-0.147
-0.178
-0.118
-0.106

0.070
-0.173
-0.009
-0.061
0.081
0.058
-0.039
0.145
0.058
0.147
-0.161
0.167
0.164
-0.010
-0.092
0.021
0.070
-0.051
0.031
0.138
-0.425
-0.008
-0.306
0.023
0.093
0.068
-0.011
-0.232
0.032
0.049
-0.135
-0.215

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xxi

San Luis Obispo-Atascadero-Paso Robles, CA
Baton Rouge, LA
Grand Forks, ND-MN
Roanoke, VA
Williamsport, PA
Pittsfield, MA
Saginaw-Bay City-Midland, MI
Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill, NC
Charleston-North Charleston, SC
Youngstown-Warren, OH
Grand Junction, CO
Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX
Fort Wayne, IN
Nashville, TN
McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, TX
Daytona Beach, FL
Springfield, MO
Birmingham, AL
Missoula, MT
Columbia, SC
Fayetteville, NC
Cheyenne, WY
Duluth-Superior, MN-WI
Montgomery, AL
Shreveport-Bossier City, LA
Owensboro, KY
Kalamazoo-Battle Creek, MI
Wichita Falls, TX
Sharon, PA
Eau Claire, WI
Kokomo, IN
Fort Pierce-Port St. Lucie, FL

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-0.449
-0.456
-0.459
-0.461
-0.462
-0.470
-0.480
-0.494
-0.495
-0.503
-0.512
-0.517
-0.521
-0.530
-0.532
-0.550
-0.551
-0.553
-0.554
-0.557
-0.557
-0.560
-0.560
-0.570
-0.574
-0.593
-0.593
-0.600
-0.601
-0.604
-0.609
-0.611

-0.404
-0.730
-0.868
-0.744
-0.770
-0.635
-0.714
-0.712
-0.755
-0.806
-0.799
-0.866
-0.829
-0.759
-1.027
-0.910
-0.935
-0.847
-0.962
-0.874
-0.906
-0.990
-0.904
-0.921
-0.964
-1.000
-0.860
-1.051
-0.982
-0.959
-0.906
-0.934

0.131
-0.026
-0.042
-0.017
-0.032
0.016
-0.080
0.011
0.035
-0.051
0.076
-0.104
-0.063
-0.001
-0.081
0.027
0.006
-0.042
0.094
-0.006
0.028
0.049
-0.069
-0.005
-0.038
-0.041
-0.056
0.003
-0.035
-0.031
-0.101
0.022

0.064
-0.061
-0.208
-0.109
-0.133
-0.054
-0.029
0.017
-0.088
-0.095
-0.148
-0.077
-0.071
-0.018
-0.226
-0.150
-0.186
-0.034
-0.203
-0.075
-0.179
-0.209
-0.122
-0.125
-0.133
-0.148
-0.044
-0.224
-0.154
-0.119
0.015
-0.089

0.007
-0.065
-0.196
-0.112
-0.130
-0.071
-0.021
-0.004
-0.109
-0.091
-0.176
-0.060
-0.066
-0.035
-0.205
-0.165
-0.193
-0.039
-0.234
-0.087
-0.193
-0.226
-0.113
-0.134
-0.132
-0.146
-0.045
-0.229
-0.153
-0.122
0.021
-0.110

-0.532
-0.036
0.108
-0.028
0.027
-0.156
0.077
-0.199
-0.190
0.038
-0.261
0.160
0.049
-0.155
0.199
-0.143
-0.062
-0.043
-0.283
-0.110
-0.129
-0.163
0.085
-0.082
0.008
0.020
-0.012
-0.045
0.007
-0.029
0.058
-0.191

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xxii

Jackson, MS
Jamestown, NY
Las Cruces, NM
Santa Fe, NM
Killeen-Temple, TX
Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC
Mobile, AL
Pensacola, FL
Terre Haute, IN
Little Rock-North Little Rock, AR
Bellingham, WA
Elkhart-Goshen, IN
Tuscaloosa, AL
Lake Charles, LA
Jackson, MI
Panama City, FL
New London-Norwich, CT-RI
Athens, GA
Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL
Mansfield, OH
Greenville, NC
Enid, OK
Lima, OH
Charleston, WV
Biloxi-Gulfport-Pascagoula, MS
Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH
Parkersburg-Marietta, WV-OH
Bangor, ME
Rapid City, SD
Pine Bluff, AR
Macon, GA
Greensboro–Winston Salem–High Point, NC

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-0.618
-0.624
-0.629
-0.632
-0.637
-0.651
-0.667
-0.667
-0.668
-0.690
-0.692
-0.699
-0.705
-0.712
-0.713
-0.714
-0.719
-0.720
-0.750
-0.751
-0.757
-0.768
-0.778
-0.781
-0.787
-0.789
-0.801
-0.803
-0.806
-0.806
-0.835
-0.840

-1.009
-0.960
-1.066
-0.832
-1.066
-0.955
-1.070
-1.092
-1.088
-1.107
-0.938
-1.052
-1.093
-1.126
-1.028
-1.130
-0.875
-1.074
-1.193
-1.154
-1.162
-1.319
-1.202
-1.277
-1.253
-1.328
-1.335
-1.323
-1.348
-1.367
-1.262
-1.251

-0.030
-0.082
0.019
0.125
0.035
-0.010
-0.012
0.009
-0.065
-0.007
0.069
-0.038
-0.011
-0.067
-0.067
0.033
-0.000
0.019
-0.019
-0.043
-0.014
-0.032
-0.059
-0.047
-0.016
-0.072
-0.074
-0.025
0.034
-0.046
-0.070
-0.012

-0.103
-0.161
-0.188
-0.013
-0.215
0.002
-0.135
-0.156
-0.135
-0.107
-0.029
-0.069
-0.104
-0.079
-0.035
-0.148
0.061
-0.132
-0.122
-0.114
-0.093
-0.222
-0.110
-0.128
-0.138
-0.183
-0.180
-0.169
-0.213
-0.181
-0.078
-0.056

-0.109
-0.147
-0.202
-0.069
-0.230
-0.018
-0.144
-0.170
-0.130
-0.121
-0.070
-0.078
-0.117
-0.078
-0.038
-0.171
0.031
-0.152
-0.134
-0.119
-0.108
-0.223
-0.112
-0.132
-0.150
-0.177
-0.173
-0.177
-0.234
-0.183
-0.081
-0.078

-0.049
0.126
-0.121
-0.523
-0.146
-0.183
-0.090
-0.129
0.050
-0.129
-0.383
-0.076
-0.125
0.003
-0.028
-0.213
-0.273
-0.189
-0.105
-0.048
-0.141
-0.008
-0.018
-0.038
-0.115
0.063
0.063
-0.074
-0.199
-0.013
-0.030
-0.199

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xxiii

Punta Gorda, FL
St. Cloud, MN
Albany, GA
Monroe, LA
Steubenville-Weirton, OH-WV
Tyler, TX
Lafayette, LA
Augusta-Aiken, GA-SC
Huntsville, AL
Hattiesburg, MS
Johnstown, PA
Wilmington, NC
Non-metro, HI
Non-metro, CA
Knoxville, TN
Benton Harbor, MI
Auburn-Opelika, AL
Chattanooga, TN-GA
Redding, CA
Fort Smith, AR-OK
Non-metro, PA
Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers, AR
Wausau, WI
Jackson, TN
Danville, VA
Wheeling, WV-OH
Jacksonville, NC
Flagstaff, AZ-UT
Houma, LA
Alexandria, LA
Barnstable-Yarmouth (Cape Cod), MA
Texarkana, TX-Texarkana, AR

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-0.850
-0.851
-0.851
-0.859
-0.870
-0.875
-0.882
-0.897
-0.899
-0.901
-0.902
-0.906
-0.915
-0.917
-0.923
-0.929
-0.942
-0.962
-1.003
-1.047
-1.049
-1.057
-1.057
-1.064
-1.079
-1.083
-1.085
-1.104
-1.110
-1.119
-1.125
-1.125

-1.302
-1.274
-1.297
-1.356
-1.416
-1.334
-1.395
-1.363
-1.360
-1.462
-1.459
-1.301
-1.218
-1.204
-1.416
-1.329
-1.446
-1.455
-1.363
-1.684
-1.609
-1.622
-1.584
-1.631
-1.671
-1.714
-1.659
-1.558
-1.704
-1.744
-1.397
-1.818

0.054
-0.055
-0.060
-0.031
-0.057
-0.021
-0.045
-0.048
-0.057
-0.019
-0.068
0.067
0.128
0.046
-0.008
-0.031
-0.013
-0.023
0.043
-0.024
-0.059
0.007
-0.054
-0.060
-0.054
-0.055
0.053
0.077
-0.049
-0.033
0.107
-0.070

-0.151
-0.107
-0.105
-0.140
-0.197
-0.115
-0.137
-0.095
-0.061
-0.202
-0.194
-0.095
0.009
-0.023
-0.125
-0.082
-0.132
-0.111
-0.078
-0.193
-0.144
-0.139
-0.090
-0.106
-0.173
-0.197
-0.253
-0.105
-0.129
-0.174
0.034
-0.199

-0.184
-0.112
-0.110
-0.150
-0.196
-0.131
-0.144
-0.105
-0.071
-0.213
-0.191
-0.138
-0.059
-0.066
-0.145
-0.099
-0.151
-0.130
-0.118
-0.208
-0.153
-0.167
-0.104
-0.118
-0.182
-0.204
-0.287
-0.157
-0.143
-0.190
-0.037
-0.203

-0.310
-0.055
-0.042
-0.097
0.007
-0.146
-0.070
-0.096
-0.097
-0.100
0.024
-0.401
-0.635
-0.400
-0.188
-0.160
-0.178
-0.172
-0.379
-0.139
-0.083
-0.260
-0.136
-0.112
-0.084
-0.066
-0.311
-0.482
-0.139
-0.153
-0.665
-0.038

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xxiv

Greenville-Spartanburg-Anderson, SC
Clarksville-Hopkinsville, TN-KY
Jonesboro, AR
Non-metro, WA
Cumberland, MD-WV
Glens Falls, NY
Joplin, MO
Non-metro, NY
Non-metro, UT
Non-metro, CT
Dover, DE
Lynchburg, VA
Sherman-Denison, TX
Asheville, NC
Longview-Marshall, TX
Decatur, AL
Non-metro, ID
Non-metro, NV
Sumter, SC
Florence, AL
Myrtle Beach, SC
Florence, SC
Non-metro, OH
Johnson City-Kingsport-Bristol, TN-VA
Gadsden, AL
Non-metro, OR
Non-metro, NM
Non-metro, IN
Goldsboro, NC
Non-metro, WY
Dothan, AL
Non-metro, IL

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-1.134
-1.169
-1.174
-1.184
-1.188
-1.192
-1.207
-1.277
-1.299
-1.313
-1.318
-1.322
-1.323
-1.334
-1.347
-1.347
-1.368
-1.380
-1.382
-1.389
-1.393
-1.397
-1.402
-1.409
-1.437
-1.465
-1.473
-1.493
-1.500
-1.508
-1.524
-1.524

-1.691
-1.821
-1.900
-1.686
-1.785
-1.662
-1.900
-1.811
-1.894
-1.683
-1.891
-1.967
-1.982
-1.923
-2.044
-2.016
-2.062
-1.886
-2.117
-2.101
-2.026
-2.115
-2.057
-2.149
-2.194
-2.090
-2.254
-2.196
-2.229
-2.264
-2.323
-2.251

-0.022
-0.002
-0.028
0.025
-0.050
-0.028
-0.012
-0.056
0.002
-0.018
-0.009
-0.029
-0.030
0.066
-0.046
-0.070
0.009
-0.003
-0.024
-0.048
0.050
-0.039
-0.054
-0.020
-0.068
0.053
-0.001
-0.055
0.002
0.001
-0.037
-0.064

-0.084
-0.207
-0.240
-0.064
-0.172
-0.105
-0.252
-0.120
-0.116
0.084
-0.087
-0.147
-0.139
-0.146
-0.155
-0.092
-0.166
0.005
-0.201
-0.143
-0.163
-0.147
-0.112
-0.188
-0.153
-0.109
-0.196
-0.114
-0.187
-0.152
-0.193
-0.158

-0.111
-0.231
-0.254
-0.107
-0.186
-0.130
-0.271
-0.139
-0.153
0.038
-0.123
-0.173
-0.165
-0.199
-0.177
-0.111
-0.203
-0.042
-0.227
-0.166
-0.212
-0.173
-0.137
-0.217
-0.172
-0.167
-0.232
-0.141
-0.225
-0.193
-0.220
-0.181

-0.247
-0.226
-0.137
-0.402
-0.132
-0.236
-0.181
-0.179
-0.342
-0.432
-0.339
-0.246
-0.249
-0.499
-0.204
-0.184
-0.347
-0.439
-0.242
-0.221
-0.466
-0.244
-0.230
-0.269
-0.175
-0.533
-0.334
-0.256
-0.356
-0.381
-0.257
-0.213

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area

xxv

Non-metro, KS
Non-metro, MD
Non-metro, NE
Anniston, AL
Ocala, FL
Non-metro, MA
Non-metro, ND
Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC
Rocky Mount, NC
Non-metro, IA
Non-metro, MT
Non-metro, MN
Non-metro, FL
Non-metro, WI
Non-metro, WV
Non-metro, LA
Non-metro, TX
Non-metro, MI
Non-metro, AZ
Non-metro, VA
Non-metro, AK
Non-metro, MS
Non-metro, OK
Non-metro, SD
Non-metro, MO
Non-metro, VT
Non-metro, NC
Non-metro, NH
Non-metro, ME
Non-metro, GA
Non-metro, KY
Non-metro, DE

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-1.533
-1.552
-1.570
-1.570
-1.573
-1.576
-1.590
-1.615
-1.631
-1.688
-1.768
-1.774
-1.777
-1.823
-1.878
-1.879
-1.885
-1.887
-1.898
-1.910
-1.922
-1.961
-2.009
-2.014
-2.039
-2.048
-2.149
-2.156
-2.176
-2.186
-2.298
-2.313

-2.362
-2.129
-2.438
-2.399
-2.364
-2.093
-2.529
-2.358
-2.386
-2.560
-2.687
-2.573
-2.636
-2.636
-2.852
-2.825
-2.844
-2.691
-2.737
-2.790
-2.579
-2.989
-3.061
-3.120
-3.059
-2.985
-3.110
-3.054
-3.179
-3.156
-3.424
-3.232

-0.042
-0.021
-0.034
-0.038
-0.010
0.063
-0.056
-0.005
-0.018
-0.038
0.046
-0.056
0.007
-0.034
-0.058
-0.064
-0.055
-0.058
0.030
-0.033
-0.003
-0.068
-0.044
-0.022
-0.030
0.044
-0.011
0.021
0.015
-0.048
-0.076
0.011

-0.239
-0.037
-0.247
-0.206
-0.167
-0.020
-0.263
-0.130
-0.123
-0.191
-0.226
-0.157
-0.171
-0.117
-0.219
-0.189
-0.204
-0.108
-0.154
-0.162
0.054
-0.221
-0.259
-0.281
-0.253
-0.159
-0.152
-0.080
-0.176
-0.151
-0.199
-0.072

-0.262
-0.082
-0.273
-0.234
-0.205
-0.091
-0.282
-0.175
-0.165
-0.224
-0.283
-0.191
-0.222
-0.162
-0.251
-0.222
-0.238
-0.149
-0.216
-0.207
-0.015
-0.253
-0.297
-0.323
-0.296
-0.230
-0.212
-0.154
-0.242
-0.202
-0.241
-0.149

-0.216
-0.417
-0.243
-0.262
-0.363
-0.656
-0.181
-0.414
-0.392
-0.309
-0.530
-0.312
-0.469
-0.413
-0.297
-0.303
-0.318
-0.379
-0.580
-0.414
-0.647
-0.299
-0.349
-0.393
-0.401
-0.661
-0.554
-0.692
-0.615
-0.470
-0.400
-0.721

Table A.2: List of Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas Ranked by Density

Name of Metropolitan Area
Non-metro, SC
Non-metro, CO
Non-metro, TN
Non-metro, AR
Non-metro, AL

Population
Density
N̂ j

Land
Value
r̂j

Quality
of Life
Q̂j

Inferred
Costs
Eq. (23)

Trade
Productivity
ÂjX

Home
Productivity
ÂjY

-2.318
-2.324
-2.507
-2.577
-2.865

-3.373
-3.231
-3.692
-3.836
-4.198

-0.030
0.086
-0.042
-0.034
-0.072

-0.148
-0.091
-0.195
-0.239
-0.194

-0.209
-0.188
-0.254
-0.300
-0.258

-0.563
-0.908
-0.558
-0.572
-0.597

Population density is estimated from Census data, while the last five columns come from the parametrized model. See text for estimation procedure. Inferred costs
equal (θL /φL )p̂ + (θN − φN θL /φL )ŵ, as given by equation (23). Quality-of-life and inferred costs are identical to those reported in Albouy (2016).

xxvi

Table A.3: Relationship between Model-Implied Variables and Data
Data

Model-Implied Variable
Quality-of-life
Trade-productivity
Home-productivity
Land value
Trade consumption
Home consumption
Land
Capital
Trade production
Home production
Trade labor
Home labor
Trade land
Home land
Trade capital
Home capital

Notation

Wage
ŵ

Home
Price
p̂

Population
Density
N̂

Q̂
ÂX
ÂY
r̂
x̂
ŷ
L̂
K̂
X̂
Ŷ
N̂X
N̂Y
L̂X
L̂Y
K̂X
K̂Y

-0.480
0.837
0.731
0.491
0.478
0.483
0.000
0.619
1.117
0.474
0.171
-0.436
0.510
-0.097
0.838
0.231

0.325
0.008
-0.926
0.316
-0.107
-0.713
0.000
0.031
-0.100
-0.705
-0.103
0.270
-0.314
0.060
-0.103
0.270

0.000
0.034
0.321
1.374
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.989
1.055
0.999
1.044
0.892
0.128
-0.024
1.044
0.892

Each row presents the relationship between a model-implied amenity, price, or quantity and data on wages, home
prices, and population density. For example, the parametrized model implies Q̂j = −0.480ŵj + 0.325p̂j . All
variables are measured in log differences from the national average.

Table A.4: Summary statistics, land supply
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev

N

Log urban area
Inferred land rent
Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)
Average slope of land (s.d.)
Log land share (s.d.)
Interaction between inferred land rent and
Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)
Average slope of land (s.d.)
Log land share (s.d.)

6.642
0.249
0
0
0

1.313
0.956
1
1
1

276
276
276
274
227

0.563
0.396
-0.470

0.911
1.191
0.807

276
274
227

xxvii

Table A.5: The Determinants of Land Supply, Inferred Land Rent Measured using Density
Dependent variable: Log urban area, square miles
(1)
(2)
Inferred land rent

0.783***
(0.0620)

Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)
Average slope of land (s.d.)
Log land share (s.d.)

0.788***
(0.0762)
0.184**
(0.0721)
-0.253***
(0.0672)
0.184***
(0.0685)

0.845***
(0.0801)
0.125
(0.0777)
-0.252***
(0.0601)
0.117
(0.0710)

6.177***
(0.0793)
227
0.672

0.110
(0.0828)
-0.0368
(0.0515)
0.128*
(0.0744)
6.163***
(0.0942)
227
0.682

Interaction between inferred land rent and
Wharton Land-Use Regulatory Index (s.d.)
Average slope of land (s.d.)
Log land share (s.d.)
Constant

6.123***
(0.0844)
276
0.621

Observations
R-squared

(3)

Inferred land rent is constructed using price and density data. All explanatory variables are normalized to have
mean zero and standard deviation one. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table A.6: Fraction of Population Density Explained by Quality of Life, Trade-productivity, and
Home Productivity, with Neutral Taxes and Feedback Effects
Geographically Neutral Taxes
Feedback Effects
Variance/Covariance Component

Notation

Quality-of-life
Trade-productivity
Home-productivity
Quality-of-life and trade-productivity
Quality-of-life and home-productivity
Trade and home-productivity

Var(εN,Q Q̂)
Var(εN,AX ÂX )
Var(εN,AY ÂY )
Cov(εN,Q Q̂, εN,AX ÂX )
Cov(εN,Q Q̂, εN,AY ÂY )
Cov(εN,AX ÂX , εN,AY ÂY )

Total variance of prediction

No
No
(1)

Yes
No
(2)

No
Yes
(3)

Yes
Yes
(4)

0.238
0.103
0.439
0.137
-0.153
0.236

0.110
0.236
0.302
0.141
-0.087
0.297

0.314
0.045
0.446
0.118
-0.036
0.113

0.182
0.130
0.383
0.152
-0.025
0.178

0.757

0.976

0.757

0.780

Columns 3 and 4 include both quality-of-life and trade-productivity feedback effects.

xxviii

0.25

Figure A.1: Quality of Life and Inferred Costs, 2000

0.20

Honolulu

0.15

Santa Barbara

Monterey
San Luis Obispo
Santa Fe
San Diego

San Francisco

0.10

Cape
Cod
Naples
Missoula

Medford

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

Quality of Life
0.05

Los Angeles
Flagstaff
Grand Junction
Sarasota
Wilmington
Fort
Collins
Seattle
Fort Walton Beach
Reno
Punta
GordaAlbuquerque
Jacksonville Myrtle
Tucson
Beach
Portland
Denver Boston
Fort
Myers
Miami
Killeen
Sacramento
Norfolk
New York
Great Falls
Fort Pierce
Austin
Phoenix
Orlando
YumaOrleans
Chicago
Sioux FallsNew
Springfield
Tampa
Nashville
Washington-Baltimore
Ocala
Joplin
Cleveland
Las Vegas Hartford
Oklahoma City
Minneapolis
Columbus
City
Atlanta
San AntonioKansas
St. Cincinnati
Louis
Philadelphia
El Paso
Bismarck
Dallas
Pittsburgh
Detroit
Bakersfield
Steubenville
Bloomington
Brownsville
Johnstown
Gadsden
Texarkana
Syracuse
Houston
Huntington
McAllen
Decatur
Kokomo
Beaumont

-0.30

-0.20

-0.10

METRO DENSITY

>5.0 Million

1.5-5.0 Million

0.5-1.5 Million

<0.5 Million

Non-Metro Areas

0.00
Inferred Cost

0.10

0.20

0.30

Linear Fit: slope = 0.22 (s.e. 0 0.04)

See note to figure 4 for metro density definitions.

xxix

0

2

4

6

8

Figure A.2: Estimated Amenity Distributions, 2000

-1.5

-1
-.5
0
.5
1
Percent deviation from national average, hundreds (1=100%)
Quality of Life
Home Productivity

1.5

Trade Productivity

Amenities are normalized to have equal value: trade-productivity corresponds to ÂX /sx and home-productivity to
ÂY /sy .

xxx

Figure A.3: Comparison of Nonlinear and Linear Model
2
Linear
Nonlinear
1.5

Percent Chnage in N

1

0.5

0

ï0.5

ï1

ï1.5
ï0.2

ï0.15

ï0.1

ï0.05
0
0.05
Percent Change in Q

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.1

0.15

0.2

(a) Quality of Life
1.5
Linear
Nonlinear
1

Percent Change in N

0.5

0

ï0.5

ï1

ï1.5
ï0.2

ï0.15

ï0.1

ï0.05
0
0.05
Percent Change in AX

(b) Trade-productivity
2
Linear
Nonlinear
1.5

Percent Change in N

1

0.5

0

ï0.5

ï1

ï1.5

ï2
ï0.2

ï0.15

ï0.1

ï0.05
0
0.05
Percent Change in AY

(c) Home Productivity

xxxi

