NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMER SPENDING AND THE
AFTER-TAX REAL INTEREST RATE

N. Gregory Mankiw

Working Paper No. 1991

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1986

I am grateful to Martin Feldstein, James Hines, and Lawrence
Kotlikoff for helpful comments. This paper was prepared for the
NBER Conference on "The Effects of Taxation on Capital Formation."
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1991
August 1986

Consumer Spending and the After-Tax Real Interest Rate

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the interaction between consumer durable goods and
consumer non-durable goods in determining the responsiveness of total
expenditure to the after-tax real interest rate. The introduction of
consumer durables into the consumer's decision problem can have important
effects on the interest elasticity of total spending. The channel
highlighted here might be called the "user cost effect," in that the
after-tax interest rate enters the implicit user cost of consumer durable
goods. Even if a consumer has a one-period planning horizon, possibly
because of a binding borrowing constraint, the user cost effect may
nonetheless make his spending highly interest sensitive.
Finally, the
paper examines the response of the level and composition of consumer
spending to the high real interest rates experienced in the early 1980s.

N. Gregory Mankiw
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02139

INTRODUCTION

The responsiveness of consumer spending to the after-tax real interest

rate has important implications for a variety of policy questions.1 The more
highly interest elastic is consumer spending, the smaller is the impact of
persistent government deficits on the capital stock and the more effective are

savings incentives such as Individual Retirement Accounts. Despite the
importance of this issue, there is little agreement among economists regarding

the interest elasticity of consumer spending. This paper examines two issues
relevant to the theoretical and empirical debate.

The paper first examines the interaction between consumer durable
goods and consumer non-durable goods in determining the responsiveness of
total expenditure to the after-tax interest rate.

I show how the introduction

of durables into the consumer's decision affects the interest elasticity of

total spending. The channel highlighted here might be called the "user cost
effect," in that the after-tax interest rate enters the implicit user cost of
consumer durable goods.

This user cost effect may be one of the most important ways in which

interest rates affect consumer spending. Previous studies of this interest
elasticity, such as Summers (1981], examine non-durable consumption in

life-cycle models. Such analyses thus emphasize intertemporal substitution
and human wealth effects. Some recent empirical work, however, has cast doubt

1For a discussion of the importance of this issue, see Boskin (1978].

—2—

on the life—cycle (permanent income) hypothesis and has suggested that
borrowing constraints play an important role in determining consumer

spending.2 A borrowing constraint effectively makes a consumer face a
one-period planning problem and thus reduces the importance of the

intertemporal substitution and human wealth effects. In contrast, I show
that even if an individual has a one-period planning horizon, the user cost
effect nonetheless makes his spending highly interest sensitive.
The second goal of this paper is to examine the response of various

catagories of consumer spending to the events of the 1980s. The 1980s provide
a natural test of the responsiveness of saving to the after-tax interest rate.
I show that these events are consistent with the view that the interest

elasticity of consumer spending is substantial. In particular, the evidence
is consistent with the view that, because of the user cost effect, spending on
consumer durables and residential construction is more highly interest
sensitive than spending on non-durables and services.

DURABLES, NON-DURA8LES, AND THE RATE OF INTEREST

In this section I examine the decision of a consumer that must choose
in each period both an amount of a non-durable good to consume and an amount

of a durable good to purchase. My goal in particular is to examine the
long-run response of consumption decisions to the interest rate. Of course,

2See, for example, Hall and Mishkin [1982] and Zeldes [1985].

—3-

the relevant interest rate for the consumer is the after-tax real interest
rate.

The analysis here is partial equilibrium in nature.

I consider

an individual facing a given path of labor income and a given constant
after-tax real interest rate that chooses a path of spending on the two goods.
I examine how his optimal levels of spending are affected by a permanent

change in the after-tax interest rate he faces. In particular, the effect of
the after-tax real interest on the user cost of durable goods is highlighted.

A Simple Model

Let us begin with the consumer's budget constraint. Each period he
spends C on the non-durable good, which equals his consumption of it, and he

spends X on the durable good, which is added to his stock. The present value
of his purchases must equal his "wealth." That is,

(1>

w =

(C.

+

Xt).

where "wealth" is defined as the present value of labor income, his initial

non-human wealth A0, and the value of the terminal stock of durables K1. That
is, if 6 is the depreciation rate f or the durable,

(2)

W =

E

t0

t +

A0

+

(i—ö)K1
(1+r)T+i

The third term ensures that the consumer can borrow against the terminal
value of his stock of the durable good.

—4—

I assume that the durable depreciates at a constant rate, that is,

exponentially. The relation between the stock K and the flow X is

(3)

Kt = Xt

+

(1-ö)Kt_i

Using the stock-flow identity we can rewrite the budget constraint in terms

of the stock rather than the flow. It becomes

(4)

w

1

=

[Ct +

((r+o)/(1+r))

Kt]

where the now relevant notion of wealth3 is

(5)

W =

+

+

Equation (4) is useful because it expresses the budget constraint in terms
of the stock of the durable K rather than the flow X.
The consumer maximizes an additively separable utility function:

T
(6)

V =

E

U(Ct,Kt).

t=0

The consumer recieves utility in each period from his consumption of the
non-durable good and his stock of the durable good.

3mis concept probably corresponds best to what is normally meant by the
term "wealth."

—5-

It is a common claim that spending on consumer durables is a form of

saving. While it is true that (like saving) buying durables today increases
future utility, it is not accurate to view durables in this model as merely

one form of saving. The "durables as savings" model suggests that transitory
income should affect spending on durables. This conclusion, however, does not

arise from this formulation of the consumer's decision. Consider an increase
in current income and a decrease in future income that does not change the

present value of income in (4). Such a change alters neither the objective
nor the constraint of the consumer. Hence, it affects neither the optimal
level of non-durable consumption nor the optimal stock of the consumer

durable. Such an increase in current income does, however, increase saving.
In this natural model of the consumer, spending on both the non-durable and
the durable depends on permanent income and is unaffected by transitory

income. The decision to save and the decision to buy durables are
conceptually distinct.

We can see from the budget constraint (4) that the consumption decision
here is analogous to a consumption decision with two non-durable goods in

which (r+ö)/(1+r) plays the role of the relative price. The first-order
condition necessary for an optimum is therefore

(7)

UK(C,K)
tJc(CK)

—

1+r

The marginal rate of substitution between durables and non-durables must
equal the marginal rate of transformation, which depends on the real

-6—

interest rate.

Suppose U(C,K) has a constant elasticity of substitution:
1-(1/e)

U(C,K) =

(8)

where

is

1—(1/e)

[c11" +

• K11"}

1(1/c)

the elasticity of substitution between durables and non-durables,

and e is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. The first—order
condition (7) becomes

-1/c
—

r+ô

1+r

which implies

(10)

log C -

log K =

log(-) - c

c

log q.

Differentiating equation (10) with respect to the interest rate yields
(11)

d log K
d r

—

d log C
d r

-

1-6
'(r+6)(1+r)

The responsiveness of the durable stock to the interest rate equals the
responsiveness of the non-durable minus a term that depends on the
depreciation rate and, most important, on the elasticity of substitution

between the durable and the non-durable. Note that the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution 8, which Hall [1985) argues is very small, does not
enter this first—order condition.

The relation between the durable and the non-durable expressed in

equation (9) is very general. First, it holds for all planning horizons 1.

—7—

That is, it holds for both young and old consumers. It also holds for
consumers that have long horizons because they are linked to some future
generations through intergenerational altruism (Barro [1974]).
Second, the utility function can be complicated in a variety of ways

without affecting equation (9). Other arguments, such as leisure or public
goods, can be entered additively separably, multiplicatively separably, or
additively within the brackets in (8).

None of these changes would affect

the first-order condition (9).

Third, expression (9) also holds for consumers who are cannot borrow on

future labor income because of some capital market imperfection. A person
facing a binding borrowing constraint is like a person with a one-period
planning horizon (T =

0).

Because the intertemporal Kuhn-Tucker conditions

hold with strict inequality, the trade-off between utility today and utility
tomorrow is not relevant at the margin; because he is at a corner with regard
to borrowing on future labor income, the existence of that income is not

relevant for today's budget constraint. Hence, positing a binding borrowing
constraint is equivalent to setting I = 0.
it is important to realize that even if I =

0,

the interest rate plays a

role in the consumption decision. In this case the budget constraint,
equations (1) and (2), becomes

(12)

+

x0 =

+ (1—o)K0
(1+r)

The interest rate affects the present value of terminal stock of the durable.

The interest rate can affect consumer spending through this channel. In the

-8case of a borrowing constrained consumer, I am assuming he can borrow to the
extent that the depreciated value of his durables can cover the debt; that is,

his net wealth, including his stock of durables but not including his future

labor income, cannot be negative. Given that consumer durable goods are
commonly used as collateral for consumer loans, this assumption about
borrowing constraints seems the most plausible.

Redefining the Consumer's Problem
It is instructive to reexpress the consumer's optimization problem given

the relation between durable and the non-durable in equation (9). By solving
out for the durable stock, the consumer's problem becomes:
T

Max V =

subject

Y(r)

E t

t=o

____
1-8

to

w

r+ö
{+q(j)1cJ1
=

T

t

(.1_) Ct
1-U/B)

where

1'(r) =

[i + ql(l/C)(t±4)/(l(l/C))]l(lR) does not affect the

consumer's decision.
With one difference, the consumer's problem expressed above is identical

to the standard problem without durable goods. In addition to the standard
effects, a change in the real interest rate changes the factor multiplying

wealth in the budget constraint. Depending on the elasticity of substitution
between the durable and the non—durable, an increase in the interest rate

-9-

could be effectively either wealth-diminishing or wealth-augmenting. For
example, if the elasticity of substitution is less than one, then an increase
in the interest rate reduces the factor multiplying wealth; thus, non—durable
spending will fall more in response to the higher interest rate than a model
that ignores durables would predict.

In the special case in which the elasticity of substitution is unity,

this additional factor becomes a constant. Hence, in this case, the
responsiveness of non-durables to the interest rate is not affected by the

presence of durable goods. The response of non-durables spending to the
interest rate can therefore be taken from standard models without durables,
and the response of durables spending can be inferred from equation (11).

Evidence on the Elasticity of Substitution Between Ourables and Non-durables
In Mankiw [1985), I provide some evidence on the elasticity of
substitution between consumer durables and consumer non-durables.

Since this

elasticity plays a key role in the interest elasticity of consumer spending, I
briefly summarize that evidence here.

The technique of the previous paper, used similarly in Hansen and
Singleton [1983) and Mankiw, Rotemberg and Summers [1985), is to estimate the

first—order condition, equation (10). Equation (10) states that

(13)

log(user cost) =

constant

-

(1/c) log(K/C)

where the relative price is the implicit rental price of the durable,
which depends on the real interest rate and (although suppressed in the

-10-

previous discussion) on the relative purchase price of the durable good. The
model implies a simple bivariate relation between the relative price and the
relative quantity K/C.4 I use expenditure on non-durables and services as C
and the net stock of consumer durables as K.5
Estimation of equation (13) yields

log(user cost) =

-1.95

-

0.81 log(K/C)

(0.06) (0.11)
s.e.e. = 0.10

O.W. = 1.39

R2 =

0.62

Standard errors are in parentheses.

Thus, the data yields the predicted negative relation between the relative

price and K/C. The coefficient implies that C is about one.

Although this result supports the model, it is possibly spurious. One
might suspect that the regression is only picking up a trend in both

variables. Alternatively, one might suspect that we have found merely a
business cycle correlation without any deeper structural interpretation. To
test these possibilities, I include a time trend and the rate of unemployment

(Rut) in the above regression. If the correlation found above is indeed
spurious, then we might expect the significant relation to disappear when

these additional variables are included. In fact, I find

error term in this equation is an expectation error attributable to
the fact that the real interest rate in the relative price is not known at
time t when the consumption decisions are made. Since K/C is known at time t,
it is orthogonal to the error, implying that OLS leads to consistent estimates
of 1/c.
5consumer durables as defined in the National Income and Product Accounts
excludes residential housing. In Mankiw [1985] I examined only the NIPA's
catagory of consumer durables, which includes primarily motor vehicles,
furniture, and household equipment. The technique could be extended to
residential housing, however.

—11—

log(user cost) = —2.11 - 1.00 log(K/C) +
(0.41) (0.43)

s.e.e. =

0.11

0.004 Time - 0.0007 RUt
(0.007)

D.W. = 1.40

(0.0182)

R2 =

0.59

The time trend and the unemployment rate are insignificant; I cannot reject
the null hypothesis that both coefficients are zero at even the ten percent

level. Perhaps more striking, the relation between the relative price and K/C
remains statistically and substantively significant.

The analysis so far has assumed that the only error in the relation is an

expectation error. If there are shocks to tastes, however, then the error
includes these taste shocks and identification requires more careful

attention. In particular, ordinary least squares does not produce consistent
estimates, as K/C is likely to be correlated with these taste shocks. To
investigate whether taste shocks are important here, I estimate equation (18)

using instrumental variables. The instruments must be orthogonal to the
shocks to consumer tastes. One variable that may be exogenous is federal
government purchases of durable goods per capita. Fluctuations in government
purchases are largely attributable to wars, making it an almost ideal

instrumental variable for many purposes. This variable is a valid instrument
here if it shifts the supply curve of consumer durables but not the demand

curve. It shifts the supply curve if, for example, the production of military
equipment takes resources away from the production of consumer durables.

Using log(G) and log(G_1) as the instruments, I obtain

log(user cost) =
s.e.c. =

0.13

—2.21 - 1.30 log(K/C)
(0.15) (0.28)

—12—

The relation found using IV is similar to that found using OLS. Both
estimation methods yield a negative and significant relation. In addition,
both estimates suggest c is about one.

Some Implications of the Evidence
The evidence above suggests that the elasticity of substitution between

durables and non-durables is approximately unity. This finding has important
implications for the interest elasticity of consumer spending. As indicated
above, a Unit elasticity of substitution implies that the interest elasticity
of non—durables spending is not affected by the presence of durable goods.
Hence, the responsiveness of rion-durables spending to the interest rate can be

taken from simulations that ignore durable goods, and the responsiveness of
durables spending can be inferred using equation (11).
I highlight here the implications of this finding for the case in which
the planning horizon for the consumer is only one period (T =

0),

either

because of myopia or because of a binding borrowing constraint. This extreme
case provides perhaps the worst circumstances to find interest sensitivity,
since the human wealth and intertemporal substitution effects emphasized in
previous work are absent.

The consumer's optimization problem outlined above becomes

(14)

Max V =

log(C)

+

subject to

(15)

Y =

C

+

(r+ól
K

• log(K)

—13—

I am assuming here that the initial wealth and the initial stock of the

durable is zero. In subsequent periods, this consumer will carry forward
both a depreciated stock of the durable and a debt; since these are equal, the
problem will remain essentially the same.
The solution to the consumer's optimization is:

(16)

C

=

(1/1+q)

K

=

(q/1+q) y

y

and

(17)

(r+ô)/(1+r)

In steady state, spending on the durable X is oK.

The responsiveness of spending to the interest rate should be apparent.
Non-durable spending is a constant fraction of income and is not affected by
the interest rate.

(This is an implication of the unit elasticity of

substitution.) Durable spending, however, is responsive to the interest
rate. A higher interest rate raises the user cost of the durable and thus
reduces K.

To gauge the magnitude of this user cost effect, it is necessary to

calibrate the model. The after-tax real interest rate has historically
averaged about zero, and durable goods as defined in the National Income
Accounts depreciate at about twenty percent per year.
r =

0.0

and 6 =

0.2,

I therefore use

as well as the estimated value of e of 1.0. From

equation (11) (or 17), we see that the interest semi-elasticity of durables

—14—

is 4.0. That is, a one percentage point increase in the real interest rate
reduces the stock of durables (and thus in steady state durables spending) by
four percent.

The responsiveness of total spending, C+X, to the after-tax real
interest rate depends on the relative importance of durables and

non—durables. Since durable spending is is approximately one-eighth of the
total, a one percentage point increase in the interest rate reduces total
spending of the consumer by one-half of one percent.

THE EVIDENCE FROM THE 1980s

The events of the early 1980s provide a natural test of the proposition
that consumer spending is sensitive to the after-tax real interest rate.

In this section I present an analysis of this episode. I find that the
level and composition of consumer spending during the 1980s is consistent
with the a high degree of interest sensitivity.

The After-Tax Real Interest Rate
Three related developments starting in approximately 1980 make the past
half decade a useful period in which to examine the response of consumers to

the after-tax real interest rate. First, monetary and fiscal policy
combined to make interest rates skyrocket. In October 1979, the Federal
Reserve announced a new disinflationary stance and a greater emphasis on

targeting monetary aggregates over stabilizing interest rates. In November
1980, Ronald Reagan was elected commited to large-scale tax reductior. This

-15-

tax reduction ocurred in 1981, which was followed by deficits that were

unprecedented in peacetime. As one might have expected from these changes
in macroeconomic policy, interest rates rose.

The second development increasing after-tax real interest rates was a

reduction in marginal tax rates on capital income. The 1981 tax cut lowered
marginal tax rates across the board, including a reduction of the top rate

from 70 percent to 50 percent. (While some of the tax reduction was offset
by already scheduled social security tax increases, these increases are not
relevant here because the social security tax falls only on labor income.)
In addition, the introduction of Individual Retirement Accounts reduced the

marginal tax rate on capital income to zero for those individuals not at the

maximum contribution level. Both of these changes in the tax law raise the
after-tax real interest rate.
The third development was the increased availability of market interest

rates to consumers. The spread of money market mutual funds and the
deregulation of banking has allowed small savers to earn rates much higher

than those on passbook savings accounts. To the extent that marginal saving
is now earning the Treasury bill rate rather than the passbook rate, this
financial development increases the real interest rate relevant for saving
decisions.

While it is difficult to measure the importance of these latter two
developments, the increase in market interest rates is easy to document.
Table 1 shows that the nominal three-month Treasury bill rate averaged 6.3
percent in the 1970s and rose to 10.9 percent in the early 1980s.

—16—

Meanwhile, inflation as measured by the consumer price index fell from 7.2
percent to 6.1 percent.

To compute the after-tax real interest rate, I use a marginal tax rate of

0.3. Since there is ample reason to believe that the marginal rate on
interest income fell during this period, using a constant marginal rate

underestimates the increase in after-tax real interest rates. Table 1 shows
that the ex post after-tax rate measured this way rose from -2.8 percent in
the 1970s to 1.6 percent in the early 1980s.

Of course, consumer decisions are based not on ex post rates but on ex

ante rates. Since the 1970s was a period of positive inflation surprises and
the early 1980s was a period of negative inflation surprises, the increase in

the ex post rate of 4.4 percentage points is overstated. A rough measure of
ex ante rates can be found using the technique pioneered by Mishkin [1980] of
regressing ex post rates on lagged information and using the fitted values as

ex ante rates. A regression of the ex post real rate (eprr) on its own lag
for the period 1970:1 to 1984:4 yields:

eprrt =

-0.39
(0.38)

s.e.e. = 2.67

+

0.66

eprrt...l

(0.10)
D.W.

= 2.46

2 = 0.41

This equation implies an increase in the ex ante rate from -2.2 percent in the
1970s to 0.3 percent in the early 1980s.

One problem with using this equation is that consumers have more
information than the lagged ex post rate when forming their expectations

—17--

implicit in the ex ante rate. If this additional information is useful, then
this equation underestimates the variation in the ex ante rate, since
forecasts based on greater information vary more than forecasts based on more
limited information.

Hence, the increase -in the ex ante rate of 2.5

percentage points implied by this equation is likely to understate the
true increase.

Consumer Spending in the 1980s

For a variety of reasons, the after-tax real interest rate rose

substantially from the 1970s to the 1980s. If consumer spending is sensitive
to this interest rate, consumer spending in the 1980s should be lower than it

otherwise would have been. My purpose in this section is to examine whether
consumer spending responded to the dramatic increase in the after-tax real
interest rate.

Rather than attempting to estimate a structural model relating consumer
decisions to interest rates, as has been done elsewhere (Hansen and Singleton
[1983], Mankiw [1985), Hall [1985)), I examine the following relation

(18)

Ct =

constant

+

A(L) c..1 +

B(L) Vt

where C is the log of some catagory of consumer spending,
V is the log of personal disposable income, and
A(L) and B(L) are distributed lags.

This equation is not intended to be structural. Its purpose is merely to
summarize the time series comovements of income and consumer spending.

—18-

The equation is estimated for the period 1970:1 to 1979:4, during which

real interest rates were very low. The equation is then used to forecast
consumer spending from 1980:1 to 1984:4 using the actual path of disposable

income. Since the forecast is conditional on disposable income, it controls
for the effect of the deep recesion in 1982 and the subsequent rapid recovery.
If consumer spending were not sensitive to the interest rate and instead
obeyed a simple Keynesian consumption function, then this equation should
forecast accurately.

In contrast, if consumer spending is sensitive to the real interest
rate, a major change in the interest rate should cause this equation to

forecast badly. Since the equation is estimated under a low interest rate
regime, it should overpredict consumer spending in the 1980s. The forecast
error can be viewed as a rough guide to the effect of omitted variables on

consumer spending during this period. Since interest rates are probably the
most important of the omitted variables, it seems reasonable to attribute
the forecast error to the effects of interest rates.6

Table 2 summarizes the results from this experiment. Total consumer
spending was on average 4.0 percent lower than one would have expected from

the experience of the 1970s.7 The breakdown into the various categories is

6Alternatively, one could attribute any conditional forecast error to the
direct effect of deficits on saving through anticipated future tax
liabilities (Barro [1974]). Note that this Ricardian view implicitly assumes
that the long-run interest elasticity of saving is infinite, since in steady
state the after—tax real interest rate must equal the subjective rate of time
preference. It therefore appears inconsistent to maintain both (1)
consumption is interest insensitive, and (2) consumers effectively have
infinite horizons and thus foresee their future tax liabilities.
7This result stands in contrast to the conclusion one would reach by a
simple comparison of savings rates through time. That is, the dynamic
comparison in Table 2 gives a very different picture of the 1980s than would a

—19-

plausible. Non-durables are 2.2 percent lower than forecast and services 4.6
percent lower. The largest forecast error is for durables spending, which is
8.4 percent lower than forecast. This differential impact is consistent with
the hypothesis that the forecast error is attibutable to the high real
interest rates.8

While the National Income Accounts treat residential construction as
investment, it seems conceptually most similar to spending on consumer

durables. If one performs the same experiment as above with residential
construction, the results confirm the above findings. In particular,
residential construction was 13.1 percent below the conditional forecast.

SUMMARY

The major conclusions of this paper are as follows:
(1) Spending on durables should be substantially more sensitive to the

after-tax real interest rate than spending on non—durables and services. The
reason is that the interest rate affects the implicit user cost of durables.
The difference in interest sensitivity can be simply expressed in terms of

the interest rate, the depreciation rate, and the elasticity of substitution
between durables and non-durables.
(2) The elasticity of substitution between durables and non-durables
can be easily estimated by examining the first-order condition of the

static comparison. Reconciling these results would appear to require a
structural model of some sort.
8While these results are broadly consistent with the model, it is
difficult to judge whether the magnitudes are comparable to what theory would
predict. The theory discussed above applies to steady states, while the
experience of the past few years is necessarily temporary or one of

-20-

consumer. This method avoids the problems of solving for the consumer's
decision rule and of obtaining proxies for future income and relative prices

that would enter that decision rule. United States aggregate data suggest
an elasticity of substitution of about unity with a very small standard
error.

(3) Even if a consumer faces a one-period planning horizon, possibly
because of a binding borrowing constraint, his spending should be highly

interest sensitive. With an elasticity of substitution of unity, a one
percentage point increase in the after-tax real interest rate reduces his
spending on durables by four percent while not affecting his spending on
non-durables.

(4) After-tax real interest rates were substantially higher in the
early 1980s than in the 1970s, suggesting that this episode is an ideal
natural experiment to examine the interest sensitivity of consumer spending.
It appears that spending on all categories of consumer spending was
substantially lower in the early 1980s than one would have forecast

conditional on the path of disposable income. Moreover, the forecast error
is greater for durable goods than for non-durable goods. This experience
thus appears consistent with the hypothesis that real interest rates have an
important impact on the level and composition of consumer spending.

transition. To examine this period in detail using a structural model, the
adjustment process, possibly including adjustment costs, should be modeled
explicitly.

—21--

Table 1
Interest Rates in the 1970s and 1980s

Nominal Three-Month
Treasury Bill Rate

Inflation

After-Tax Real
Interest Rates
Ex ante
Ex post

1970:1 — 1979:4

6.3

7.2

—2.8

1980:1 — 1984:4

10.9

6.1

1.6

0.3

Note: After-tax rate is computed assuming a marginal tax rate of 0.3.
Ex ante real rates are computed as the fitted value from the first-order
autoregression of ex post real rates estimated 1970:1 to 1984:4.

—22—

Table 2

Conditional Forecast Errors for Consumption

1980:1 — 1984:4

Category of Consumer Spending

Actual Level Relative to Predicted (percent)

80:1 80:4 81:4 82:4 83:4 84:4

Average

-0.8 -2.4 -5.3 -5.0 -4.2 —5.3

-

4.0

Non—durables

-1.0 -2.5 -3.0 -3.1. -1.5 -2.0

-

2.2

Services

-0.6 -1.2 -4.0 -5.3 -6.6 —7.4

-

4.6

Durables

—2.2 -7.5 —16.9 —9.7 —5.4 —5.7

—

8.4

-3.1 -2.4 -31.6 -25.9 +2.0 -6.1

-13.1

Total Consumer Expenditure

Residential Construction

Note: A reduced-form equation is estimated by regressing consumption on its
own two lags, current personal disposable income, and two lags of income
using data from 1970:1 to 1979:4. This equation is used dynamically to
forecast consumption given the observed path of disposable income. The
figure reported is the difference in log of actual spending and the log of
predicted spending, times 100, which is approximately the percentage
difference.

—23—

REF ERENCES

Barro, Robert, 1974, Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?, Journal of Political
Economy 82, 1095-1117.
Boskin, M.J., 1978, Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest, Journal of
Political Economy 86, S3-S27.
Hall, Robert E., 1985, Consumption and Real Interest, NBER Working Paper.
Hall, Robert E.,, and Frederic S. Mishkin, 1982, The Sensitivity of Consumption
to Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Datas on Households,
Econometrica 50, 461-481.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1983, Stochastic Consumption,
Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,
Journal of Political Economy 91, 249-265.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1985, Consumer Durables and the Real Interest Rate,
Review of Economics and Statistics 6?, 353-362.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Julio J. Rotemberg, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1985,
Intertemporal Substitution in Macroeconomics, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 100, 225-251.
Mishkin, Frederic, 1980, The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation,
Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy 15, 151-200.
Summers, Lawrence H., 1981, Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life
Cycle Growth Model, American Economic Review 71, 533-544.
Zeldes, Stephen, 1985, Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation, Wharton School.

