NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GRAVITY AND EXTENDED GRAVITY:
USING MOMENT INEQUALITIES TO ESTIMATE A MODEL OF EXPORT ENTRY
Eduardo Morales
Gloria Sheu
Andrés Zahler
Working Paper 19916
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19916

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014, Revised June 2017

An earlier draft of this paper circulated under the title "Gravity and Extended Gravity: Estimating
a Structural Model of Export Entry." The views in this paper should not be purported to reflect
those of the United States Department of Justice. An earlier draft of this paper circulated under
the title “Gravity and Extended Gravity: Estimating a Structural Model of Export Entry.” We
would like to thank Pol Antràs, Kamran Bilir, Jan De Loecker, Michael Dickstein, Gene
Grossman, Ricardo Hausmann, Elhanan Helpman, Guido Imbens, Robert Lawrence, Andrew
Levy, Marc Melitz, Julie Mortimer, Ezra Oberfield, Ariel Pakes, Charly Porcher, Stephen
Redding, Dani Rodrik, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Felix Tintelnot, and Elizabeth Walker for
insightful conversations, and seminar participants at BEA, Boston College, Brandeis, Columbia,
CREI, Duke, ERWIT, Harvard, LSE, MIT, NBER, Princeton, Sciences-Po, SED, UCLA,
University of Chicago-Booth, Wisconsin, and the World Bank for very helpful comments. We
also thank Jenny Nuñez, Luis Cerpa, the Chilean Customs Authority, and the Instituto Nacional
de Estadísticas for assistance with building the dataset. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Andres Zahler acknowledges the Nucleo Milenio Initiative
NS100017 "Intelis Centre" for partial funding.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Eduardo Morales, Gloria Sheu, and Andrés Zahler. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gravity and Extended Gravity: Using Moment Inequalities to Estimate a Model of Export
Entry
Eduardo Morales, Gloria Sheu, and Andrés Zahler
NBER Working Paper No. 19916
February 2014, Revised June 2017
JEL No. F14,L65
ABSTRACT
Exporting firms often enter foreign markets that are similar to previous export destinations. We
develop a dynamic model in which a firm's exports in a market may depend on how similar the
market is to the firm's home country (gravity) and to its previous export destinations (extended
gravity). Given the large number of export paths from which forward-looking firms may choose,
we use a moment inequality approach to structurally estimate our model. Using data from Chilean
exporters, we estimate that having similarities with a prior export destination in geographic
location, language, and income per capita jointly reduce the cost of foreign market entry by 69%
to 90%. Reductions due to geographic location (25% to 38%) and language (29% to 36%) have
the largest effect. Extended gravity thus has a large impact on export entry costs.

Eduardo Morales
Department of Economics
Princeton University
310 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
ecmorales@princeton.edu
Gloria Sheu
Department of Justice
gloria.sheu@usdoj.gov

Andrés Zahler
Universidad Diego Portales
no email available

1

Introduction

Exporting firms continuously enter and exit foreign countries, and the decision of which countries to export to is an important determinant of aggregate trade flows.1 When selecting which
countries to enter, firms tend to choose markets similar to their prior export destinations.2
We establish that this cross-country correlation in firms’ export decisions occurs because entry
costs in a market are smaller for firms that have previously exported to similar markets. We
refer to this path dependence in entry costs as extended gravity.
Extended gravity has significant implications for trade policy. It predicts that reducing
trade barriers in a country will increase entry not only in its own market but also in other
markets that are connected to it through extended gravity. This suggests that import policies
in one country generate externalities for other countries. As for export policy, extended
gravity means that export promotion measures will have the largest impact when targeted
toward destination countries that share characteristics with large export markets.
We estimate a new model of firm export dynamics. In our model, entry costs in a market
depend on how similar it is both to the firm’s home country and to other countries to which
the firm has previously exported. Our model is thus consistent with gravity in that it allows
the probability to be higher that firms export to markets that are close to their country
of origin. But the model also allows firms export decisions to depend on their previous
export history. While gravity reflects proximity between origin and destination markets,
extended gravity depends on proximity between past and subsequent destinations. Our model
imposes only weak restrictions on how firms both determine the set of countries to which they
consider exporting and forecast the profits they would obtain upon entering these markets.
We introduce an approach that exploits these weak assumptions on firms’ consideration and
information sets in order to estimate bounds on the impact of extended gravity on entry costs.
To measure the importance of extended gravity, we use a firm-level dataset for Chile that
includes information on exports by year and destination as well as on a broad set of firm
characteristics during 1995–2005. We estimate our model for the chemicals sector, which is
consistently among the top two manufacturing sectors in Chile by volume of exports during
our sample period. Our estimates show that similarity in geographic location, language, and
income per capita with a prior export destination jointly reduce the cost of foreign market
entry by 69% to 90%. The reductions due to similarity in geographic location (25% to 38%)
and language (29% to 36%) have the largest impact. Conversely, we cannot rule out that
similarity in income per capita has no extended gravity effects on its own.
Extended gravity is consistent with foreign market entry requiring a costly adaptation
process: some firms are better prepared to enter certain countries because they have previously
1

See Bernard et al. (2007, 2010); Hillberry and Hummels (2008); Head and Mayer (2014).
For evidence on spatial correlation in export flows, see Evenett and Venables (2002); Lawless (2009, 2013);
Albornoz et al. (2012); Chaney (2014); Defever et al. (2015); Meinen (2015).
2

1

served similar markets and have thus already partly completed this adaptation. This process
may entail changes in the branding, labeling, and packaging of the product, as well as product
modifications that reflect local tastes or legal requirements imposed by national regulators.3
In order to test our hypothesis that extended gravity impacts export entry costs, we rely on
a dynamic multi-country model to structurally identify costs that may depend on gravity and
extended gravity. We account for gravity by allowing these costs to depend on whether each
destination shares a continent, language, or similar income per capita with Chile. By contrast,
extended gravity depends on whether the destination shares a border, continent, language,
or similar income per capita with a country to which the firm exported in the previous year.
If extended gravity is important, firms in our framework decide whether to enter a country
taking into account the impact of this decision on future entry costs in other markets.
The standard approach to the estimation of entry models relies on deriving choice probabilities from a theoretical framework and finding the parameter values that maximize the
likelihood of the entry choices observed in the data (Das et al., 2007). This approach is not
feasible in our setting. Evaluating these probabilities involves examining the dynamic implications of every possible bundle of export destinations. Given the cardinality of the potential
choice set (for a given number of countries J, this set includes 2J elements), computing the
value function for each of its elements is infeasible unless very strong simplifying assumptions
are imposed on the firm’s actual choice set and state vector.4 The impossibility of computing
this value function implies that we cannot solve the model and perform counterfactuals. However, using moment inequalities, we can estimate bounds on the effect of extended gravity on
export entry costs. Our estimator requires neither computing the value function of the firm
nor artificially reducing the dimensionality of the firm’s choice set or state vector.
Our inequalities come from applying an analogue of Euler’s perturbation method. Specifically, we impose one-period deviations on the observed export path of each firm. Our moment
inequalities are robust to different assumptions on: (a) how forward-looking firms are, as
captured by firms’ planning horizons; (b) firms’ choice sets; and (c) firms’ information sets.
In addition, our inequalities do not impose any parametric restrictions on the distribution of
firms’ expectational errors, which may vary flexibly across firms, countries, and time periods.
In identifying extended gravity effects from firms’ observed export choices, we face the
challenge of separating path dependence from unobserved heterogeneity. Unobservable (to
the researcher) determinants of the decision to export that are specific to each firm and
correlated both over time and across countries that share geographic location, language or
3

Adaptation may also involve searching for a local distributor (Chaney, 2014, 2016a,b) or hiring workers
with knowledge of specific markets (Labanca et al., 2014).
4
For example, even if the firm’s actual choice set includes only 20 destinations and the expected profits in
each of them depend only on a state variable that takes 5 values, the state vector will still include over 1013
elements. Furthermore, as we show in a simulation in Appendix D, misspecifications of the firm’s consideration
or information sets may significantly bias estimates of the impact of extended gravity on entry costs.

2

similar income per capita will generate export paths similar to those that we would observe
if these extended gravity factors were an important determinant of firms’ choices. In order to
separately identify the effect of these unobservables from the path dependence generated by
extended gravity, in our moment inequality estimation we allow for firm-, year-, and groupof-countries-specific fixed effects. Specifically, we allow the firm’s export decision to depend
on fixed effects that are specific to each firm and year, but common across countries that are
located in the same continent, share an official language, or have similar income per capita.
Our estimates show that extended gravity has a significant effect on entry costs. Previously
serving a market that shares a border with a destination (e.g. Poland and Germany) reduces
entry costs by 25% to 38%.5 Sharing a continent without sharing border (e.g. Poland and
France) reduces entry costs by 19% to 29%, and sharing only language (e.g. Portugal and
Brazil) by 29% to 36%. Our estimates for having similar income per capita are less informative;
they indicate that the reduction in entry costs may be any number smaller than 29%. The
combined effect of all four extended gravity covariates is between 69% and 90%, which implies
that, for example, a Chilean firm exporting to Germany will face subsequent entry costs in
Austria that are between a tenth and a third of the costs faced by a firm that is exporting
only to destinations that do not share any extended gravity covariates with Austria.
Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. First, it relates to papers that
estimate export entry costs. Das et al. (2007) estimate fixed and sunk costs of breaking
into exporting generally. Dickstein and Morales (2016) estimate fixed and sunk costs by
destination, but ignore the presence of extended gravity effects.6 In contrast to this prior
literature, we estimate the impact of extended gravity on export entry costs.
Second, our paper relates to previous work showing that firms tend to export to countries
similar to their prior destinations; e.g. Eaton et al. (2008); Lawless (2009, 2013); Albornoz
et al. (2012); Chaney (2014); Defever et al. (2015). Except for Chaney (2014), none of these
papers structurally estimates a model of forward-looking firms that incorporates a mechanism
rationalizing this export behavior. We build such a model, emphasize the importance of entry
cost dynamics to explain observed export dynamics, and identify extended gravity effects
under weak assumptions on firms’ information and consideration sets and planning horizons.
Third, our paper introduces a new moment inequality procedure to deal with multiple
discreteness problems (Hendel, 1999). These are decision problems in which agents violate
the single-choice assumption inherent to multinomial discrete choice models. These problems
feature in the store-network choice literature (Jia, 2008; Holmes, 2011; Ellickson et al., 2013;
Zheng, 2016), in the demand estimation literature (Allenby et al., 2002, 2007; Dubé, 2004),
and in the work on multinational companies (Tintelnot, 2016) and on the sourcing decisions of
5

We report here projections of a 95% confidence set. See Section 5 for details on estimation.
Additional export cost estimates are provided in Roberts and Tybout (1997); Arkolakis (2010); Moxnes
(2010); Aw et al. (2011); Eaton et al. (2014); Arkolakis et al. (2015a); Irarrazabal et al. (2015); Eaton et al.
(2016); Fitzgerald et al. (2016); Ruhl and Willis (2016); Bai et al. (2017).
6

3

importers (Antràs et al., 2017). In these papers, the set including all bundles of alternatives an
agent may choose is very large. The literature contains three approaches to dealing with these
large-dimensional discrete choice sets: first, exploiting the increasing or decreasing differences
property of the agent’s objective function (Jia, 2008; Antràs et al., 2017; Arkolakis and Eckert,
2017); second, modeling multiple discreteness problems as an aggregation of simple discrete
choices happening at different points in time (Hendel, 1999; Sieg and Zhang, 2012; Arcidiacono
et al., 2016); and third, using moment inequalities (Holmes, 2011).
Fourth, our paper contributes to an empirical literature on moment inequalities (Katz,
2007; Ishii, 2008; Ho, 2009; Pakes, 2010; Ho and Pakes, 2014; Eizenberg, 2014; Pakes et al.,
2015; Pakes and Porter, 2015; Wollmann, 2016; Illanes, 2016; Dickstein and Morales, 2016).
Our approach is closest to that in Holmes (2011), but differs from it in that we do not form
inequalities by changing the order in which we observe firms entering markets. We implement
instead an analogue of Euler’s perturbation method (Hansen and Singleton, 1982; Luttmer,
1999), building thus inequalities that are valid under weak restrictions on firms’ expectations.
Fifth, extended gravity has implications for the interpretation of gravity parameters. The
standard gravity equation (Tinbergen, 1962) predicts that trade flows between two countries
depend only on their size and measures of trade resistance between them. Anderson and van
Wincoop (2003) take into account third country effects through multilateral resistance terms:
given two countries, higher barriers between one of them and the rest of the world raises
imports from the other one. Extended gravity works in the opposite direction: it creates
benefits for firms from directing their exports towards markets that share characteristics with
a large number of countries, especially if those markets require high adaptation costs to enter.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data and presents
stylized facts that motivate the rest of the paper. Section 3 introduces a model of entry into
export markets, and Section 4 derives moment inequalities from it. Section 5 describes our
estimation approach, and sections 6 and 7 present the results. Section 8 concludes.

2

Data

In this section, we describe our sources of data and provide evidence suggestive of the importance of extended gravity in determining firms’ export destinations.

2.1

Data Sources

Our data covers the period 1995–2005 and comes from two separate sources. The first is the
Chilean customs database, which covers the universe of exports of Chilean firms. The second is
the Chilean Annual Industrial Survey (Encuesta Nacional Industrial Anual, or ENIA), which
includes all manufacturing plants with at least 10 workers. We aggregate the plant-level

4

information in ENIA to obtain firm-level information, and merge it with customs using firm
identifiers. We thus observe both the export and domestic activity of each firm.
Our dataset includes all firms operating in the chemicals sector (sector 24, ISIC rev.
3.1), which is among the top two Chilean manufacturing sectors by volume of exports in
every sample year. We observe both exporters and non-exporters, and use for estimation an
unbalanced panel that includes all firms active for at least two consecutive years between 1995
and 2005. An observation is a firm-country-year combination. The per-year average number
of firm-country pairs with positive exports is approximately 650, out of which around 150
correspond to firms that were not exporting to the same country in the previous year, and
around 125 correspond to firms that did not continue exporting to the same country in the
following year. These export events are generated by a per-year average of 110 firms exporting
to around 70 countries in total. For each firm-year-country combination we have information
on the value of goods sold in US dollars, and we transform them into year 2000 values using
the US CPI.
We complement our customs-ENIA data with a database of country characteristics. We
obtain information on the primary official language, continent, and names of bordering countries of each possible destination market from CEPII (Mayer and Zignago, 2011). We collect
data on real GDP per capita from the World Bank World Development Indicators. We construct our gravity and extended gravity variables from these country characteristics.
The gravity variables relate Chile to each destination. We create four individual dummy
variables that equal one if these destinations do not share border, continent, language, or
similar income per capita with Chile.7 We denote them as “Grav. Border”, “Grav. Cont.”,
“Grav. Lang.”, and “Grav. GDPpc”.8 The extended gravity variables relate each potential
destination to a firm’s prior export bundle. We define separate dummies for sharing border,
continent, language, or similar income per capita with at least one country the firm exported
to in the previous year, and not with Chile itself. We denote them as “Ext. Grav. Border”,
“Ext. Grav. Cont.”, “Ext. Grav. Lang.”, and “Ext. Grav. GDPpc”. Thus, an extended
gravity dummy equals one for a given firm-country-year observation if the country does not
share the corresponding characteristic with Chile but shares it with some other country to
which the firm exported in the previous year.9 For example, in the case of Austria, all four
extended gravity variables equal one for a firm that exported to Germany in the previous year.
7
Using 2002 data, the World Bank classifies countries into four groups according to their GDP per capita.
Low income is 735 USD or less, lower middle income is 736 to 2,935 USD, upper middle income is 2,936 to 9,075
USD, and high income is 9,076 USD or more. Chile belongs to the upper middle income group. Whenever two
countries belong to the same group, we refer to them as “sharing similar income per capita”.
8
Formally, (Grav. Cont.)j = 1 − continent(h, j), where continent(h, j) is a dummy variable that equals one
if countries h and j share continent. The other two gravity variables are defined
P analogously.
9
Formally, (Ext. Grav. Lang.)ijt = (1 − dijt−1 ) × (1 − language(h, j 0 )) × 1{ j 0 dij 0 t−1 × language(j, j 0 ) ≥ 0},
where dijt is a dummy variable that equals one if firm i exports to destination j in year t, language(j, j 0 ) is a
dummy variable that equals one if countries j and j 0 share language, and 1{A} is an indicator function that
equals 1 if A is true. The other three extended gravity variables are defined analogously.

5

2.2

Motivating Evidence

We provide here descriptive evidence suggestive of the relevance of extended gravity. We also
discuss alternative economic mechanisms that may generate similar export behavior.
As an illustration of the export patterns suggestive of the presence of extended gravity,
Figure 4 shows the 2000 to 2005 export path of a firm in our sample.10 Prior to 2000, this
firm’s single export destination outside South America was the United States. Its export
destinations in this time period were thus consistent with gravity: they are either large (the
United States), or close to Chile (Bolivia and Peru), or both (Argentina). However, from
the year 2000 onwards, this firm entered markets that are small and far away from Chile, but
related to its prior destinations. The firm expanded through Central America by consecutively
entering countries bordering prior destinations: it entered Mexico (which borders the United
States) in 2000; Guatemala (which borders Mexico) in 2001; Belize, Honduras, and El Salvador
(which all border Guatemala) in 2003; and, finally, Nicaragua (which borders Honduras) in
2004. Simultaneously, the firm also expanded through Europe. While Mexico and Guatemala
(the Central American countries geographically close to the United States) appear to be the
firm’s gateway into Central America, the United Kingdom (the European country linguistically
close to the United States) seems to be its gateway into Europe. From the United Kingdom,
the firm jumped successively into France (in 2003), the Netherlands (in 2004) and Spain (in
2005). Given the short export spells in each of these countries, it is hard to square this export
behavior with the hypothetically large sunk entry costs that gravity forces would predict.
By systematically entering markets similar to its prior destinations, the firm in Figure 4
exemplifies patterns present in our data. Table 1 shows export entry probabilities computed
using all observations in our sample.11 The overall entry probability is 0.66%. If our extended
gravity story holds, the entry probability in a potential destination will be larger among firms
that exported in the previous year to markets that share some extended gravity covariate
with it. This prediction matches the evidence in Table 1. The probability of entering a
destination conditional on previously exporting to a connected market is always larger than
the unconditional one. This probability increase depends on the characteristic shared between
both markets: it is more than twofold if both markets share income per capita or language,
more than fourfold if they share continent, and approximately tenfold if they share a border.
The evidence in Table 1 is only suggestive of the presence of extended gravity. Other
economic forces can also explain these findings. The discussion of these other forces informs the
specification of the model introduced in Section 3, written with the aim of guiding us towards
an identification approach that controls for these alternative explanations when measuring
extended gravity effects.
10

Table A.1 in Appendix A.1 lists all destinations of this firm for every year between 1995 and 2005.
The entry probability in a country equals the number of firms exporting to it in year t and not in t − 1,
divided by the number of non-exporters in t−1. Table 1 presents averages across countries of these probabilities.
11

6

7

Note: Export destinations of an illustrative firm between years 2000 and 2005.

(f) Year 2005

(d) Year 2003

(c) Year 2002

(e) Year 2004

(b) Year 2001

(a) Year 2000

Figure 1: Export Path of an Individual Firm

Table 1: Entry Probabilities
Probability of Entry

Number of Entries

0.66%

1638

6.74%
2.79%
1.59%
1.53%
0.31%

397
525
205
588
770

Overall:
Extended Gravity:
If Ext. Grav. Border = 1
If Ext. Grav. Cont. = 1
If Ext. Grav. Lang. = 1
If Ext. Grav. GDPpc = 1
If All Ext. Grav. = 0

First, suppose that firms rank countries by proximity to Chile and spread out gradually to
more distant markets (i.e. exports are only determined by standard gravity). Two countries
ranked consecutively are likely to belong to the same continent and, thus, in this case, a firm
already exporting to a continent will be more likely to subsequently enter other countries in
the same continent. This correlation in export entry, however, would be driven by distance
between Chile and each destination, not by distance between destinations. It is thus key to
account for gravity in order to correctly identify extended gravity. Consequently, in our model,
we allow firms’ export decisions to depend flexibly on gravity forces.
Second, the higher probability of exporting to a country among firms previously exporting to related markets could reflect similarity in firm-specific demand or supply across these
markets. Under this interpretation, for example, the higher probability of exporting to a market for a firm previously exporting to a bordering country would not be due to a reduction
in entry costs caused by this export experience (state dependence), but due to similarity in
preferences for this firm’s output among customers living in these two countries (unobserved
heterogeneity). While our benchmark estimates account only for firm-year unobserved heterogeneity, we also show that these are largely robust to allowing firms’ export decisions to
depend on serially correlated firm- and year-specific unobserved covariates that are common
across groups of countries that share any of the extended gravity variables we consider.12
Third, the patterns documented in Table 1 could also be due to the combined effect of two
forces: (a) most firms do not export at all or export only to a small number of destinations,
while a few firms export widely; (b) the more countries a firm exports to, the more likely it
is that every new destination shares some characteristic with one of its previous destinations.
Thus, correctly identifying extended gravity requires accounting for factors that make some
firms, ceteris paribus, more likely to export to any country, as well as for the set of potential
new export destinations that each firm has in each time period. We exploit our data to account
12

For example, some firms may be more likely to export to European countries and others more likely to
export to Asian countries, and these patterns may be entirely due to factors unobserved to us (e.g. firms sell
different varieties that are differentially demanded in different continents) and correlated over time.

8

for as many determinants of firms’ exports as possible. Additionally, we impose only minimal
assumptions on the sets of countries that firms consider exporting to in each period.
Finally, even if one can conclude that exporting to a country does indeed cause an increase
in the probability of subsequently exporting to other destinations that share some characteristic with it, there are still different mechanisms that may generate this path dependence
in export decisions. In our structural estimation, we show that one mechanism present in
the data is the reduction in export entry costs due to extended gravity. When identifying
this channel, we control for two alternative sources of path dependence. First, we allow our
extended gravity variables to also impact exports through other channels. Second, we allow
firms’ information sets to flexibly evolve as they enter foreign markets. This second mechanism
accounts for the possible presence of learning by exporting: as firms export to a country, they
gain information about the demand for their products both in that country and in countries
similar to it. Our estimates of the impact of extended gravity on export entry costs thus
control for the possible presence of learning and should not be attributed to it.
As an intermediate step between the motivating evidence presented in this section and the
structural estimates presented in sections 6 and 7, Appendix A presents additional reducedform evidence on the relevance of extended gravity in determining firms’ export destinations.13

3

Empirical Model

In this section, we present the model that guides our identification of the impact of extended
gravity on the costs that firms face when entering a new destination. Time is discrete and
indexed by t. All firms are located in a country h and choose which export markets to export
to.14 We index all firms active in year t by i = 1, . . . , Nt , and the potential destination markets
by j = 1, . . . , J. The creation and destruction of firms is treated as exogenous.

3.1

Demand, Variable Trade Costs, and Market Structure

η−1
Firms face an isoelastic demand in every country: qijt = p−η
ijt Pjt Yjt . The quantity demanded,

qijt , thus depends on the price the firm sets, pijt , the total expenditure in the market, Yjt ,
and the price index, Pjt , which captures the competition that the firm faces in this market.
A firm produces one unit of output with ait bundles of inputs. The cost of each bundle
is wt , and the marginal production cost is thus ait wt . When firms sell abroad, they also pay
13

In Appendix A.2, we present entry probabilities similar to those in Table 1, separately for firms of different
size and firms with different number of prior export destinations; in Appendix A.3, we present estimates from
logit models of export participation that control for gravity; in Appendix A.4, we additionally control for firmspecific unobservables that are common to countries that share a continent, language or similar income per
capita; and, in Appendix A.5, we show that the direct impact of extended gravity on export participation is
unaffected by whether we allow it to also impact firms’ export revenues.
14
In our empirical application, the market h is Chile. For ease of notation, we eliminate the subindex h.

9

“iceberg” trade costs: they must ship τijt units of output for one unit to reach market j.
These costs account for transport costs and for ad valorem tariffs charged by country j on
goods originating from h. The marginal cost to the firm of selling in market j is thus τijt ait wt .
Conditional on entering a foreign market, exporters behave as monopolistically competitive
firms and, thus, the revenue firm i obtains if it exports to market j in period t is

rijt ≡ pijt qijt =

η τijt ait wt
η − 1 Pjt

1−η
Yjt .

(1)

We model the impact of variable trade costs τijt on export revenues as
1−η
τ τ
τijt
= exp(ξjt + ξi + Xijt
ξ ) + ετijt ,

(2)

τ = (d
e
where ξjt is a country-year term, ξi is a firm-specific term, and Xijt
ijt−1 , Xijt , ln(ait )).

The variable dijt−1 is a dummy that equals one if firm i exported to country j in year t − 1,
e is a vector that accounts for the extended gravity variables introduced in Section 2.1:
and Xijt

“Ext. Grav. Border”, “Ext. Grav. Cont.”, “Ext. Grav. Lang.”, and “Ext. Grav. GDPpc”.
Finally, ετijt is unobserved and we assume that
τ
Ejt [ετijt |Xijt
, dijt , Jit ] = 0,

where

(3)

Ejt [·] denotes an expectation conditional on a destination-year pair jt, and Jit denotes

the information set of the firm when deciding where to export to. Equation (3) thus implies
that the unobserved trade costs, ετijt , do not affect the decision of whether to export to market
j in year t, as captured by the dummy variable dijt .
As we show in Appendix B.1, equations (1) to (3) imply that
r
rijt = exp(αjt + αi + Xijt
α r ) + εR
ijt ,

(4)

where αjt is a country-year component common to all firms, αi is a firm-specific term, and
e
R
r = (d
Xijt
ijt−1 , Xijt , ln(riht )). The variable εijt is unobserved and satisfies
r
Ejt [εRijt |Xijt
, dijt , Jit ] = 0.

(5)

As described in Section 5, our estimation procedure uses equations (4) and (5) to generate a
proxy for the potential export revenues rijt for every firm, country, and year.15 Equation (4)
e ),
allows export revenues to depend on gravity (through αjt ), extended gravity (through Xijt
15
While our data includes information on export sales for firm-country-year triplets with positive exports,
rijt dijt , estimating extended gravity effects requires a proxy for rijt in all remaining cases. Equations (1) to
r
(3) play no role in our analysis except by providing a microfoundation for the relationship between Xijt
and
rijt in equations (4) and (5). We attach no structural interpretation to the parameters entering equation (4).

10

firms’ domestic sales, riht , and firms’ lagged export status, dijt−1 , in a way that captures
prevalent features of our data.16,17 The term εR
ijt makes our model compatible with any residual
variation in export revenues across firms, countries and years (Eaton et al., 2011).
As discussed in Section 2.2, flexibly modeling the determinants of export revenues is desirable for the identification of extended gravity: any variation in rijt that affects firms’ export
participation decisions, is not controlled for explicitly in the export revenue equation (4), and
is correlated with our extended gravity covariates would be confounded in our estimation with
the true impact of these covariates on export entry costs. However, in practice, the predicted
export revenues in our setting are similar across many different specifications of the vector of
r and fixed effects included in the revenue equation (4).18
observed covariates Xijt

3.2

Fixed and Sunk Export Costs

Exporters also face fixed and sunk export costs. Fixed costs are independent of both the
firm’s export history and how much it sells to a destination. They account for the cost of
advertising, updating information on a market, and participating in trade fairs. We assume
fijt = fjo + uicj t + εFijt ,

(6)

where index cj represents a group of countries to which j belongs, and uicj t thus denotes factors
that are firm- and year-specific but common to a group cj (e.g. common to all countries sharing
both continent and language). The observable part of fixed costs, fjo , is modeled as
fjo = γ0F + γcF (Grav. Cont.)j + γlF (Grav. Lang.)j + γgF (Grav. GDPpc)j ,

(7)

where each gravity term is defined in footnote 8. Both uicj t and εFijt are unobserved to the
researcher. While we impose no assumption on the distribution of uicj t , we assume that

E[εFijt |dijt , Jit ] = 0.

(8)

Sunk costs are independent of the quantity exported to a destination, and a firm only has to
pay them if it was not exporting to this destination in the previous year. They account for
16

As shown in Table B.1 (Appendix B.2), the elasticity of rijt with respect to riht is 0.4. Our model
rationalizes this estimate by allowing τijt to depend on ait in equation (2). A model in which τijt is a demand
shifter is isomorphic to ours. Thus, one can interpret the relationship between τijt and ait as a relationship
between productivity and “quality” (Verhoogen, 2008; Kugler and Verhoogen, 2012; Fieler et al., 2016).
17
The dependency of rijt on dijt−1 is consistent with Ruhl and Willis (2016). This dependency may be due to
firms’ learning (Albornoz et al., 2012; Berman et al., 2015), partial-year effects (Bernard et al., 2015; Gumpert
et al., 2016), or customer capital accumulation (Fitzgerald et al., 2016; Piveteau, 2016).
18
As we show in Appendix B.2, the key predictors of export revenues are: (a) the firm fixed effect αi ; (b)
the firm’s domestic sales, riht ; (c) the distance between home and destination markets; and (d) the aggregate
sectoral imports of country j in year t. Covariates (c) and (d) are accounted for by the country-year effect αjt
in equation (4). All other covariates have little additional explanatory power for export revenues in our data.

11

expenses in building distribution networks, hiring workers with specific skills (e.g. knowledge
of foreign languages), and adapting the exported products to destination-specific preferences
and legal requirements. We model them as
sijt = soj − eoijt + εSijt .

(9)

The observable part of sunk costs depends both on gravity, soj , and extended gravity, eoijt . We
model the gravity term as
soj = γ0S + γcS (Grav. Cont.)j + γlS (Grav. Lang.)j + γgS (Grav. GDPpc)j ,

(10)

and the extended gravity term as
eoijt = γbE (Ext. Grav. Border)ijt + γcE (Ext. Grav. Cont.)ijt + γlE (Ext. Grav. Lang.)ijt
+ γgE (Ext. Grav. GDPpc)ijt ,

(11)

with each extended gravity variable defined in footnote 9. The term eoijt thus depends on all
export destinations of firm i in year t − 1: it accounts for the possibility that entry costs in a
market are smaller for those firms that have previously exported to countries similar to it. We
assume that εSijt is unobserved to the firm when it is deciding on its set of export destinations,

E[εSijt |dijt , Jit ] = 0.

(12)

As discussed in Section 2.2, correctly identifying extended gravity requires controlling for
the impact on firms’ export decisions of firm-specific unobserved (to the researcher) covariates
that are correlated over time and across countries that share characteristics giving rise to
extended gravity relationships. We allow for such unobserved covariates through the term uicj t
in equation (6). We do not restrict the correlation in uicj t across firms, groups of countries,
and time periods, nor its relationship to firms’ export decisions. Thus, our model is consistent
with firms conditioning on uicj t when deciding where to export to. Our baseline results in
Section 6 assume that cj = c for all j. In Section 7, we present additional results in which we
clasify countries into groups cj according to their continent, language, or income per capita.

3.3

Export Profits

The assumptions on demand, variable production costs and market structure in Section 3.1,
and the assumptions on fixed and sunk costs in Section 3.2, imply that the potential static
profits of exporting to a destination j are
πijt = rijt − τijt ait wt qijt − fijt − (1 − dijt−1 )sijt = η −1 rijt − fijt − (1 − dijt−1 )sijt ,
12

(13)

and the total potential static profits of exporting to a bundle b of destinations are
X

πibt =

πijt .

(14)

j∈b

Through the dependency of export revenues and sunk costs on last period’s exports, the static
export profits in period t, πibt , will depend on the export bundle chosen in t − 1. However,
conditional on the t − 1 export bundle, all prior years’ export destinations have no impact on
the static profits in period t.19 The export bundle in t − 2 will thus directly affect the static
profits in t − 1, but it will affect those in t only indirectly through the optimal set of export
destinations in t − 1. Thus, the dynamic problem of the firm exhibits one-period dependence.

3.4

Optimal Export Destinations

While we use b to denote a generic bundle of countries that a firm may choose to export to, we
use oit to denote the export bundle actually chosen by firm i in period t. Formally, oit is a vector
that indicates the export status in each of the J export markets: oit = (di1t , . . . , dijt , . . . , diJt ),
where, as a reminder, dijt equals one if firm i exports to market j in year t, and zero otherwise.
Assumption 1 indicates how firms choose the vector oit in every time period.
Assumption 1 For every firm i and period t, let oit denote the observed bundle of export
destinations, Jit denote the information set, and Bit denote the consideration set. Then


oit = argmax E Πibt,Lit |Jit ,

(15)

b∈Bit

where

E[·] denotes the expectation consistent with the data generating process and
Πibt,Lit = πibt +

Lit
X

δ l πioit+l (b)t+l ,

(16)

l=1

where δ is the discount factor and oit+l (b) denotes the optimal export bundle that firm i would
choose at period t + l if it had exported to the bundle b in period t.
Assumption 1 characterizes the firm’s observed export bundle as the outcome of an optimization problem defined by three elements: (1) the Lit periods ahead discounted sum of profits
Πibt,Lit ; (2) the consideration set Bit or set of export bundles among which the firm selects
its preferred one; (3) the information set Jit or set of variables the firm uses to predict its
19

This would not be true if sunk costs in a country for firms that had exported two periods ago to it were
lower than those for firms that had never exported to it. Extending our methodology to allow for such entry
costs is straightforward. However, Roberts and Tybout (1997) provide evidence consistent with the assumption
that export entry decisions exhibit only one-period dependence.

13

potential export profits in each of the bundles included in Bit . Identifying the impact of extended gravity on sunk costs requires imposing some restrictions on these three elements of
the optimization problem. Assumptions 2 to 4 indicate the restrictions we impose.
Assumption 2 Lit ≥ 1.
We impose only weak restrictions on how forward-looking firms are when deciding their optimal export bundle. Our model is compatible with firms that take into account the effect of
their current choices on future profits in any of the three following ways: (a) only one period
ahead, Lit = 1; (b) any finite number p > 2 of periods ahead, Lit = p; or, (c) an infinite number of periods ahead, Lit = ∞ (i.e. perfectly forward looking firms). Furthermore, different
firms may have different planning horizons, and the planning horizon of a firm may change
over time; i.e. Lit may be different from Li0 t0 for i 6= i0 or t 6= t0 . This heterogeneity in planning
horizons accommodates differences across managers in their investment preferences.20
Equation (15) imposes that firms’ expectations are rational but leaves their information
sets unrestricted. Assumption 3 indicates the restriction we impose on them.
Assumption 3 Zit ⊆ Jit , where Zit is a vector of observed covariates.
We thus impose that the researcher observes a vector Zit that is included in the firm’s information set Jit .21 Specifically, to compute our estimates, we specify the vector Zit as
Zit = (Zijt , j = 1, . . . , J),

(17a)

Zijt = (fjo , soj , eoijt , dijt−1 ),

(17b)

where, as a reminder, fjo , soj and eoijt are components of fixed and sunk costs that depend
exclusively on gravity and extended gravity variables, and dijt−1 captures the lagged export
status of the firm in country j. Equation (17) thus only requires firms to know whether each
foreign country shares continent, language or similar income per capita either with Chile or
with at least one country to which they exported to in the previous year. It is reasonable
to assume that all potential exporters have this information. Beyond this minimal content,
we do not impose any assumption on firms’ information sets. The variables not in Zit that
complete the information set Jit may thus vary flexibly across firms and years.
Assumption 3 and the definition of Zit in equation (17) allow for a large degree of unobserved heterogeneity in the uncertainty firms face when deciding which countries to export to.
They are compatible with firms having different information both on the export revenue they
20

Bandiera et al. (2015) find that managers have heterogeneous utility functions. Pennings and Garcia (2008)
show that this heterogeneity matters for their investment decisions, and Cheng and Steinwender (2016) show
that different managers react differently to trade shocks.
21
Whenever we indicate that a random vector Zit is included in the true information set Jit , Zit ⊆ Jit , we
formally mean that the distribution of Zit conditional on Jit is degenerate.

14

would obtain in each market, rijt , and on the fixed cost component uicj t . These differences
may be due to firms’ investing differentially in acquiring information or having different prior
export experience across markets (consistent with within-firm learning).22
Equation (15) also leaves unrestricted the consideration set Bit . The potential choice
set among which firms may choose their optimal export bundle includes all combinations of
foreign countries. Given that the number of countries J to which at least one firm in our data
exports is over 100, it is unrealistic to assume that firms evaluate the trade-offs, as captured
by the function

E[Πibt,Lit |Jit ], of exporting to each of these 2J bundles of countries. The

firm’s consideration set Bit is thus likely smaller than the potential choice set. However, the
lack of data on firms’ consideration sets makes it hard to correctly specify the set Bit of every
firm and period in our sample. For this reason, we do not specify a consideration set Bit for
every firm and year, but just impose a minimal content requirement on it.
Assumption 4 Ait ⊂ Bit , where Ait is known to the researcher.
This assumption imposes that the researcher must list the elements of a subset Ait of the true
consideration set Bit . Specifically, to compute our estimates, we specify the set Ait as
0

Ait = {oit } ∪ {oj→j
, ∀j = 1, . . . , J, and j 0 = 1, . . . , J such that j 0 ∈ Aijt },
it
Aijt = {j 0 = 1, . . . , J such that fjo = fjo0 and uicj t = uicj 0 t },

(18a)
(18b)

0

j→j
where oit
is the bundle constructed by swapping the observed destination j for the alter0

native one j 0 . Formally, for a bundle oit with dijt = 1 and dij 0 t = 0, the bundle oj→j
=
it
(d0i1t , . . . , d0iJt ) is constructed as: (a) dij 00 t = d0ij 00 t if j 00 6= j and j 00 6= j 0 ; (b) dijt − 1 = d0ijt ; and
(c) dij 0 t + 1 = d0ij 0 t . The set Ait includes the observed bundle, oit , plus all other ones built
by swapping an observed destination j for an alternative one j 0 that belongs to the set Aijt .
According to the definition of Aijt , destinations j and j 0 must share: (a) the component of
fixed costs fjo , defined in equation (7); and (b) the unobserved fixed costs term uicj t , defined
in equation (6). Requirement (a) implies that both j and j 0 must have the same gravity
relationship to the home country of the firm: either both or none of them share continent,
language or similar income per capita with country h. Depending on how we define the groups
of countries assumed to share the value of uicj t , requirement (b) may additionally require j
and j 0 to share a continent, language or similar income per capita with each other.23 Con22
Dickstein and Morales (2016) find that large firms have more information relevant to predict rijt than small
firms, and their evidence suggests that this informational advantage is due to larger investments in acquiring
information. Multiple papers provide evidence consistent with within-firm learning (Albornoz et al., 2012;
Berman et al., 2015; Arkolakis et al., 2015b; Timoshenko, 2015a,b; Bastos et al., 2016; Fitzgerald et al., 2016).
23
For example, if we assume that uicj t is common to all countries located in the same continent (cj = cj 0 if j
and j 0 belong to the same continent), requirement (a) implies that either both or none of j and j 0 have Spanish
as official language (Chile’s official language) and share similar income per capita with Chile; and requirement
(b) requires both j and j 0 to be located in the same continent. In this case, we could thus hypothetically swap
the United Kingdom for Germany, but not for the United States, as they are located in different continents.

15

sequently, Assumption 4 and equation (18) imply consideration sets that include at least the
observed choice, oit , plus small perturbations around it. The set of bundles not in Ait that
complete the consideration set Bit may vary flexibly across firms and years.

3.5

Parameters to Identify, Identification Approach and Prior Literature

The unknown model parameters are the demand elasticity η; the discount factor δ; the export
revenue parameters entering equation (4),
α ≡ ({αjt }j,t , {αi }i , αr );

(19)

the fixed and sunk costs parameters entering equations (7), (10), and (11),
γ ≡ (γ0F , γcF , γlF , γgF , γ0S , γcS , γlS , γgS , γbE , γcE , γlE , γgE );

(20)

the planning horizon Lit , information set Jit , and consideration set Bit of every firm i and year
t in the sample; and the joint distribution of the unobserved determinants of export revenues,
fixed and sunk costs, defined respectively in equations (4), (6), and (9).
Prior literature that has estimated single-agent export entry models has done so by assuming away extended gravity effects, γbE = γcE = γlE = γgE = 0; fixing the value of δ to a
number close to 1; specifying the exact planning horizon, Lit , and the precise content of both
the information and the consideration sets, Jit and Bit , of every firm and year in the sample;
and imposing parametric restrictions on the distributions of the unobserved determinants of
export profits. Given these assumptions, the remaining parameters are point identified. This
approach cannot be applied in our setting. Once we allow the extended gravity parameters
to differ from zero, computational feasibility forces us to impose strong assumptions on planning horizons and information and consideration sets so that we can estimate the remaining
parameters through maximum likelihood or a method of moments approach.24
Even if computational feasibility was not a constraint, computing extended gravity estimates that depend on precise definitions of the firm’s planning horizon, information and
consideration sets would be undesirable. As the simulation in Appendix D.2 illustrates, extended gravity estimates are biased if these model elements are misspecified. Given the lack
of data on firms’ planning horizons, information and consideration sets and our aim of correctly identifying the extended gravity parameters, we opt for imposing only the relatively
weak restrictions indicated in assumptions 2 to 4 and equations (17) and (18). Imposing only
these weak restrictions is not without costs: they are not strong enough to point identify the
extended gravity parameters and, furthermore, the resulting model is not suitable to analyze
24
A method of moments approach is feasible if Lit = 0 for all it pairs and Jit is such that firms have perfect
foresight; see Jia (2008), Tintelnot (2016), Antràs et al. (2017), and Arkolakis and Eckert (2017).

16

how firms’ export decisions change in response to counterfactual changes in the environment.
We quantify the importance of extended gravity in reducing export entry costs by identifying bounds on the following vector of relative extended gravity parameters

κ ≡ (κb , κc , κl , κg ) ≡


γbE γcE γlE γgE
,
,
,
,
S γS γS γS
γall
all
all
all

S
γall
≡ γ0S + γcS + γlS + γgS .

(21)

The parameter κb captures the relative reduction due to extended gravity in border in the sunk
costs of entering a country that differs from Chile in all three gravity variables included in our
analysis. The parameters κc , κl and κg capture analogous relative reductions due to extended
gravity in continent, language and similarity in income per capita. For example, for a firm
entering Germany, κg indicates the relative reduction in sunk costs if previously exporting
to the United States, κc indicates the corresponding reduction if previously exporting to
Romania, κc + κg if previously exporting to Spain, κb + κc + κg if exporting to France, and
κb +κc +κl +κg if exporting to Austria. Focusing on identifying the parameter vector κ, instead
of the parameter vector γ, has several advantages. First, the value of κ is independent of the
units in which export sales are measured and, thus, is easier to interpret. Second, identifying
bounds on κ does not require fixing any parameter to a normalizing constant and, thus, these
bounds are scale-invariant. Third, the assumptions required to identify κ are weaker than
those needed to identify all elements of γ.25 Fourth, it is computationally much simpler.26

4

Deriving Moment Inequalities

In Section 4.1, we derive conditional moment inequalities from the model described in Section
3. In Section 4.2, we transform these conditional moment inequalities into unconditional
ones. In Section 4.3, we illustrate how these unconditional moment inequalities may be used
to compute bounds on the elements of the extended gravity parameter vector κ.

4.1

One-period Deviations

We apply an analogue of Euler’s perturbation method to derive inequalities: we compare the
stream of profits along a firm’s observed sequence of bundles with the stream along alternative
sequences that differ from the observed one in just one period. Denoting the observed sequence
25

E.g. identifying γ0F requires parametric restrictions on the distribution of uicj t , and identifying γ0F , γcF , γlF
and γgF requires expanding the set Ait to include alternative export bundles that differ from the observed one
both in the number of export destinations and in the gravity characteristics of the countries included in them.
26
Ho and Rosen (2016) discuss how the computational cost of standard moment inequality inference procedures increases with the dimensionality of the parameter vector to estimate: these procedures require evaluating
whether each point in the parameter space verifies a condition determining its inclusion in the confidence set.
As γ includes 12 parameters, computing a confidence set for it is computationally expensive: a grid covering a
12-dimensional space requires a very large number of points in order to keep the discretization error small.

17

Figure 2: Actual and Counterfactual Path: Example
Actual Path

One-period Deviation Path

Alternative Path

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

t−1

t

t+1

t+2

t−1

t

t+1

t+2

t−1

t

t+1

t+2

The left panel describes the actual export path: the firm chooses destination A in periods t − 1 and t, and
destination B in periods t + 1 and t + 2. The middle panel describes the path that would have been optimal
conditional on choosing destination B in year t. The right panel describes a one-period deviation path from the
actual one: it is identical to the actual path except for swapping destination A for destination B in period t.
The solid arrows denote transitions observed in the data; the dotted arrows denote counterfactual transitions.

as oTi1 = {. . . , oit−1 , oit , oit+1 , . . . }, we form inequalities by comparing the expected discounted
sum of profits generated by it to that generated by an alternative sequence that differs from
0

0

oTi1 in the bundle chosen in t, {. . . , oit−1 , oj→j
, oit+1 , . . . }, where, as a reminder, oj→j
is the
it
it
bundle that results from swapping destination j by j 0 in oit . Given the one-period dependence
in export profits imposed in our model (see Section 3.3), the difference in the discounted sum
of profits generated by the observed and the alternative paths depends only on the difference
in static profits in periods t, πijj 0 t , and t + 1, πijj 0 t+1 ,
πijt − πij 0 t + δ

J
X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ),

(22)

j 00 =1

|

{z

πijj 0 t

}

|

{z

πijj 0 t+1

0

}
0

j→j
00 and year t + 1 if it chooses oj→j in t.
where πij
00 t+1 are the potential profits of i in country j
it

To provide intuition on equation (22), we present in Figure 2 the example of a firm that
must choose which of three possible markets to export to. The left panel describes the firm’s
observed path: it chooses market A in periods t − 1 and t, and market B in periods t + 1 and
t + 2. From Assumption 1, these are the firm’s optimal export destinations in each period.
The middle panel describes the choice that would have been optimal in t + 1 and t + 2 if the
firm had deviated from the optimal path and chosen destination B in period t. The right
panel describes an alternative path built as a one-period deviation from the observed one: it
deviates from it only in that market B is chosen in period t. Using the model’s notation:
oit = (diAt , diBt , diCt ) = (1, 0, 0) and oA→B
= (0, 1, 0). The static profits of exporting to
it
18

market B in period t + 2 are independent of the choice made by the firm in period t: profits
exhibit one-period dependence and, thus, they depend on export history only through the
export bundle in the previous period. This is why period t + 2 static profits do not enter
equation (22). Conversely, the difference in static profits in periods t and t + 1 between the
actual and the period-t deviating path will generally be different from zero.
Proposition 1 shows how we use one-period deviations to derive moment inequalities.
Proposition 1 Suppose assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold; then, for any pair of countries j and
0

j→j
j 0 such that oit
∈ Bit , and any Zit ,

E πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 dijt (1 − dij 0 t ) = 1, Zit ≥ 0.




(23)

The proof of Proposition 1 is in Appendix C.1. Equation (23) indicates that, conditional on
any vector of covariates included in the firm’s information set, Zit , and firm i exporting to
country j and not to j 0 in period t (dijt (1 − dij 0 t ) = 1), the expected discounted sum of profits
along the observed export path is weakly larger than the expected discounted sum along
an alternative path that swaps the observed destination j for the alternative j 0 in period t.
Equation (23) is a revealed preference inequality and, thus, for it to hold, the bundle oj→j
it

0

must belong to the consideration set of the firm in period t, Bit .
To gain intuition on the inequality in equation (23), we use again the example in Figure 2.
Since, according to the left panel, destination A was chosen in period t, Assumption 1 implies
that, conditional on the information available to the firm in period t, the firm weakly prefers
the optimal export path that includes destination A in t (in the left panel) to the optimal path
that includes destination B in t (in the middle panel). However, once country B is selected
in period t, choices in subsequent periods that are optimal conditional on this choice (in the
middle panel) must be preferred over choices that would have been optimal only if destination
A had been selected in t (in the left panel). Transitivity of preferences thus ensures that the
optimal path described in the left panel is, given the information available to the firm in t,
weakly preferred over the one-year deviation path described in the right panel.27
The inequality in equation (23) illustrates how the general approach in Pakes (2010) and
Pakes et al. (2015) can be applied to single-agent dynamic discrete choice models. Our strategy
of using one-period deviations to build estimating equations follows the methodology in Hansen
and Singleton (1982) and Luttmer (1999), but is adapted to our moment inequality setting.28
27

According to Proposition 1, it need not be the case that the realized or ex post difference in profits is
positive. Formally, our model does not imply that dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ) ≥ 0 for every i, j, j 0 and t.
28
Arcidiacono and Miller (2011); Scott (2013); Aguirregabiria and Magesan (2013, 2016); and Traiberman
(2016) also use one-period deviations to estimate dynamic discrete choice models. These papers, however, fully
specify the agents’ planning horizon, and information and consideration sets. Also, for every realization of these
information sets, these procedures require estimating nonparametrically the probability that any alternative
in the consideration set is chosen. Given the dimensionality of any reasonable specification of the information
and consideration sets in our setting, performing this nonparametric estimation is infeasible in our case.

19

Thus, our inequalities do not condition on choices that the firm makes in periods later than the
deviating period t. This differentiates our inequalities from those in Holmes (2011) and Illanes
(2016), and it is important for our purposes because conditioning on the firm’s subsequent
F
S
29
choices would rule out the definition of (εR
ijt , εijt , εijt ) as expectational errors.

4.2

From Conditional to Unconditional Moment Inequalities

The inequalities in equation (23) have two properties that complicate their applicability in
estimation. First, they condition on a particular pair of destinations j and j 0 , implying that
the number of inequalities that one can construct is larger than the sample size. Second, they
condition on the vector Zit , which may take many values. These two characteristics imply
that the sample analogue of most of the moments in equation (23) will average over very few
observations. To facilitate estimation, we exploit the many conditional moment inequalities in
equation (23) to derive a finite number of unconditional inequalities that aggregate across pairs
of actual and counterfactual destinations and across observations with different values of Zit .30
Conditioning on a finite set of moments, while convenient, may entail a loss of information
relative to the many conditional moment inequalities in equation (23). However, as Section
6 shows, the inequalities we employ nonetheless generate economically meaningful bounds on
the parameters of interest. Proposition 2 characterizes our unconditional inequalities.
Proposition 2 Suppose equation (23) and Assumption 4 hold; then, for any function Ψ(·)
such that
Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t ) ≥ 0

(24)

for all values of (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) in their support, it holds that

E

"

J
X
X
j=1

#
Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ) ≥ 0.

(25)

j 0 ∈Aijt

The proof of Proposition 2 is in Appendix C.2. The inequality in equation (25) sums over all
pairs (j, j 0 ) such that j is an actual export destination, dijt = 1, and j 0 is a market to which the
29

F
S
Equations (4), (6) and (9) assume that the vector (εR
ijt , εijt , εijt ) is mean independent of Jit , but do not
0
restrict its relationship to any information set Jit0 such that t > t. This is consistent with the interpretation
F
S
of (εR
ijt , εijt , εijt ) as expectational errors. If we were to apply the inequalities in Holmes (2011) to our setting,
F
S
we would need to assume that the vector (εR
ijt , εijt , εijt ) is mean independent of the information sets Jit0 in
every period t0 . If were to apply the inequalities in Illanes (2016) to our setting, we would need to assume that
F
S
the vector (εR
ijt , εijt , εijt ) belongs to the information set Jit . We opt for our approach because, as discussed in
Dickstein and Morales (2016), allowing for expectational errors is key to the estimation of export entry costs.
30
Menzel (2014); Chernozhukov et al. (2014); Bugni et al. (2016b) introduce inference procedures in settings
with many moment inequalities. Andrews and Shi (2013); Chernozhukov et al. (2013); Armstrong (2014, 2015);
Armstrong and Chan (2016) study conditional moment inequality models.

20

firm does not export, dij 0 t = 0, but that is included in the set Aijt specified by the researcher,
j 0 ∈ Aijt . Assumption 4 requires all bundles formed by swapping country j for an alternative
j 0 included in Aijt to belong to the consideration set Bit . This motivates our choice of Aijt in
equation (18b) as including only countries that are similar to the observed destination j; i.e.
countries that the firm is likely to have considered when selecting j as destination.
When summing over pairs of destinations j and j 0 , the inequality in equation (25) weights
them according to a function Ψ(·) that must satisfy two restrictions: (a) it is weakly positive;
(b) it is a function only of variables observed to the researcher and assumed to belong to the
firm’s information set Jit . This motivates our choice of Zijt , described in equation (17b), as
including only variables that every firm is likely to know.
Without additional restrictions on the set Aijt and the instrument function Ψ(·), the
profit differences πijj 0 t and πijj 0 t+1 in equation (25) will depend on all observed and unobserved
determinants of export revenues, fixed and sunk costs, and all parameters included the vectors
α and γ defined in equations (19) and (20). For our aim of computing bounds on the extended
gravity parameters in the vector κ defined in equation (21), inequalities that depend on all
elements of γ or on the unobserved determinant of fixed costs uicj t are problematic. As
discussed in footnote 26, computing a confidence set for all elements of γ is very costly.
Additionally, if the moments we use for estimation depend on the unobserved term uicj t ,
then we would need to either assume that it is mean independent of the firm’s information
set, Jit , or impose parametric restrictions on its distribution. Either of these distributional
assumptions on uicj t , if inaccurate, will bias our estimates of κ. The following proposition
indicates how we solve these two problems by restricting the set Aijt and the function Ψ(·).
Proposition 3 Suppose equations (5), (8), (12), and (18b) hold, and that
Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 0

S
S
soj 6= γall
or soj0 6= γall
;

if

(26)

then the moment
"

E

J
X
X
j=1

j 0 ∈A

#
Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 )

(27)

ijt

depends only on the distribution of a vector of observed covariates and the parameter vector
S ).
θ∗ ≡ (α, κ, η, γall

The proof of Proposition 3 is in Appendix C.3. Importantly, this proposition indicates that,
if we restrict Aijt according to equation (18b), Ψ(·) according to equation (26), and the
F
S
distribution of the vector (εR
ijt , εijt , εijt ) according to equations (5), (8), and (12), then the

moment in equation (27) does not depend on unobserved determinants of export profits, and

21

S and κ defined in equation (21).31
depends on the vector γ only through the parameters γall

The following corollary indicates how we derive the finite set of unconditional moment
inequalities we use to estimate bounds on κ.
Corollary 1 Given propositions 2 and 3 and any K functions {Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t )}K
k=1 satisfying
equations (24) and (26); then, for every k = 1, . . . , K, it holds:
"

mk (θ ) ≡ E
∗

J
X
X
j=1

j 0 ∈A

#
Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ) ≥ 0.

(28)

ijt

Appendix C.4 lists the K = 10 instrument functions we use in our estimation. Let’s define a
vector θ of unknown parameters whose true value is θ∗ . Then, denoting by Θ the set of all
values of θ such that

4.3

mk (θ) ≥ 0, for all k = 1, . . . , K, Corollary 1 implies that θ∗ ∈ Θ.

Using Inequalities to Bound Extended Gravity Parameters: Intuition

We illustrate here how, by properly selecting alternative destinations to compare to the observed ones, one can construct inequalities that bound the parameters of interest.
In the example in Table 2, a firm enters the United Kingdom in year 8, and we consider an
alternative path in which it enters Germany instead. Both countries are in Europe and have
similar income per capita, but differ in that the former is English-speaking and the latter is
German-speaking. Assume that the firm exported only to the United States in year 7 and does
not export anywhere in year 9. Therefore, in terms of extended gravity effects, the actual and
counterfactual paths differ only in that the firm benefits from extended gravity in language in
the former but not in the latter. Indexing the observed destination with j and the alternative
one with j 0 , the difference in year 8 static profits between actual and counterfactual paths is:
πijj 0 8 = η −1 rij8 − fij8 − sij8 − (η −1 rij 0 8 − fij 0 8 − sij 0 8 )
=η

−1

(rij8 − rij 0 8 ) − (uicj 8 − uicj 0 8 ) −

(εFij8

−

εFij 0 8 )

(29)
+

(eoij8

−

eoij 0 8 )

−

(εSij8

−

εSij 0 8 )

= η −1 (rij8 − rij 0 8 ) − (uicj 8 − uicj 0 8 ) − (εFij8 − εFij 0 8 ) + γlE − (εSij8 − εSij 0 8 )
o
o
R
R
F
F
E
S
S
= η −1 (rij8
− rij
0 8 + εij8 − εij 0 8 ) − (uicj 8 − uic 0 8 ) − (εij8 − εij 0 8 ) + γl − (εij8 − εij 0 8 ),
j

where the first line uses equation (13); the second line applies equations (6) and (9), and takes
into account that Germany and the United Kingdom share all gravity variables affecting the
observable components of fixed costs, fjo = fjo0 , and sunk costs, soj = soj0 ; the third line exploits
31

The intuition behind Proposition 3 is the following. First, according to equation (18b), destinations j and
j must satisfy that fjo = fjo0 ; thus, the moment in equation (27) differences out all terms that depend on
(γ0F , γcF , γlF , γgF ). Second, also according to equation (18b), j and j 0 must also satisfy that uicj t = uicj 0 t , which
are thus also differenced out. Finally, according to equation (26), j and j 0 must share no gravity characteristic
S
with Chile; thus, equation (27) depends on (γ0S , γcS , γlS , γgS ) only through the scalar γall
.
0

22

Table 2: Example of a 1-period Export Event

Observed
Alternative

United Kingdom
Germany
United Kingdom
Germany

t=7
0
0
0
0

t=8
1
0
0
1

t=9
0
0
0
0

that the firm’s single export destination in year 7 shares language with j but not with j 0 ; and
the fourth line uses the expression for export revenues in equation (4), with the notational
o ≡ exp(α + α + X r αr ). As the firm does not export in year 9, its export
simplification rijt
jt
i
ijt

profits in this year are zero both in the actual and counterfactual paths, and then
0

j→j
dij 00 9 (πij 00 9 − πij
00 9 ) = 0,

for all j 00 ∈ J.

(30)

Therefore, the equivalent of the difference in profits in equation (22) is
πijj 0 8 + δπijj 0 9 =
η

−1

o
(rij8

−

o
rij
08

+

εR
ij8

−

εR
ij 0 8 )

− (uicj 8 − uicj 0 8 ) −

(31)

(εFij8

−

εFij 0 8 )

+

γlE

−

(εSij8

−

εSij 0 8 ).

However, not every possible pair of observed and alternative destinations may be used to
build our inequalities. As propositions 2 and 3 show, our inequalities compare an observed
destination j only to those alternative ones included in the set Aijt defined in equation (18b).
By restricting in this way the set of alternative destinations, our inequalities include only
profit differences between destinations j and j 0 such that uicj t = uicj 0 t for every firm i and
year t. Therefore, Germany is a valid alternative to the United Kingdom only if we assume
that uicj t is common across countries that share continent and similar income per capita.
Imposing this assumption, the difference in profits in equation (31) becomes
o
o
R
R
F
F
E
S
S
πijj 0 8 + δπijj 0 9 = η −1 (rij8
− rij
0 8 + εij8 − εij 0 8 ) − (εij8 − εij 0 8 ) + γl − (εij8 − εij 0 8 )
S
o
o
R
R
F
F
S
S
= γall
(η̃ −1 (rij8
− rij
0 8 + εij8 − εij 0 8 ) + κl ) − εij8 + εij 0 8 − εij8 + εij 0 8 ,

(32)

where the second line rewrites the difference in profits as a function of the relative extended
S . If we additionally assume that εR = εF =
gravity parameter of interest κl and η̃ = ηγall
ijt
ijt
S > 0, then equation (32) defines a lower bound on κ as
εSijt = 0 for every i, j, and t, and γall
l

a function of observed determinants of export revenue and the parameter vector (η̃, α):
S
o
o
− rij
γall
(η̃ −1 (rij8
0 8 ) + κl ) ≥ 0

−→

o
o
κl ≥ η̃ −1 (rij
0 8 − rij8 ).

(33)

F
S
Our model however allows εR
ijt , εijt and εijt to differ from zero: equations (5), (8) and (12)

23

impose only that these terms are mean zero conditional on the firm’s information set. Therefore, deriving bounds on κl that depend only on observed covariates requires averaging profit
differences such as those in equation (32) across sets of firms, observed and alternative destinations, and years, selected on the basis of variables that belong to the firms’ information
sets. For each inequality in equation (28), the instrument function Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) selects the
observations that the corresponding moment averages over. How can we define a function
Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) such that the corresponding inequality identifies a lower bound on κl ?
A moment inequality will help identify a lower bound on κl if it averages across paths
such that, as in Table 2, the firm benefits from extended gravity in language more in the
observed than in the alternative path. An instrument function that satisfies the requirements
in equations (24) and (26) and that selects observations likely to verify this condition is:
S
Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, eoijt − eoij 0 t = γl }.

(34)

This function takes value one if three conditions are satisfied, and zero otherwise. The first
condition requires that neither j nor j 0 share continent, language or similar income per capita
with Chile. The second one requires that firm i is exporting to neither j nor j 0 in year t − 1;
and the third one requires that countries j and j 0 are identical in every extended gravity
covariate other than language, which benefits only the observed destination j.
The function in equation (34) guarantees that, for all observations entering the moment
inequality defined by it, the difference in static profits in period t, πijj 0 t , is analogous to that in
equation (29). However, it does not guarantee that the difference in period t + 1 static profits,
πijj 0 t+1 , will equal zero as in equation (30). Imagine that, instead of the path described in
Table 2, we observe the one in Table 3, in which the firm exports to the United Kingdom also
in year 9. In this case, the difference in export profits in year 9 in the United Kingdom is
0

j→j
S
dij9 (πij9 − πij9
) = γall
− γcE − γgE + εSij9 ,

(35)

or, in words, the sunk costs of entering the United Kingdom for a firm that only exports to
Germany in year 8. Therefore, the equivalent of equation (32) for the example in Table 3 is
πijj 0 8 + δπijj 0 9 =

(36)

S
o
o
R
R
F
F
S
S
S
γall
(η̃ −1 (rij8
− rij
0 8 + εij8 − εij 0 8 ) + κl + δ(1 − κc − κg )) − εij8 + εij 0 8 − εij8 + εij 0 8 + δεij9 .

The examples in tables 2 and 3 assume that the firm does not export to any country other
than the United Kingdom in year 9. More generally, when swapping an observed destination
by an alternative one in a year t, one needs to keep track of how this change affects, through
extended gravity effects, the sunk costs in any other country to which the firm starts exporting
in year t + 1. We illustrate this case through an example in Appendix C.5.
24

Table 3: Example of a 1-period Export Event

Observed
Alternative

United Kingdom
Germany
United Kingdom
Germany

t=7
0
0
0
0

t=8
1
0
0
1

t=9
1
0
1
0

As equations (32) and (36) illustrate, the instrument function Ψk (·) in equation (34) does
not fully determine the shape of the difference in profits πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 for the observations
that enter the corresponding moment

mk (·). This shape depends on the observed export

destinations in years t and t + 1. However, all profit differences corresponding to observations
that make the instrument function in equation (34) equal to one will share the feature that
their derivative with respect to the parameter κl is likely positive. Consequently, the resulting
moment inequality is increasing κl and, thus, identifies a lower bound on κl .32
The examples above also show that expectational errors always enter additively in the
function πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 . As Ψk (·) is a function of variables included in the firms’ information
sets, the average of these expectational errors across the observations that make Ψk (·) equal
to one will equal zero asymptotically. Consequently, the resulting moment inequalities will
depend exclusively on observed covariates and a finite number of parameters to estimate.

5

Estimation

Our parameter vector of interest is κ, defined in equation (21). We treat all other parameters
as nuisance parameters. For estimation, we use the inequalities {mk (θ) ≥ 0, k = 1, . . . , 10}
described in equation (28) and Appendix C.4. As the examples in equations (32) and (36)
illustrate, and Appendix C.3 proves, we can rewrite these moments as a function of κ, the
S .
vector of revenue parameters α, the rescaled elasticity of demand η̃, and the sunk cost γall
S and, thus, we can set this
Furthermore, these moments are homogeneous of degree one in γall

parameter to any arbitrary positive constant without affecting the bounds on (α, κ, η̃).
We estimate bounds on (α, κ, η̃) in two steps. First, we use data on export revenues and
moment equalities to obtain point estimates of α. Second, we use moment inequalities and
these estimates of α to obtain confidence sets for (κ, η̃). This two-step estimator is preferred
over an alternative approach that uses only the inequalities {mk (θ) ≥ 0, k = 1, . . . , 10} to
estimate bounds on (α, κ, η̃). First, the two-step approach uses different sources of variation
to identify α and κ: we use data on export revenues conditional on export participation to
identify α, and data on foreign market entry and exit to identify κ. If we had estimated both α
If the partial derivative of mk (·) with respect to κl , is positive, then, holding all other parameters constant,
mk (·) increases with κl and, thus, the inequality mk (θ) ≥ 0 will be violated at very low values of κl .
32

25

and κ using only our inequalities, then separate identification of α and κ would be exclusively
due to the functional form restrictions we impose on revenue, fixed and sunk cost in equations
(4), (7), (10) and (11). Second, if we were to identify α using only inequalities, then it would
also be set identified (instead of point identified). Finally, due to computational constraints,
identifying α using inequalities would force us to limit its dimensionality.33

5.1

First Step Estimation

Following equations (4) and (5), we estimate α using data on revenues, rijt , and its determir , for the subsample of firms, countries, and years with positive exports, d
nants, Xijt
ijt = 1.

We use nonlinear least squares to compute the estimates α̂; we provide additional details in
r is observed independently of the value of d , we use α̂ to define a
Appendix B.2. As Xijt
ijt
r α̂r ).
proxy for the potential revenues of every firm, country and year: r̂ijt ≡ exp(α̂jt + α̂i + Xijt

5.2

Second Step Estimation

Given r̂ijt for every firm, country, and year, we use the sample analogue of the ten moment
inequalities described in equation (28) and Appendix C.4 to compute a 95% confidence set
for the vector (κ, η̃). When computing this set, we apply the procedure described in Section
10.2 of Andrews and Soares (2010) to account for the fact that our moments depend on the
preliminary estimate α̂. Specifically, we apply the Generalized Moment Selection procedure
and adjust the variance matrix of the moments to account for their dependency on α̂.34 In
sections 6 and 7, we report confidence sets for different linear functions of the elements of κ;
we compute these as projections of the 95% confidence set for (κ, η̃).35

6

Results

We present estimates of bounds on linear combinations of the four extended gravity parameters: the relative reduction in sunk costs due to extended gravity in border, κb , continent,
33

See the discussion in footnote 26. A third possible approach is to combine in one step the equalities we use
to identify α and the inequalities that identify (κ, η̃). This approach has the same computational limitations as
using only inequalities to estimate (α, κ, η̃): we still need to limit the dimensionality of α so that a grid covering
all feasible values of (α, κ, η̃) neither is too coarse nor incorporates an infeasibly large number of points.
34
Section 8 in Andrews and Shi (2013) contains a similar adjustment for the case of a conditional moment
inequality estimator. We thank the authors of Andrews et al. (2016) for sharing with us an unpublished version
of their work that includes details on the implementation of the estimator in Section 8 of Andrews and Shi
(2013); we adapt their implementation procedure to our combination of a nonlinear least squares first step
estimator and an unconditional moment inequality second step estimator. All details are in Appendix C.6.
35
Our projected confidence sets are conservative. Instead of applying the procedure introduced in Bugni et
al. (2016a) (which has better power properties), we report these projected sets for two reasons. First, they
are sufficiently tight to provide economically meaningful information on the effect of extended gravity on sunk
costs. Second, as we report confidence sets for many functions of κ, it is computationally more convenient to
compute a single confidence set for (κ, η̃) and then project it multiple times.

26

Table 4: Bounds on Individual Extended Gravity Parameters
Border

Continent

Language

GDPpc

[5.71%, 13.33%]

[19.05%, 28.57%]

[28.57%, 36.19%]

[0%, 28.57%]

Notes: This table reports bounds on the vector κ defined in equation (21). It uses
the regression results described in column I of Table B.1. The confidence intervals
are projections of a confidence set for (κ, η̃) computed following the procedure in
Section 10.2 of Andrews and Soares (2010).

κc , language, κl , and income per capita, κg . To compute these estimates, we assume here
that the unobserved heterogeneity in expected fixed export costs is common across countries:
uicj t = uit , for all j. We impose no other restriction on the distribution of uit .36
As described in Section 5, our extended gravity estimates depend on prior estimates of
the revenue parameters α, which we use to compute a proxy of the potential export revenue
of every firm, country and year, r̂ijt . Our estimates of α, reported in Table B.1 in Appendix
B.2, reveal that: new exporters sell small amounts; firms’ exports increase in the size of
the destination market and generally decrease in any measure of distance between home and
foreign markets; and more productive firms, as proxied either by value added per worker or
by domestic sales, export larger amounts. For the purpose of computing confidence sets on
extended gravity parameters, the main characteristic of the nine revenue regressions reported
in Table B.1 is that, as we show in Table B.2 in Appendix B.2, they all generate very similar
predicted export revenues r̂ijt . Our moment inequality estimates are thus robust to several
different specifications of the export revenue regression. To confirm this, we report here and
in Appendix C.7 two sets of extended gravity estimates that differ in the number of covariates
used to compute the corresponding predicted export revenues.37 No matter which specification
we use to construct r̂ijt , the moment inequality estimates are very similar.
As shown in Table 4, we estimate the extended gravity effect due to border to be between
approximately 6% and 13%, the effect due to continent to be between 19% and 29%, the
effect due to language to be between 29% and 36%, and the effect due to similarity in income
per capita to be lower than 29%. Panel A in Figure 3 represents these estimates graphically:
except for the case of similarity in income per capita, our estimated bounds are tight and
reject the null that extended gravity effects are zero. One should not conclude from these
36

In Section 7, we relax this assumption and allow uicj t to vary across countries that differ in the continent
of location, in official language, or in income per capita.
37
We report here results that rely on the “long” revenue regression described in column I of Table B.1. It
includes: firm and year fixed effects; the firm’s value added per worker, share and average wages of skilled and
unskilled workers; a large set of distance measures between foreign and home countries; this same set interacted
with a dummy for first year of exports to a country; extended gravity covariates; and a measure of the foreign
market’s size. We report in Appendix C.7 results that use the “short” revenue regression described in column
VI of Table B.1. This one includes only: firm and year fixed effects; the firm’s domestic sales; the physical
distance between foreign and home countries; and the aggregate imports in the foreign market. Besides fixed
effects, the “long” regression includes 28 regressors, while the “short” one only 3.

27

Table 5: Bounds on Combinations of Extended Gravity Parameters
Border + Language + Continent + Continent + Continent + Continent + Continent + All
Continent GDPpc
GDPpc
GDPpc +
Language
Language + Language +
Border
Border
GDPpc
[24.76%,
38.10%]

[32.38%,
60.95%]

[24.76%,
49.52%]

[34.29%,
57.14%]

[47.62%,
62.86%]

[55.24%,
74.29%]

[57.14%,
81.90%]

[68.57%]
89.52%]

Notes: This table reports bounds on sums of elements of the vector κ defined in equation (21). It uses the regression
results described in column I of Table B.1. The confidence intervals reported in this table are projections of a 5dimensional confidence set for (κ, η̃) computed following the procedure in Section 10.2 of Andrews and Soares (2010).

estimates that linguistic factors matter more than geographic ones. Contiguous countries will
also generally share continent and, as shown in Table 5 and Panel A in Figure 3, their joint
effect is between 25% and 38%, comparable to the effect of sharing common language.
Table 5 and Panel B in Figure 3 present bounds on combinations of extended gravity
parameters. Noticeably, firms that have export experience in a country that shares border,
continent, language and similar income per capita with a new export destination will pay
sunk export costs 69% to 90% smaller than those paid by a firm that has no prior export
experience (or experience only in countries unrelated to that new destination). This result
puts into question the standard assumption that firms consider different foreign countries as
independent export markets. Our results suggest that this equivalence between markets and
countries is, in some cases, inaccurate. When two countries are very similar to each other,
firms that jump between them face barriers only slightly larger than those they would face
when jumping across regions of the same country.
Panel C in Figure 3 illustrates our estimates through the example of a firm that enters
the United States. If this firm was previously exporting to Canada, a country that shares
border, continent, language and similar income per capita with the United States, it will
pay only between one tenth and one third of the entry costs paid by a firm that was not
exporting in the prior year. Similarly, Panel D of Figure 3 shows that the cost of starting
to export to Germany for a firm whose only export destinations in the previous year are, for
example, China or Argentina will be between four and ten times larger than the corresponding
cost for a firm that exported to Austria instead. These results reflect that, once a firm
has adapted its products or workforce to successfully export to Austria, the additional cost
required to enter Germany is relatively small. Furthermore, firms are forward-looking and,
thus, when considering whether to enter a country like Austria, they take into account that the
investment required to break into this market will also eventually allow them to enter other
similar countries such as Germany. Therefore, the decision of whether to make the investment
needed to enter a foreign country will depend on how similar it is to other markets.
The difference in the entry costs in Germany of previous exporters to Austria and of
previous exporters to France reflects the role of language in generating extended gravity effects.
28

Once the linguistic connection is not present, the total reduction in entry costs due to extended
gravity effects is at most 57%. If we further omit the income per capita connection and consider
the sunk costs in Germany of previous exporters to Poland, then the advantage is between
25% and 38%. Finally, sharing only continent (as is the case of Greece and Germany) implies,
as discussed above, an approximate reduction in entry costs of 19% to 29%.
Is it easier to enter the United States from Mexico or from the United Kingdom? Mexico
shares all geographic factors (border and continent) with the United States, while the United
Kingdom shares all non-geographic factors (language and similar income per capita). While
we cannot reject that the extended gravity effects enjoyed by a firm previously exporting
to Mexico are the same as those experienced by a firm previously exporting to the United
Kingdom, most parameter values in our confidence set indicate that the combined effect of
language and income per capita is larger than the combined effect of border and continent.
Two features of our estimates are worth noting. First, although we identify κ from firms’
discrete export decisions, our estimates do not depend on a normalization by scale. The
reason is that κ captures not the absolute but the relative reduction in sunk costs. Second,
our estimates show that, even though the confidence interval for a parameter may be large,
confidence intervals for linear combinations of this and other parameters can be smaller. For
example, the confidence interval for κg is nearly 30 percentage points wide; however, the
confidence interval on the sum of all four extended gravity parameters, κb + κc + κl + κg , is 21
percentage points wide. Combinations of parameters may thus be better identified than each
of them by itself; estimates will have this property whenever the covariates that multiply these
parameters are positively correlated. Panel (e) in Figure 4 illustrates this: the projection of
the confidence set for (κ, η̃) on the space (κc , κg ) slopes negatively and, thus, includes both
parameter values that combine high values of κc with low values of κg and values that combine
low values of κc with high values of κg . The bounds on κc +κg are thus narrower than those on
κg . The reason why the projection of the confidence set for (κ, η̃) on the space (κc , κg ) slopes
negatively is that countries that belong to the same continent tend to have similar income per
capita: if a firm enters a country that shares a continent with a prior export destination, this
country will also likely share similar income per capita with that destination. In these cases,
our estimator cannot determine whether the firm’s entry decision is due to extended gravity
in continent or in income per capita, but it can determine that the sum of both effects must
be large enough to explain the observed export decision.38
38
This is one of the reasons why we do not aim to identify the effect of each gravity variable on sunk costs
(the other one being an increase in the dimensionality of the parameter vector to estimate). In the case of
Chile, gravity variables are very correlated: most Spanish-speaking countries are located in South America and
have similar levels of income per capita. For example, if we observe firms entering Argentina instead of the
larger US market, our model will indicate that export costs in Argentina are lower; however, we cannot discern
whether this is due to Argentina sharing continent, language or similar income per capita with Chile. For this
reason, we estimate extended gravity effects relative to the sunk costs of exporting to a country that differs
S
from Chile in all gravity variables: we identify bounds on κb = γbE /γall
, but not, for example, on γbE /γcS .

29

Figure 3: Bounds on Extended Gravity Parameters
Panel A: Individual Extended Gravity Parameters

Panel B: Combinations of Extended Gravity Parameters

Panel C: Extended Gravity Effects When Entering the United States

Panel D: Extended Gravity Effects When Entering Germany

Notes: These figures represent the projected confidence intervals reported in Panel A of tables 4
and 5.

30

Figure 4: Projected Confidence Set
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Border vs. GDPpc

(d) Continent vs. Language

(e) Continent vs. GDPpc

(f) Language vs. GDPpc

Notes: These confidence sets are two-dimensional projections of a 5-dimensional confidence set for (κ, η̃)
computed following the procedure in Section 10.2 of Andrews and Soares (2010).

31

7

Robustness

In this section, we present estimates consistent with the unobserved heterogeneity in export
profits, uicj t , varying across groups of countries. We treat uicj t as a firm i, year t, and groupof-countries cj fixed effect, and define the groups cj by the countries’ continent, language, or
income per capita. We thus impose no restrictions on the distribution of uicj t across country
groups, firms, and time periods. This implies that only those inequalities in which we swap an
observed export destination for an alternative one belonging to the same country group will be
useful to identify κ: any difference in the firm’s export decisions in two countries j and j 0 that
do not belong to the same country group, cj 6= cj 0 , can be explained by specific realizations
of uicj t and uicj 0 t . Our approach to build inequalities is thus based on differencing out the
unobserved heterogeneity that affects firms’ export decisions, and we do so by choosing actual
and counterfactual destinations j and j 0 such that cj = cj 0 and, therefore, uicj t − uicj 0 t = 0.
Inequalities that compare export profits in countries that share continent, language, or
similar income per capita create challenges for the identification of extended gravity parameters. For example, consider the case in which we treat uicj t as a firm-year-continent fixed
effect and, thus, build inequalities that compare destinations that belong to the same continent. This complicates the identification of the continent extended gravity parameter, κc . A
firm that benefits from extended gravity in continent when entering country j in year t would
have equally benefited from it if it had entered an alternative destination j 0 located in the
same continent: if the firm is exporting in t − 1 to a country sharing continent with j, it is
also then exporting to a country sharing continent with j 0 . The difference in static profits in
t, πijj 0 t , will thus not depend κc . While the difference in static profits in year t + 1, πijj 0 t+1 ,
may still depend on κc , inequalities that difference out a firm-year-continent fixed effect will
have low identification power for κc . However, as long as there is variation in language and
income per capita across countries sharing a continent, these inequalities may still be useful
to identify extended gravity effects due to language, κl , and income per capita, κg . Similarly,
when we allow for firm-year-language or firm-year-income-per-capita-group fixed effects, our
inequalities lose identification power for the corresponding extended gravity parameters.
The results we obtain when we allow uicj t to vary across groups of countries, reported in
Table 6, are consistent with those we obtain when we assume that this term is common to
all countries, reported in Table 4. When we allow uicj t to differ across continents, the border
extended gravity effect is estimated to be between 10% and 23%, the one due to language to
be between 12% and 27%, and the one due to similarity in income per capita to be between
9% and 21%. As expected based on the discussion above, the continent extended gravity effect
is not identified in this case. Allowing uicj t to vary across countries that differ in their official
language yields a border extended gravity effect between 3% and 9%, a continent extended
gravity effect between 12% and 24%, and an extended gravity effect due to similarity income

32

Table 6: Bounds on Individual Extended Gravity Parameters
Panel A: Firm-Year-Continent Fixed Effects
Border

Continent

Language

GDPpc

[10.37%, 22.70%]

[-, -]

[11.85%, 26.67%]

[8.89%, 20.74%]

Panel B: Firm-Year-Language Fixed Effects
Border

Continent

Language

GDPpc

[2.96%, 8.89%]

[11.85%, 23.70%]

[-, -]

[14.81%, 34.07%]

Panel C: Firm-Year-GDP Per Capita Fixed Effects
Border

Continent

Language

GDPpc

[4.10%, 7.18%]

[18.46%, 28.72%]

[18.46%, 28.72%]

[-, -]

Notes: This table reports bounds on the vector κ defined in equation (21). It relies on
the regression estimates in column I of Table B.1. The bounds in panels A, B, and C
are computed under the assumption that uicj t is, respectively, a firm-year-continent,
a firm-year-language, and a firm-year-income-per-capita-group fixed effect. The confidence intervals are projections of a confidence set for (κ, η̃) computed following the
procedure in Section 10.2 of Andrews and Soares (2010).

per capita between 15% and 34%. Finally, when allowing for firm-year-income-per-capitagroup fixed effects, we obtain a border extended gravity effect between 4% and 7%, and
extended gravity effects due to continent and language between 19% and 29%.
Our inequalities do not allow for firm-, year-, and country-specific unobserved heterogeneity in export profits known to the firm when deciding on its set of export destinations.
However, as the simulation in Appendix D.3 shows, if substantial unobserved heterogeneity
impacts the firm’s export decisions, the identified set defined by inequalities that ignore such
heterogeneity is likely to be empty. We use the model specification tests in Andrews and
Soares (2010) and Bugni et al. (2015) to test the null hypothesis that the identified sets defined by the inequalities employed in tables 4 and 6 are nonempty: the p-values for both the
“test BP” and the “test RS” are always larger than 10% (see Appendix C.6.2 for details). One
should not interpret our results as suggesting that export profits do not differ across firms for
unobserved reasons. Such unobserved determinants are accounted for in our model through
F
S
the terms εR
ijt , εijt and εijt , defined in equations (4), (6), and (9). However, consistent with

equations (5), (8), and (12), our estimates do not contradict the assumption that these terms
are also unobserved to the firm when deciding which new destinations to enter.

8

Concluding Remarks

We use moment inequalities to estimate a dynamic model of firm entry into spatially related
export markets. The traditional approach assumes that the firm’s export decision in a market
33

is independent of the decision taken in any other market. Conversely, our model allows for
dynamic complementarities across markets in the firm’s export decisions. These decisions are
thus potentially very complex, and this complexity makes moment inequalities ideal.
Our results show that extended gravity is an important determinant of firms’ entry costs.
A firm that exports to countries that share border, continent, language and similar income
per capita with a particular market will face sunk costs in it that are between 69% and 90%
smaller than those faced by a firm whose export destinations do not share any of these four
characteristics with this market. Among the four extended gravity factors we consider, border
and language are to be the most important. Exporting to a country located in the continent
of a subsequent new destination reduces sunk costs by 19% to 29% if both countries do not
share border, and by 25% to 38% if they do. This effect is similar to the impact of sharing
language, which reduces entry costs by 29% to 36%. The impact of sharing similar income
per capita is imprecisely estimated to be below 29%.
Although our estimator has the advantage of being consistent with a flexible specification
of the firm’s information and consideration sets, and planning horizon, it also has limitations.
In particular, our benchmark estimates assume away the existence of firm-year-country specific
factors that influence firms’ entry decisions but are not in our data. If these unobserved factors
are correlated across countries connected through some extended gravity variable, then our
extended gravity estimates will not be capturing only state dependence in trade costs but also
the effect of unobserved heterogeneity in potential export profits. To address this concern,
we also present estimates that allow for firm-year-group-of-countries specific fixed effects. No
matter whether we define country groups by their continent, language or income per capita,
the resulting estimates are generally consistent with the benchmark ones.
Given that sunk costs are important determinants of firms’ export decisions (Das et al.,
2007) and that the extensive margin of firms drives much of the variation in aggregate trade
across destinations (Bernard et al., 2010), our findings suggest that shocks to the profitability
of exporting to a market will have important effects on neighboring countries and in countries
that share a language with them. For example, our analysis suggests that an increase in trade
barriers between the United States and China will impact Chinese exports to Mexico and
Canada. Quantifying this impact, however, requires correctly specifying firms’ information
and consideration sets and planning horizons, as well as solving the resulting combinatorial
dynamic discrete choice problem. This requires dealing with computational challenges still
unsolved in the literature, and, thus, we leave this quantification for future work.

References
Aguirregabiria, Victor and Arvind Magesan, “Euler Equations for the Estimation of

34

Dynamic Discrete Choice Structural Models,” Advances in Econometrics, 2013, 31, 3–44.
[19]
and , “Solution and Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Choice Structural Models Using
Euler Equations,” mimeo, October 2016. [19]
Albornoz, Facundo, Héctor F. Calvo Pardo, Gregory Corcos, and Emanuel Ornelas, “Sequential Exporting,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (1), 1–24. [1,
3, 11, 15]
Allenby, Greg M., Jaehwan Kim, and Peter E. Rossi, “Modeling Consumer Demand
for Variety,” Marketing Science, 2002, 21 (Summer), 229–250. [3]
, , and , “Product Attributes and Models of Multiple Discreteness,” Journal of Econometrics, 2007, 138, 208–230. [3]
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 170–192. [4]
Andrews, Donald W.K. and Gustavo Soares, “Inference for Parameters Defined by
Moment Inequalities Using Generalized Moment Selection,” Econometrica, 2010, 78, 119–
157. [26, 27, 28, 31, 33, 20, 24, 25]
and Patrik Guggenberger, “Validity of Subsampling and Plug-in Asymptotic Inference
for Parameters Defined by Moment Inequalities,” Econometric Theory, 2009, 25, 669–709.
[24]
and Xiaoxia Shi, “Inference Based on Conditional Moment Inequalities,” Econometrica,
2013, 81 (2), 609–666. [20, 26]
, Wooyoung Kim, and Xiaoxia Shi, “Stata Commands for Testing Conditional Moment
Inequalities/Equalities,” Stata Journal, 2016, forthcoming. [26]
Antràs, Pol, Teresa Fort, and Felix Tintelnot, “The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory
and Evidence from U.S.,” mimeo, February 2017. [4, 16]
Arcidiacono, Peter and Robert A. Miller, “Conditional Choice Probability Estimation
of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 2011,
79, 1823–1867. [19]
, Patrick Bayer, Jason R. Blevins, and Paul B. Ellickson, “Estimation of Dynamic
Discrete Choice Models in Continuous Time with an Application to Retail Competition,”
Review of Economic Studies, 2016, 83 (3), 889–931. [4]
Arkolakis, Costas, “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (6), 1151–1199. [3]
and Fabian Eckert, “Combinatorial Discrete Choice,” mimeo, January 2017. [4, 16]
, Sharat Ganapati, and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “The Extensive Margin of Exporting Goods: A Firm-level Analysis,” mimeo, November 2015. [3]
35

, Theodore Papageorgiou, and Olga A. Timoshenko, “Firm Learning and Growth,”
mimeo, September 2015. [15]
Armstrong, Tim B., “Weighted KS Statistic for Inference on Conditional Moment Inequalities,” Journal of Econometrics, 2014, 182 (2), 92–116. [20]
, “Asymptotically Exact Inference in Conditional Moment Inequality Models,” Journal of
Econometrics, 2015, 186 (1), 51–65. [20]
and Hock Peng Chan, “Multiscale Adaptive Inference on Conditional Moment Inequalities,” Journal of Econometrics, 2016, 194 (1), 24–43. [20]
Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu, “R&D Investment, Exporting, and
Productivity Dynamics,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4), 1312–1344. [3]
Bai, Xue, Kala Krishna, and Hong Ma, “How you Export Matters: Export Mode,
Learning and Productivity in China,” Journal of International Economics, 2017, 104 (1),
122–137. [3]
Bandiera, Oriana, Luigi Guiso, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun, “Matching Firms,
Managers, and Incentives,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (3), 623–681. [14]
Bastos, Paulo, Daniel A. Dias, and Olga A. Timoshenko, “Learning, Prices, and Firm
Dynamics,” mimeo, 2016. [15]
Berman, Nicolas, Vincent Rebeyrol, and Vincent Vicard, “Demand Learning and
Firm Dynamics: Evidence from Exporters,” mimeo, November 2015. [11, 15]
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K.
Schott, “Firms in International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (3),
105–130. [1]
,
,
, and
487–493. [1, 34]

, “The Margins of US Trade,” American Economic Review, 2010, 99,

, Renzo Massari, Jose-Daniel Reyes, and Daria Taglioni, “Exporter-Dynamics and
Partial-Year Effects,” mimeo, November 2015. [11]
Bugni, Federico A., Ivan A. Canay, and Xiaoxia Shi, “Alternative Specification Tests
for Partially Identified Models Defined by Moment Inequalities,” Journal of Econometrics,
2015, 185 (1), 259–282. [33, 23, 24]
, , and , “Inference for Functions of Partially Identified Parameters in Moment Inequality Models,” Quantitative Economics, 2016, forthcoming. [26]
, Mehmet Caner, Anders Bredahl Kock, and Soumedra Lahiri, “Inference in Partially Identified Models with Many Moment Inequalities Using Lasso,” mimeo, 2016. [20]
Butler, J. S. and Robert Moffitt, “A Computationally Efficient Quadrature Procedure
for the One-Factor Multinomial Probit Model,” Econometrica, 1982, 50 (3), 761–764. [7]

36

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi, Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005. [23]
Card, David and Daniel Sullivan, “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training Programs
on Movements In and Out of Employment,” Econometrica, 1998, 56 (3), 497–530. [6]
Chaney, Thomas, “The Network Structure of International Trade,” American Economic
Review, 2014, 104 (11), 3600–3634. [1, 2, 3]
, “The Gravity Equation in International Trade: An Explanation,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2016, forthcoming. [2]
, “Networks in International Trade,” in Yann Bramoulle, Andrea Galleoti, and Brian Rogers,
eds., Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Networks, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2016. [2]
Cheng, Chen and Claudia Steinwender, “Import Competition, Heterogeneous Preferences of Managers, and Productivity,” mimeo, December 2016. [14]
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, and Kengo Kato, “Testing Many Moment
Inequalities,” mimeo, November 2014. [20]
, Sokbae Lee, and Adam M. Rosen, “Intersection Bounds: Estimation and Inference,”
Econometrica, 2013, 81 (2), 667–737. [20]
Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout, “Market Entry Costs,
Producer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics,” Econometrica, 2007, 75 (3), 837–873. [2,
3, 34]
Defever, Fabrice, Bendikt Heid, and Mario Larch, “Spatial Exporters,” Journal of
International Economics, 2015, 95 (1), 145–156. [1, 3]
Dickstein, Michael J. and Eduardo Morales, “What Do Exporters Know?,” mimeo,
December 2016. [3, 4, 15, 20, 30]
Dubé, Jean-Pierre, “Multiple Discreteness and Product Differentiation: Demand for Carbonated Soft Drinks,” Marketing Science, 2004, 23 (1), 66–81. [3]
Eaton, Jonathan, David Jinkins, James R. Tybout, and Daniel Yi Xu, “Two Sided
Search in International Markets,” mimeo, June 2016. [3]
, Marcela Eslava, David Jinkins, C. J. Krizan, and James R. Tybout, “A Search
and Learning Model of Export Dynamics,” mimeo, February 2014. [3]
, , Maurice Kugler, and James R. Tybout, “The Margins of Entry into Export Markets: Evidence from Colombia,” in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thierry Verdier,
eds., The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 2008. [3]
, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramraz, “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” Econometrica, 2011, 79 (5), 1453–1498. [11]
37

Eizenberg, Alon, “Upstream Innovation and Product Variety in the U.S. Home PC Market,”
Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81, 1003–1045. [4]
Ellickson, Paul, Stephanie Houghton, and Christopher Timmins, “Estimating Network Economies in Retail Chains: A Revealed Preference Approach,” Rand Journal of
Economics, 2013, 44 (2), 169–193. [3]
Evenett, Simon J. and Anthony J. Venables, “Export Growth in Developing Countries:
Market Entry and Bilateral Trade Flows,” mimeo, June 2002. [1]
Fieler, Ana Cecilia, Marcela Eslava, and Daniel Yi Xu, “Trade, Skills and QualityUpgrading: A Theory with Evidence from Colombia,” mimeo, November 2016. [11]
Fitzgerald, Doireann, Stefanie Haller, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi, “How Exporters Grow,”
mimeo, January 2016. [3, 11, 15]
Gumpert, Anna, Andreas Moxnes, Natalia Ramondo, and Felix Tintelnot, “Exporters’ and Multinational Firms’ Life-cycle Dynamics,” mimeo, October 2016. [11]
Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, “Generalized Instrumental Variables
Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 1982, 50 (5), 1269–
1286. [4, 19]
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, “Gravity Equations: Workhorse,Toolkit, and Cookbook,” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Vol.4 of Handbook
of International Economics, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 131–195. [1]
Heckman, James J., “The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial Conditions in Estimating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process and Some Monte
Carlos Evidence,” in Charles F Manski and Daniel McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of
Discrete Choice Data and Econometric Applications, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1981, pp. 179–
195. [6]
Hendel, Igal, “Estimating Multiple-Discrete Choice Models: An Application to Computerization Returns,” Review of Economic Studies, 1999, 199 (April), 423–446. [3, 4]
Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels, “Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions: A
Decomposition Using Micro-Data,” European Economic Review, 2008, 52 (3), 527–550. [1]
Ho, Katherine, “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 393–430. [4]
and Adam Rosen, “Partial Identification in Applied Research: Benefits and Challenges,”
mimeo, August 2016. [17]
and Ariel Pakes, “Hospital Choices, Hospital Prices, and Financial Incentives to Physicians,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3841–3884. [4]
Holmes, Thomas J., “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,” Econometrica,
2011, 79 (1), 253–302. [3, 4, 20]

38

Illanes, Gaston, “Switching Costs in Pension Plan Choice,” mimeo, 2016. [4, 20]
Irarrazabal, Alfonso A., Andreas Moxnes, and Luca David Opromolla, “The Tip of
the Iceberg: A Quantitative Framework for Estimating Trade Costs,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 2015, 97 (4), 777–792. [3]
Ishii, Joy, “Compatibility, Competition, and Investment in Network Industries: ATM Networks in the Banking Industry,” mimeo, 2008. [4]
Jia, Panle, “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the
Discount Retailing Industry,” Econometrica, 2008, 76 (6), 1263–1316. [3, 4, 16]
Judd, Kenneth L., Numerical Methods in Economics, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
Press, 1998. [7]
Katz, Michael, “Supermarkets and Zoning Laws,” Unpublished PhD Dissertation, 2007,
Harvard University. [4]
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, “Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality,” Review
of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (1), 307–339. [11]
Labanca, Claudio, Danielken Molina, and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “Preparing to
Export,” mimeo, December 2014. [2]
Lawless, Martina, “Firm Export Dynamics and the Geography of Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 2009, 77 (2), 1149–1172. [1, 3]
, “Marginal Distance: Does Export Experience Reduce Firm Trade Costs?,” Open
Economies Review, 2013, 24 (5), 819–841. [1, 3]
Luttmer, Erzo C. J., “What Level of Fixed Costs can Reconcile Consumption and Stock
Market Returns?,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (5), 969–997. [4, 19]
Mayer, Thierry and Soledad Zignago, “Notes on CEPII’s Distances Measures,” mimeo,
December 2011. [5]
Meinen, Phillipp, “Sunk Costs of Exporting and the Role of Experience in International
Trade,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 2015, 48 (1), 335–367. [1]
Menzel, Konrad, “Consistent Estimation with Many Moment Inequalities,” Journal of
Econometrics, 2014, 182, 329–350. [20]
Moxnes, Andreas, “Are Sunk Costs in Exporting Country-Specific?,” Canadian Journal of
Economics, 2010, 43 (2), 467–493. [3]
Pakes, Ariel, “Alternative Models for Moment Inequalities,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (6),
1783–1822. [4, 19]
and Jack R. Porter, “Moment Inequalities for Multinomial Choice with Fixed Effects,”
mimeo, December 2015. [4]

39

, , Katherine Ho, and Joy Ishii, “Moment Inequalities and their Application,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (1), 315–334. [4, 19]
Pennings, Joost M. E. and Philip Garcia, “The Informational Content of the Shape
of Utility Functions: Financial Strategic Behavior,” Managerial and Decision Economics,
2008, 30 (2), 93–90. [14]
Piveteau, Paul, “An Empirical Dynamic Model of Trade with Consumer Accumulation,”
mimeo, January 2016. [11]
Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout, “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An
Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs,” American Economic Review, 1997, 87 (4),
545–564. [3, 13]
Romano, Joseph P. and Azeem M. Shaikh, “Inference for Identifiable Parameters in
Partially Identified Econometric Models,” Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference,
2008, 138 (9), 2786–2807. [24]
Ruhl, Kim J. and Jonathan L. Willis, “New Exporter Dynamics,” International Economic Review, forthcoming 2016. [3, 11]
Scott, Paul T., “Dynamic Discrete Choice Estimation of Agricultural Land Use,” mimeo,
December 2013. [19]
Sieg, Holger and Jipeng Zhang, “The Effectiveness of Private Benefits in Fundraising of
Local Charities,” International Economic Review, 2012, 53 (2), 349–374. [4]
Timoshenko, Olga A., “Learning versus Sunk Costs Explanations of Export Persistence,”
European Economic Review, 2015, 79, 113–128. [15]
, “Product Switching in a Model of Learning,” Journal of International Economics, 2015,
95 (2), 233–249. [15]
Tinbergen, Jan, Shaping the World Economy, New York: The Twentieth Century Fund,
1962. [4]
Tintelnot, Felix, “Global Production with Export Platforms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, forthcoming. [3, 16]
Traiberman, Sharon, “Occupations and Import Competition,” mimeo, December 2016. [19]
Verhoogen, Eric A., “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 489–530. [11]
Wollmann, Thomas G., “Trucks Without Bailouts: Equilibrium Product Characteristics
for Commercial Vehicles,” mimeo, May 2016. [4]
Zheng, Fanyin, “Spatial Competition and Preemptive Entry in the Discount Retail Industry,” mimeo, November 2016. [3]

40

Online Appendix for “Extended Gravity’

Eduardo Morales
Princeton University

Gloria Sheu
U.S. Department of Justice

June 24, 2017

Andrés Zahler
Universidad Diego Portales

A

Reduced-Form Evidence

In this section, we present reduced-form evidence on the relevance of extended gravity in determining firms’
export destinations. Specifically, we complement the motivating evidence presented in Table 1 in Section 2.2
by addressing some alternative explanations for the transition probabilities documented in that table.

A.1

Export Path of an Illustrative Firm

For the same firm illustrated in Figure 1 in Section 2.2, this table lists all countries to which the firm exported
in each year in our sample. Country names listed in italics have English as their primary official language.
Countries are listed in increasing order according to their distance to Chile. We refer the reader to Section
2.2 for a description of the export behavior of this firm that illustrates how extended gravity forces may be an
important explanation of its choice of which foreign countries to start to export in each year.

Table A.1: Export Path of an Individual Firm
Countries
Argentina
Bolivia
Peru
Ecuador
Brazil
Colombia
Venezuela
Panama
Nicaragua
El Salvador
Honduras
Belize
Guatemala
Mexico
United States
Spain
France
The Netherlands
United Kingdom
Australia

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X
x
X
X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X

Notes: For the same firm illustrated in Figure 1, this table lists all countries to which the firm exported in each year
in our sample. Country names listed in italics have English as their primary official language.

A.2

Transition Probabilities by Firm Size

As discussed in Section 2.2, extended gravity effects are not the only economic mechanism that can rationalize
the transition probabilities reported in Table 1. An alternative explanation is the joint effect of the following
two forces: (a) most firms either do not export at all or export to a very few destinations, while a small set of
firms export widely; (b) the more countries a firm exports to, the more likely it is that every new destination
shares some characteristic with a previous destination of the firm.
The model reported in Section 3 and the results presented in sections 6 and 7 account for this alternative
explanation both by allowing observed and unobserved firm characteristics to determine the number of countries

1

Table A.2: Transition Probabilities By Firm Size
Overall
Large Firms
Small Firms
Prob. of Num. of Prob. of Num. of Prob. of Num. of
Entry
Entries
Entry
Entries
Entry
Entries
Overall:
Extended Gravity:
If Ext. Grav. Border = 1
If Ext. Grav. Cont. = 1
If Ext. Grav. Lang. = 1
If Ext. Grav. GDPpc = 1
If All Ext. Grav. = 0

0.53%

1638

1.03%

1264

0.30%

374

6.74%
2.79%
1.59%
1.53%
0.31%

397
525
205
588
770

6.78%
2.86%
1.46%
1.59%
0.69%

321
391
145
453
585

5.94%
2.88%
1.83%
1.52%
0.16%

76
134
60
135
185

Notes: Large Firms have domestic sales above median; Small Firms have domestic sales below median. Median
domestic sales in our sample equal approximately 1.8 million dollars.

Table A.3: Transition Probabilities By Number of Exporters
Overall
Many Destinations Few Destinations
Prob. of Num. of Prob. of Num. of Prob. of Num. of
Entry
Entries
Entry
Entries
Entry
Entries
Overall:
Extended Gravity:
If Ext. Grav. Border = 1
If Ext. Grav. Cont. = 1
If Ext. Grav. Lang. = 1
If Ext. Grav. GDPpc = 1
If All Ext. Grav. = 0

0.53%

1638

1.97%

871

0.38%

767

6.74%
2.79%
1.59%
1.53%
0.31%

397
525
205
588
770

7.22%
3.23%
1.87%
2.31%
0.99%

361
497
196
498
134

1.21%
0.95%
0.34%
0.57%
0.33%

36
28
9
90
636

Notes: Many Destinations probabilities correspond to firms with above median number of destinations; Few Destinations probabilities correspond to firms with number of destinations below or equal to the median. The median
number of destinations in our sample is equal to 4.

a firm exports to in every time period and by flexibly modeling the set of export destinations to which each
firm considers exporting (i.e. its consideration set).
As preliminary evidence that the transition probabilities reported in Table 1 are not entirely due to this
possible alternative explanation, tables A.2 and A.3 report transition probabilities analogous to those in Table
1 for subgroups of firms that differ both in their domestic sales (interpreted here as a proxy for the firm’s
productivity) and in their total number of export destinations in the previous year. To facilitate the comparison,
the first two columns in both of these tables include the overall numbers reported in Table 1.
The first row in tables A.2 and A.3 shows that the overall probability of entry is larger for large firms and
for firms already exporting to a large number of destinations. The remaining rows in these tables show that,
for all the four subgroups of firms considered in them, the general finding that firms are more likely to enter a
country when previously exporting to similar destinations survives. For example, the relative increase in the
entry probability associated to previously exporting to a bordering country is: approximately thirteen when
considering all firms; seven when considering firms with large domestic sales; close to twenty when considering
firms with low domestic sales; and slightly below four no matter whether we look at firms with above or below
median number of export destinations in the year prior to entry. As the remaining rows in tables A.2 and A.3
illustrate, similar patterns hold for the relative increase in export entry probabilities associated to previously
exporting to countries located in the same continent, sharing the same official language or having similar income

2

per capita as the potential new export destination.

A.3

Accounting for Gravity Forces

As discussed in Section 2.2, an alternative explanation for the transition probabilities reported in Table 1
is the importance of gravity variables in determining the entry behavior of potential exporters. If firms rank
countries by proximity to Chile and spread out gradually to more distant markets, then a firm already exporting
to a continent would be more likely to start exporting to other countries in the same continent. Similarly, if
Chilean firms enter destinations with languages more similar to Spanish before entering those with more distinct
languages (e.g. French speaking countries are prioritized over German speaking ones), the fact that we observe
firms successively entering countries that share language would be exclusively due to their ranking in terms of
linguistic distance to the country of origin (gravity) and not due to their linguistic distance to prior destinations
of the firm (extended gravity).
The model described in Section 3 accounts for this alternative explanation by allowing the export profits
that a firm would make in any given destination upon entry to flexibly depend on several measures of distance
between that destination and the firm’s home market, Chile. Specifically, as equation (2) in Section 3 shows,
we allow marginal trade costs in our model to vary flexibly by destination country. Additionally, as equations
(7) and (10) show, we also allow fixed and sunk costs to depend on whether the destination shares continent,
official language or similar income per capita with Chile. Therefore, we allow any measure of similarity between
countries that we use to define extended gravity effects (similar geographic location, language or income per
capita) to also impact export decisions through standard gravity effects. Based on this model, sections 6 and 7
present the moment inequality estimates of those model parameters that determine the importance of extended
gravity effects on export entry costs.
As a preliminary step, we show in Table A.4 how reduced-form export entry probabilities depend on
extended gravity variables while simultaneously controlling for standard gravity covariates. Specifically, we
present in Table A.4 estimates of several binary logit models of the probability that a firm exports a positive
amount to a destination in a given year.
Besides the extended gravity covariates of interest (described in Section 2.1), we allow in the baseline
specification (column I) the probability that a firm exports to a potential destination to depend on: (a)
measures of distance between the potential destination and Chile (gravity); (b) measures of previous export
experience of the firm in this potential destination; and (c) interactions of the measures in (a) and (b). The
covariates in (a) account for gravity; those in (b) account for persistence in export status; and those in (c)
account for heterogeneity in this persistence across potential destinations.
As measures of gravity, we include dummy variables that equal one for those potential destinations that
do not share any border (“Grav. Border”), continent (“Grav. Cont.”), language (“Grav. Lang.”), similar
income per capita (“Grav. GDPpc”), or any free trade agreement (“Grav. FTA”) with Chile. As measures of
previous export experience of a firm in a potential destination, we include a dummy variable that equals one
for those firm-destination-year triplets for which the firm was not exporting to the corresponding destination
in the previous year (“Entry”).
The results of the baseline specification in column I of Table A.4 show that: (a) the most important
determinant of export participation is prior export participation (as indicated by the large negative coefficient
on “Entry”); (b) all our measures of distance between the destination and the origin countries have a negative
impact on the probability that firm exports to that destination (as indicated by the negative coefficients on
all gravity variables); (c) the persistence in export status is generally stronger in destinations that are further
away (in the gravity sense) from the country of origin of the firms (as indicated by the negative coefficients on
the interactions of “Entry” with both “Grav. Border” and “Grav. Lang.”); (d) all extended gravity variables
have a large and statistically significant positive impact on export participation.
A shortcoming of the specification in column I of Table A.4 is that it does not control directly for the
heterogeneity across firms that differ in productivity (or domestic sales) in their probability of exporting to any
given destination. This heterogeneity is documented in Table A.2 in Appendix A.2. The productivity of a firm
is likely to impact its export probability by affecting its potential export revenue; i.e. the sales revenue that it
would obtain if it were to export. In columns II to IV of Table A.4, we account for this impact by expanding
the baseline specification in column I with an additional proxy for this potential export revenue. Specifically,
we include either domestic sales as an additional control (in column II) or a predicted measure of potential
export revenues that we construct by projecting the observed export revenues (of those firms, countries and
years with positive exports) on a wide set of firm and country characteristics that we observe for every firm,

3

Table A.4: Logit
Variables: (β)

I

II

Revenue
-0.578a
(-5.795)
Grav. Cont.
-1.131a
(-10.559)
Grav. Lang.
-0.576a
(-6.639)
Grav. GDPpc
-0.792a
(-9.871)
Grav. FTA
-0.383a
(-6.455)
Entry
-3.532a
(-6.877)
Entry ×
-0.104
Grav. Dist.
(-1.535)
Entry ×
-0.303a
Grav. Border
(-2.379)
Entry ×
0.156
Grav. Cont.
(1.178)
Entry ×
-0.544a
Grav. Lang.
(-4.828)
Entry ×
0.217a
Grav. GDPpc
(2.352)
Entry ×
0.923a
Ext. Grav. Border (15.705)
Entry ×
1.293a
Ext. Grav. Cont.
(19.703)
Entry ×
0.411a
Ext. Grav. Lang.
(5.598)
Entry ×
1.027a
Ext. Grav. GDPpc (16.778)

Num. Obs.

IV

V

0.215a
(42.367)

Domestic Sales

Grav. Border

III

-0.525a
(-5.682)
-1.049a
(-9.545)
-0.488a
(-5.237)
-0.636a
(-7.254)
-0.504a
(-8.264)
-3.087a
(-5.923)
-0.128c
(-1.844)
-0.343a
(-2.662)
0.053
(0.395)
-0.603a
(-5.025)
0.129
(1.350)
0.873a
(14.944)
1.211a
(17.814)
0.353a
(4.802)
0.870a
(13.093)

VI

VII

VIII

0.207a
(41.071)
3.075a
(13.597)
-0.478a
(-4.774)
-1.075a
(-9.945)
-0.747a
(-7.611)
-0.721a
(-8.912)
-0.441a
(-7.303)
-3.975a
(-7.583)
-0.042
(-0.609)
-0.304a
(-2.339)
0.018
(0.134)
-0.448a
(-3.900)
0.205b
(2.177)
0.845a
(14.298)
1.307a
(19.694)
0.387a
(5.233)
1.005a
(16.243)

2.625a
(13.636)
-0.544a
(-5.477)
-1.135a
(-10.658)
-0.683a
(-7.939)
-0.728a
(-9.313)
-0.415a
(-6.939)
-3.401a
(-6.605)
-0.120c
(-1.755)
-0.300a
(-2.357)
0.166
(1.248)
-0.445a
(-3.940)
0.195b
(2.107)
0.829a
(14.307)
1.280a
(19.743)
0.363a
(5.068)
0.989a
(16.288)

3.508a 2.749a
(15.588) (14.306)
-1.718a -1.662a -1.601a -1.681a
(-19.228) (-17.711) (-17.501) (-18.666)
-0.667a -0.639a -0.889a -0.826a
(-7.928)
(-6.921) (-10.245)
(-9.698)
-0.773a -0.641a -0.709a 0.723a
(-9.840)
(-7.364)
(-8.838)
(-9.112)
-4.643a -4.398a -4.569a -4.614a
(-67.538) (-62.513) (-65.600) (-66.992)

0.059
(0.554)

-0.606a
(-5.385)
0.184b
(2.018)
0.746a
(13.807)
1.403a
(22.423)
0.427a
(6.096)
0.949a
(16.042)

-0.069
(0.636)
-0.695a
(-6.223)
0.095
(1.012)
0.697a
(12.779)
1.314a
(19.744)
0.391a
(5.373)
0.794a
(12.109)

-0.022

0.055

(-0.207)

(0.519)

-0.482a
(-4.527)
0.158c
(1.702)
0.695a
(12.509)
1.390a
(21.379)
0.417a
(5.663)
0.941a
(15.437)

-0.518a
(-4.945)
0.154c
(1.676)
0.667a
(12.231)
1.371a
(21.585)
0.402a
(5.661)
0.923a
(15.421)

234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896

Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. Estimates are obtained by MLE,
and t-statistics are in parentheses. The dependent variable is a dummy variable for positive exports. All specifications
include year fixed effects. “Domestic Sales”, “Revenue”, and “Grav. Dist” are in logs. All other covariates are dummy
variables.

country and time period (in columns III and IV).39 The results in columns II to IV in Table A.4 show that
39
Using different firm and country characteristics as covariates in this projection yields different revenue proxies. Table
B.1 presents projection estimates for six different sets of covariates. In spite of the differences across these sets, Table B.2
shows that the pairwise correlation coefficients between the export revenues generated by these six specifications are close
to one. Therefore, for the sake of interpreting the results in Table A.4, it is not very important what the exact vector
of observed covariates we use to construct our measure of predicted revenues is. Specifically, column III in Table A.4
uses a proxy for revenue consistent with the specification in column VI of Table B.1 (which projects export revenue on a

4

adding either domestic sales or a measure of potential export revenues as an additional covariate in our logit
model does not significantly affect the estimates of the different gravity and extended gravity measures. All
the resulting estimates are very similar to those in column I, which we have already described above.
The specifications in columns V to VII differ from those in columns I to IV only in that they exclude those
gravity measures that we will also be excluding from the specification of the fixed and sunk export costs in our
structural model (see equations (7) and (10) in Section 3): “Grav. Border”, “Grav. FTA”, and “Grav. Dist”.
As the results in Table A.4 show, eliminating these covariates from the logit model reduces the coefficient on
“Entry” and “Grav. Cont” but has nearly no impact on the four extended gravity coefficients. Given that our
moment inequality estimates focus exclusively on estimating bounds on these four extended gravity coefficients,
we find their robustness to the specific set of gravity variables we control for reassuring.

A.4

Accounting for Unobserved Heterogeneity Across Country Groups

As discussed in Section 2.2, an alternative explanation for the transition probabilities reported in Table 1 is
the importance of unobserved (to the researcher) demand and supply conditions that are correlated across
destinations with similar geographic location, language, and/or income per capita. Under this alternative explanation, for example, the higher probability of exporting to a market among those firms previously exporting
to a different market located in the same continent would not be due to a reduction in entry costs generated
by this previous export experience. Instead, it would just be the consequence of export profits being similar
across these two markets.
The model described in Section 3 accounts for this alternative explanation by allowing export profits
to flexibly depend on unobserved covariates that are firm- and year-specific and correlated across groups of
countries that share continent, language and/or similar income per capita. We thus allow firms to have some
unobserved features that, for example, make some more likely to export to English-speaking countries and
others more likely to export to French-speaking countries. For example, firms may specialize in different
varieties of a product that are differently demanded in different destinations, or firms’ workforce may include
workers with different skills (e.g. linguistic skills) that specifically valuable to break into certain markets, or
firms may have access to distributors that specialize in different sets of countries. Specifically, as equation
(6) shows, we allow the export fixed costs of firm i in country j and year t, fijt , to depend on an unobserved
component uicj t common to all countries j in the same group or “cluster” cj . In Section 7, we present results in
which we define clusters of countries by their continent, language or income per capita group. When computing
these results, we treat these unobserved terms uicj t as firm-, year-, group-of-countries-specific fixed effects and,
thus, we impose no assumption on their distribution.
As a preliminary step, we present here results in which we allow for an unobserved term uicj t to affect
the probability that a firm i exports to country j in year t but, relative to our moment inequality estimation,
restrict its distribution in two ways: (a) we assume that it is constant over time, uicj t = uicj ; (b) we assume
that it is distributed normally and independently across firms and clusters of countries. Specifically, we assume
here that
dijt = 1{β1 revenueijt + β2 gravityj + β3 (1 − dijt−1 ) + β4 [(1 − dijt−1 ) × gravityj ]
+ β5 [(1 − dijt−1 ) × ext.gravityijt ] + uicj + εijt > 0},

(A.1)

where dijt is a dummy variable equal to 1 if firm i exports to country j during year t, “revenue” is a proxy
for the potential export revenue, “gravity” and “ext.gravity” are vectors of observed of gravity and extended
gravity covariates, and both uicj and εijt are unobserved to the researcher. We assume that εijt is independent
across firms, countries and time periods, and follows a logistic distribution with location parameter equal to
zero and scale parameter equal to one. Concerning the term uicj , we assume that it is independent across firms
and country clusters c = 1, . . . , C, and follows a normal distribution with mean equal to zero and variance equal
to an unknown parameter σc2 . Jointly with these distributional assumptions, the definition of dijt in equation
(A.1) implies a mixed logit model for dijt . The correlation structure in this mixed logit is such that
 2
2
0
0
0
 σc + σε if i = i , j = j , and t = t ,
σc2
if i = i0 , cj = cj 0 , and j 6= j 0 or t0 6= t,
cov(uicj + εijt , uicj 0 + εij 0 t ) =

0
otherwise,
large set of firm and country characteristics) while column IV in Table A.4 uses a proxy for revenue consistent with the
specification in column I of Table B.1 (which projects export revenue on a minimal set of characteristics). Consistently
with the high correlations in Table B.2, the estimates in columns III and VI of Table B.1 are very similar to each other.

5

where σε2 = var(εijt ) is the variance of the standard logistic distribution; i.e. σε2 = π 2 /3.
We present estimates of the vector (β1 , β2 , β3 , β4 , β5 ) and σc in Table A.5. In all columns, we use the
same measures of “revenue”, “gravity”, and “ext.gravity” as in column III in Table A.4. The only difference
across the different columns in Table A.5 is the definition of the country clusters c = 1, . . . , C. These different
definitions of country clusters imply different cross-country correlation patterns in the unobserved determinants
of the firm’s export status. As an example, the estimates in column I in Table A.5 are based on the assumptions
that two different countries j and j 0 belong to the same group or cluster, cj = cj 0 , if they share continent,
language, and similar income per capita. Column II defines broader groups: cj = cj 0 if countries j and j 0
share continent and language, independent of their income per capita. Columns III to VII allow for other
partitions of countries. Specifically, column III includes firm-, continent-, income-per-capita-specific random
effects; column IV includes firm-, language-, income-per-capita-specific random effects; column V includes firm-,
continent-specific random effects; column VI includes firm- language-specific random effects; and column VII
includes firm-, income-per-capita-specific random effects.
Given a definition of the clusters of countries c = 1, . . . , C, the log-likelihood function corresponding to
each of the models in Table A.5 is
Z

N X
C
X
(N C)−1
log
Lic (uic )(1/σc )φ(uic /σc )duic ,
(A.2)
uic

i=1 c=1

with
Lic (uic ) ≡

J
T
Y
Y
j=1,
c=cj

{L(dijt |{dij 0 t−1 ; j 0 = 1, . . . , J}, xijt , uic ; β)}L0 (dij0 |xij0 , uic ; γ) ,

(A.3)

t=1

Q
where Jj=1,c=cj denotes the product over all countries j included in the cluster c; the vector xijt includes the
observed measures of “revenue”, “gravity”, and “ext.gravity”; β ≡ (β1 , β2 , β3 , β4 , β5 ); γ is a vector of reducedform parameters; and φ(·) denotes the standard normal density. The variable N denotes the total number of
firms that appear at least one year in the sample, and the variable C denotes the total number of clusters of
countries that we allow for. The individual likelihood function L(·) equals

P (dijt

L(dijt |{dij 0 t−1 ; j 0 = 1, . . . , J}, xijt , uic ; β) =
(A.4)
dijt
1−dijt
0
0
= 1|{dij 0 t−1 ; j = 1, . . . , J}, xijt , uic ; β)
1 − P (dijt = 1|{dij 0 t−1 ; j = 1, . . . , J}, xijt , uic ; β)
,

with
P (dijt = 1|{dij 0 t−1 ; j 0 = 1, . . . , J}, xijt , uic ; β) =

(A.5)

exp(β1 revenueijt + β2 gravityj + β3 (1 − dijt−1 ) + β4 (1 − dijt−1 )gravityj + β5 (1 − dijt−1 )ext.gravityijt + uicj )
.
1 + exp(β1 revenueijt + β2 gravityj + β3 (1 − dijt−1 ) + β4 (1 − dijt−1 )gravityj + β5 (1 − dijt−1 )ext.gravityijt + uicj )
The individual likelihood function L0 (·) equals
L0 (dij0 |xij0 , uic ; γ) = P0 (dij0 = 1|xij0 , uic ; γ)

dij0

1 − P0 (dij0 = 1|xij0 , uic ; γ)

1−dij0

,

(A.6)

for some unknown probability function P0 (·). Our model does not have a prediction for the functional form
of the function P0 (·). This function determines the probability of the initial conditions {dij0 ; i = 1, . . . , I, j =
1, . . . , J} as a function of the exogenous covariates included in the vector {xij0 ; i = 1, . . . , I, j = 1, . . . , J} and
the firm- and group-of-countries specific effects {uicj ; i = 1, . . . , I, j = 1, . . . , J}. Following Heckman (1981),
we approximate P0 (·) through a reduced-form function of the exogenous variables included in the vector xijt
and the unobserved effect uicj ; specifically, we assume that40
P0 (dij0 = 1|xij0 , uic ; γ) =

exp(γ1 revenueij0 + γ2 gravityj + uicj )
.
1 + exp(γ1 revenueij0 + γ2 gravityj + uicj )

(A.7)

40
An alternative approach to model P0 (·) is to assume that all firms are in steady state in the first year of our sample
(e.g. Card and Sullivan, 1998). Not only is this assumption unrealistic in our setting but, additionally, computing the
steady state export probability of each firm in each destination country is particularly complicated in our case due to
the presence of the extended gravity effects.

6

For any given value of the parameter vector (β, σc ), computing the log-likelihood function in equations
(A.2) to (A.7) requires numerically computing the integral
Z
Lic (uic )(1/σc )φ(uic /σc )duic ,
(A.8)
uic

for every firm i in the sample and every cluster c in which we partition the J possible export destinations.
To compute this integral, we use the Gauss-Hermite quadrature (e.g. Butler and Moffitt, 1982) and, thus,
approximate it as
Z
n
√
1 X
fic (uic )(1/σg )φ(uic /σg )duic ≈ π − 2
(A.9)
w̃l fic ( 2σg ũl ),
uic

l=1

where w̃l and ũl are the Gauss-Hermite quadrature weights and nodes. In our approximation, we fix n = 10
and use the weights and nodes reported in Table 7.4 in Judd (1998).
A comparison of the estimates of the different models presented in Table A.5 to those of the model presented
in column III in Table A.4, shows that, while the estimates of the coefficients on gravity measures are sensitive
to the introduction of firm- and group-of-countries-specific random effects, the estimates of the extended gravity
effects are generally robust to the introduction of these random effects uic in the statistical model. As in Table
A.4, the coefficients on the four extended gravity covariates are always positive and generally statistically
significant at 1%. The only exception happens in those cases in which the random effect is defined exactly
at the same level as the extended gravity covariate. In columns V to VII, we allow for random effects at the
continent-, language- and income-per-capita groups and the corresponding extended gravity coefficients become
either significant only at the 5% level (in the case of column V) or not statistically significant at any commonly
used statistical level (in the case of columns VI and VII). Conversely, all other extended gravity covariates
remain significant at the 1% significance level.

A.5

Accounting for Extended Gravity in Marginal Costs

As discussed in Section 2.2, even if one can conclude that exporting to a country does indeed increase the
probability of subsequently exporting to other destinations that share some characteristic with it, there may
be different economic mechanisms that can generate this path dependence in export destinations. Specifically,
the transition probabilities reported in Table 1 could be due to extended gravity variables impacting not the
costs that a firm must pay upon entering a new market (sunk export costs) but the per-unit transport cost
that firms must pay to sell abroad.
As we discuss in Section 3, the per-unit transport costs that a firm faces in a destination affect the
probability that the firm exports to such destination by impacting the potential export revenue that such firm
would make in such destination upon entry. Therefore, to show that our measures of extended gravity effects,
understood as changes in sunk export costs, are not sensitive to whether we account for the possible impact
of the same extended gravity variables on per-unit transport costs, we compute predicted potential export
revenues allowing different vectors of covariates to impact such revenues. The estimates on these different
specifications of export revenues are in Table B.1. Among the six revenue projections in Table B.1, those in
columns I, II and IV account for the possible impact of extended gravity effects on per-unit transport costs
(and, thus, on export revenues), while those in columns III, V and VI do not. The six columns in Table A.6
use the measure of predicted revenues generated by the specification described in the corresponding column
of Table B.1. As the results in Table A.6 show, the differences in the maximum likelihood estimates of the
parameters on the four extended gravity are very small. These estimates are thus robust to whether we account
for the potential impact of the same extended gravity covariates on potential export revenues.41

41

Table A.6 shows the robustness of the estimates in column I of Table A.5 to different specifications of the predicted
export revenues. For each of the specifications in columns II to VII of Table A.5, tables analogous to Table A.6 are
available upon request. They all show that the mixed logit estimates are not affected by the particular statistical model
used to predict the potential revenue from exporting, revenueijt , among those in Table B.1.

7

Table A.5: Mixed Logit
Variables: (β)
Revenue
Grav. Border
Grav. Cont.
Grav. Lang.
Grav. GDPpc
Grav. FTA
Entry
Entry ×
Grav. Dist.
Entry ×
Grav. Border
Entry ×
Grav. Cont.
Entry ×
Grav. Lang.
Entry ×
Grav. GDPpc
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. Border
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. Cont.
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. Lang.
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. GDPpc
Firm RE
Continent RE
Language RE
GDPpc RE
Std. Dev. RE: (σc )

I

II

III

IV

0.014a
0.013a
0.015a
0.013a
(5.415)
(5.126)
(6.100)
(5.088)
-0.315a -0.268a -0.123
-0.183b
(-3.188)
(-2.757)
(-1.278)
(-1.918)
-0.037
-0.050
-0.246b -0.263a
(-0.356)
(-0.481)
(-2.513)
(-2.600)
-0.724a -0.669a -0.651a -0.619a
(-7.659)
(-7.255)
(-7.611)
(-6.769)
0.179b
0.141c
0.153b
0.197a
(2.338)
(1.933)
(2.145)
(2.719)
-0.338a -0.259a -0.306a -0.304a
(-4.978)
(-4.288)
(-5.162)
(-5.146)
-2.180a -2.356a -2.652a -2.940a
(-3.877)
(-4.232)
(-4.913)
(-5.416)
-0.124c -0.128c -0.075
0.036
(-1.655)
(-1.726)
(-1.049)
(0.497)
-0.919a -0.910a -1.097a -1.086a
(-6.791)
(-6.793)
(-8.243)
(-8.191)
-1.032a -0.864a -0.703a -1.032a
(-6.930)
(-5.854)
(-4.898)
(-7.223)
-0.145
-0.165
-0.395a -0.173
(-1.149)
(-1.319)
(-3.313)
(1.404)
-0.727a -0.623a -0.567a -0.694b
(-6.504)
(-5.902)
(-5.158)
(-6.285)
0.761a
0.830a
0.793a
0.872a
(9.814) (11.140) (10.822) (11.931)
1.552a
1.263a
1.307a
1.465a
(17.001) (14.224) (14.570) (17.029)
0.277a
0.293a
0.251a
0.224b
(2.843)
(3.117)
(2.735)
(2.409)
0.708a
0.657a
0.573a
0.576a
(7.810)
(7.719)
(6.287)
(6.495)

V

VI

VII

0.015a
0.017a
0.016a
(5.897)
(6.343)
(6.444)
-0.193b -0.057
-0.054
(1.936)
(-0.597)
(0.559)
-0.055
-0.334a -0.327a
(-0.035)
(-3.488)
(-3.399)
-0.623a -0.578a -0.586a
(-7.028)
(-6.851)
(-6.901)
0.077
0.055
0.052
(1.055)
(0.773)
(0.727)
-0.319a -0.505a -0.376a
(-5.349)
(-5.770)
(-6.404)
-3.354a -2.906a -2.608a
(-5.905)
(-5.446)
(-4.962)
0.014
-0.068
-0.091
(0.187)
(-0.595)
(-1.291)
-1.168a -1.153a -1.182a
(-8.512)
(-8.722)
(-8.873)
0.278c -0.734a -0.915a
(1.921)
(-5.374)
(-6.629)
-0.380a
0.001
-0.428a
(-3.169)
(0.006)
(-3.656)
-0.273b -0.388a
0.019
(-2.588)
(-3.766)
(0.171)
0.699a
0.942a
0.889a
(9.552) (13.334) (12.576)
0.201b
1.180a
1.467a
(2.271) (14.468) (18.380)
-0.130
-0.111
0.236a
(-1.353)
(-1.244)
(2.668)
0.229a
0.429a -0.056
(2.767)
(5.301)
(-0.602)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
Yes

9.374a
(9.227)

8.908a
(8.762)

9.169a
(9.022)

9.272a
(9.133)

5.714a
(5.620)

8.199a
(8.033)

8.826a
(8.665)

Num. Obs.
234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896
Num. Obs. per (i, cj )
23
40
46
40
133
93
232
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. Estimates are obtained by
MLE, and t-statistics are in parentheses. The dependent variable is a dummy variable for positive exports. The
explanatory variable Revenue denotes predicted revenue (in logs), as generated by the estimates in Column I of Table
B.1. Column I includes firm-continent-language-GDPpc specific random effects. Column II includes firm-continentlanguage specific random effects. Column III includes firm-continent-GDPpc specific random effects. Column IV
includes firm-language-GDPpc specific random effects. Column V includes firm-continent specific random effects.
Column VI includes firm-language specific random effects. Column VII includes firm-GDPpc specific effects.

8

Table A.6: Mixed Logit With Different Predicted Export Revenues
Variables: (β)

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

0.014a
0.014a
0.012a
0.018a
0.027a
0.022a
(5.415)
(4.439)
(4.970)
(6.021) (11.701)
(9.001)
Grav. Border
-0.315a -0.317a -0.310a -0.318a -0.313a -0.245a
(-3.184)
(-3.207)
(-3.136)
(-3.219)
(-3.169)
(-2.479)
Grav. Cont.
-0.037
-0.057
-0.033
-0.036
-0.050
-0.029
(-0.356)
(-0.535)
(-0.317)
(-0.342)
(-0.479)
(-0.272)
Grav. Lang.
-0.724a -0.713a -0.719a -0.749a -0.762a -0.748a
(-7.660)
(-7.477)
(-7.567)
(-7.931)
(-8.237)
(-7.948)
Grav. GDPpc
0.179a
0.148b
0.174b
0.181a
0.177a
0.179a
(2.334)
(1.910)
(2.284)
(2.375)
(2.325)
(2.320)
Grav. FTA
-0.302a -0.299a -0.308a -0.302a -0.284a -0.321a
(-4.978)
(-4.801)
(-5.075)
(-4.982)
(-4.665)
(-5.200)
Entry
-2.179a -2.205a -2.165a -2.160a -2.164a -2.780a
(-3.875)
(-3.901)
(-3.847)
(-3.844)
(-3.858)
(-4.883)
Entry ×
-0.124b -0.121c -0.127b -0.127b -0.128b -0.049
Grav. Dist.
(-1.657)
(-1.603)
(-1.691)
(-1.695)
(-1.713)
(-0.639)
Entry ×
-0.919a -0.934a -0.917a -0.909a -0.924a -0.925a
Grav. Border
(-6.794)
(-6.883)
(-6.776)
(-6.715)
(-6.828)
(-6.785)
Entry ×
-1.032a -1.036a -1.034a -1.029a -0.975a -1.080a
Grav. Cont.
(-6.930)
(-6.913)
(-4.898)
(-6.912)
(-6.557)
(-7.213)
Entry ×
-0.145
-0.160
-0.149
-0.121
-0.177c -0.231b
Grav. Lang.
(-1.149)
(-1.244)
(-1.174)
(-0.951)
(-1.428)
(-1.832)
Entry ×
-0.726a -0.717a -0.722a -0.727a -0.715a -0.707a
Grav. GDPpc
(-6.498)
(-6.341)
(-6.458)
(-6.504)
(-6.188)
(-6.246)
Entry ×
0.761a
0.791a
0.749a
0.765a
0.696a
0.739a
Ext. Grav. Border
(9.814) (10.001)
(9.657)
(9.865)
(8.950)
(9.328)
Entry ×
1.552a
1.517a
1.560a
1.495a
1.523b
1.508a
Ext. Grav. Cont.
(17.003) (16.345) (17.091) (16.969) (16.621) (16.159)
Entry ×
0.277a
0.269a
0.284a
0.275a
0.224b
0.226b
Ext. Grav. Lang.
(2.847)
(2.669)
(2.914)
(2.828)
(2.266)
(2.218)
Entry ×
0.708a
0.751a
0.709a
0.706a
0.701a
0.732a
Ext. Grav. GDPpc (7.810)
(8.177)
(7.826)
(7.782)
(7.704)
(7.932)
Revenue

Firm RE
Continent RE
Language RE
GDPpc RE
Std. Dev. RE: (σg )
Num. Obs.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9.374a
(9.227)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

9.380a

9.372a

(9.236)

(9.224)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9.365a
(9.218)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9.346a
(9.202)

234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896 234,896

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
9.375a
(9.232)

234,896

Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. Estimates are
obtained by MLE, and t-statistics are in parentheses. The dependent variable is a dummy variable for
positive exports. The explanatory variable For each column, “Revenue” denotes predicted revenue (in
logs), as generated by the estimates in the corresponding column of Table B.1. All columns include
firm-continent-language-GDPpc specific random effects.

9

B
B.1

Export Revenue: Details
Export Revenue Equation: Details

In this section, we show that the assumptions on demand, variable trade and production costs, and market
structure introduced in Section 3.1 imply the expressions for rijt in equations (4) and (5).
η−1
Given the constant elasticity of substitution demand function qijt = p−η
Yjt in every market, the conijt Pjt
stant marginal production cost ait wt , the constant variable trade costs τijt , and the monopolistic competition
assumptions, we can write the potential revenue that firm i would obtain in market j at period t as indicated
in equation (1); i.e.

1−η
η τijt ait wt
rijt =
Yjt .
η − 1 Pjt
Assuming that trade costs in h are common across firms, τiht = τht , we can similarly write the potential revenue
that firm i will obtain in the home market at period t as

1−η
η τht ait wt
riht =
Yht .
(B.1)
η − 1 Pht
Taking the ratio of these two expressions, we can express the potential export revenues of firm i in market j
and period t relative to its domestic sales in the same time period as

1−η
rijt
τijt Pht
Yjt
=
,
(B.2)
riht
τht Pjt
Yht
and, multiplying by riht on both sides of the equality, we obtain
1−η

Yjt
τijt Pht
riht .
rijt =
τht Pjt
Yht

(B.3)

Given the expression for variable trade costs τijt in equation (2), we can rewrite potential export revenues as
in equation (4),
o
rijt = rijt
+ εR
ijt ,

with the observed component of revenue being equal to,
o
τ
rijt
= exp(ξjt + ξi + Xijt
ξτ )



1 Pht
τht Pjt

1−η

Yjt
riht ,
Yht

(B.4)

and the unobserved component being equal to
τ
εR
ijt = εijt



1 Pht
τht Pjt

1−η

Yjt
riht .
Yht

(B.5)

τ
e
Using the expression for riht in equation (B.1), the definition Xijt
≡ (dijt−1 , Xijt
, ln(ait )) and additionally
τ
o
defining ξ ≡ (ξd , ξe , ξa ), we can further rewrite rijt as

o
rijt

 1
ξ

1−η
1
− 1−η
(η − 1)Pht a
1 Pht
Yjt
e
1−η
= exp(ξjt + ξi ) riht Yht
exp(ξd dijt−1 + ξe Xijt )
riht .
ητht wt
τht Pjt
Yht

Defining the country-year and firm unobserved effects entering the export sales equation,

ξa 
1−η
− 1 (η − 1)Pht
1 Pht
Yjt
exp(αjt ) = exp(τjt ) Yht 1−η
,
ητht wt
τht Pjt
Yht
exp(αi ) = exp(τi ),
and the parameter vector
αr = (ξd , ξe , ξr ),

ξr =

10

ξa + 1 − η
,
1−η

o
we can rewrite rijt
as in equation (4); i.e.
o
r
rijt
= exp(αjt + αi + Xijt
αr ),

with

r
e
Xijt
= (dijt−1 , Xijt
, ln(riht )).

Concerning the unobservable component of export revenues, εR
ijt , the following derivation shows that, given
its definition in equation (B.5) and the mean independence condition in equation (3), the variable εR
ijt must
satisfy the mean independence condition in equation (5):
r
e
Ejt [εRijt |Xijt
, dijt , Jit ] = Ejt [εR
ijt |dijt−1 , Xijt , riht , dijt , Jit ]



1−η

1 Pht
Yjt
e
= Ejt ετijt
riht dijt−1 , Xijt
, riht , dijt , Jit
τht Pjt
Yht

1−η
1 Pht
Yjt
e
= Ejt [ετijt |dijt−1 , Xijt
, riht , dijt , Jit ] ×
riht
τht Pjt
Yht
1−η

Yjt
1 Pht
e
riht
= Ejt [ετijt |dijt−1 , Xijt
, ait , dijt , Jit ] ×
τht Pjt
Yht

1−η
1 Pht
Yjt
τ
= Ejt [ετijt |Xijt
, dijt , Jit ] ×
riht
τht Pjt
Yht
1−η

Yjt
1 Pht
riht = 0,
=0×
τht Pjt
Yht
r
, the second equality uses equation (B.5), the third equality
where the first equality uses the definition of Xijt
takes into account that price indices and market sizes are constant conditional on a country-year pair, the
fourth equality takes into account that riht is a deterministic function of ait and variables that vary only at
τ
the country-year pair level, the fifth equality uses the definition of Xijt
, and the last equality applies the mean
independence restriction in equation (3).
Summing up, this section shows that the description of potential export revenues in equations (4) to (5) is
a consequence of the assumptions imposed in equations (1) to (3).

B.2

Revenue Regression

Table B.1 contains the Nonlinear Least Squares (NLS) estimates of the parameter vector entering the expression
for potential export revenues in equation (4). Let’s denote the observed measure of export revenues for a firm
obs
i in market j and year t as rijt
. We assume that observed export revenues equal potential export revenues for
those firm-market-year triplets with positive exports. Therefore,
obs
r
rijt
= dijt rijt = dijt (exp(αjt + αi + Xijt
α r ) + εR
ijt ),

where the second equality uses equation (4). Combining this expression with equation (5), we can derive the
following moment condition
obs
r
r
Ejt [rijt
− exp(αjt + αi + Xijt
αr )|Xijt
, dijt = 1] = 0.

(B.6)

obs
Notice that, if present in the data, measurement error in observed export revenues rijt
is also likely to be mean
r
zero conditional on the vector of observed covariates Xijt and the export dummy dijt . Therefore, the mean
independence condition in equation (B.6) is also likely to hold in the presence of additive measurement error
in export revenues.
Table B.1 presents the estimates of the parameters entering the moment condition in equation (B.6) under
r
several different specifications of the vector of observed covariates Xijt
and the vector of fixed effects entering
the export revenue equation. Columns I to VI include firm and year fixed effects, while columns VII to IX
include firm and country-year pair specific fixed effects. Specifically, the regression equation whose estimates
are shown in column IX corresponds exactly to that in equation (4) in Section 3.1 in the main text: it includes
firm and country-year fixed effects and, as observed covariates, it includes the firm’s domestic sales, an indicator
of lagged export participation in each country (“Entry” equals 1 the firm did not export to the corresponding
e
market in the previous year), and the vector of extended gravity covariates Xijt
.
While the assumptions on demand, variable trade costs and market structure in Section 3.1 suggest that
country-year specific fixed effects should be included in our revenue regression, its inclusion is problematic when

11

Table B.1: Revenue Regressions
Variables: (β)

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

IX

0.386a
0.328a 0.403a 0.388a 0.384a
(29.186)
(20.892) (32.016) (32.241) (32.767)
Emp. × Chile
0.444a 0.142a 0.380a
0.184a
(13.476) (7.201) (11.504)
(5.301)
Sk. Emp.
0.057b
0.103a 0.258a 0.236a
(2.184)
(4.413) (14.207) (9.775)
Unsk. Emp.
-0.002
0.015 0.078a 0.091a
(-0.145)
(1.339) (8.128) (8.182)
Avg. Sk. Wage
0.643a
0.816a 0.069a 0.063a
(4.736)
(5.591) (5.146) (4.386)
Avg. Unsk. Wage
0.009a
0.004c -0.003 -0.008a
(2.751)
(1.286) (-0.978) (-2.411)
VA/Emp.
0.369a
0.341a 0.333a 0.307a
(24.400)
(22.632) (22.244) (19.589)
Grav. Dist.
-0.638a -0.526a -0.538a -0.617a -0.596a -1.337a
(-8.100) (-6.461) (-8.096) (-7.768) (-8.285) (-46.453)
Grav. Border
1.206a 1.157a 0.839a 1.195a 0.978a
(11.504) (10.722) (9.221) (11.219) (10.044)
Grav. Cont.
-0.079 -0.089 -0.421a -0.208b -0.531a
(-0.706) (-0.795) (-4.047) (-1.827) (-4.788)
Grav. Lang.
-0.084c -0.311a 0.122a -0.059 -0.030
(-1.614) (-6.188) (2.493) (-1.118) (-0.567)
Grav. GDPpc
-1.013a -1.388a -0.143b -0.999a -0.170b
(-3.352) (-2.968) (-1.839) (-2.925) (-2.110)
Grav. FTA
0.202a -0.182a 0.237a 0.200a 0.199a
(4.439) (-4.101) (5.241) (4.332) (4.274)
Landlocked
-1.234c -1.289b -0.991c -1.127c -1.267
(-1.447) (-1.856) (-1.334) (-1.494) (-1.247)
Agg. Imports
0.857a 0.871a -0.782a 0.849a 0.833b 1.107a
(30.755) (31.649) (29.503) (30.241) (29.788) (41.867)
GDPpc
-0.067a -0.109a -0.055a -0.067a -0.523a
(-3.440) (-5.616) (-2.899) (-3.449) (-2.488)
Ext. Grav. Border -0.205a -0.282a
-0.202a
(-6.259) (-8.125)
(-6.111)
Ext. Grav. Cont.
-0.449a -0.501a
-0.346a
(-9.590) (-8.671)
(-7.136)
Ext. Grav. Lang.
0.029 0.395a
0.033
(0.883) (10.863)
(0.967)
Ext. Grav. GDPpc 0.966a 1.617a
0.954a
(3.289) (3.492)
(2.853)
Entry
-11.028a -5.299 -15.916a -10.237a
-1.693a -1.899a
(-3.309) (-0.708) (-6.956) (-3.095)
(-10.493) (-10.067)
Entry ×
1.464a 0.593 2.147a 1.387a
Grav. Dist.
(3.116) (0.566) (6.817) (2.997)
log(Dom. Rev.)

Notes: continues in the next page.

12

Table B.1: Revenue Regressions (cont.)
Variables: (β)

I

II

III

IV

Entry ×
Grav. Cont.
Entry ×
Grav. Lang.
Entry ×
Grav. GDPpc
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. Border
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. Cont.
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. Lang.
Entry ×
Ext. Grav. GDPpc

-1.695c
(-1.371)
-1.055a
(-4.053)
0.770
(1.159)
-1.000a
(-2.997)
1.264a
(4.172)
0.394c
(1.307)
-0.734b
(-2.018)

-1.028

-1.451

-1.251

(-0.793)

(-1.153)

(-0.993)

-1.452a
(-3.146)
2.296b
(2.242)
-0.409
(-0.769)
1.267c
(1.507)
-0.975
(-0.884)
-2.385a
(-2.633)

-1.097a -1.075a
(-4.083) (-4.030)
-0.045
0.984c
(-0.083) (1.368)
-0.954a
(-2.752)
0.782a
(2.635)
0.357
(1.144)
-0.824b
(-2.073)

Adj. R2
Num. Obs.

0.8715
8219

0.8876
8219

0.8632
8219

V

VI

VII

VIII

IX

-0.177a
(-5.282)
0.478a
(14.918)
-0.103a
(-2.534)
0.534a
(2.503)

0.8633 0.8496 0.8216 0.9027 0.9075 0.9099
8219
8219 8219 8219 8219
8219

Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. Heteroskedasticity-robust
t-statistics are in parentheses. The dependent variable is firm-country-year level observed revenue (conditional on being
positive). Firm dummies are included in all specifications. Additionally, specifications I to VI account for year fixed
effects, and specifications VII to IX account for country-year pair specific fixed effects. Interaction terms between year
dummies and a dummy for selling in Chile are also included.

the aim of this regression is to generate predicted revenues for a large number of firm-country-year triplets.
The reason is that we cannot identify the value of the country-year fixed effect αjt for those destination-year
pairs in which we observe no exporters in our sample. This is inconvenient, as it implies that, if we were to
construct our revenue predictions using an specification that includes such fixed effects, we would not be able
to construct a proxy for the potential revenue from exporting rijt for a large number of observations in our
sample.
The specifications in columns I to VI account only firm and year fixed effects. These fixed effects can
be precisely estimated for all firms and years in our sample and, therefore, its inclusion does not restrict the
set of observations from whom we can construct predicted potential export revenues. To compensate for the
lack of country-year fixed effects in these specifications, we include instead a large set of observable country
characteristics: both time-invariant gravity covariates (e.g. “Grav. Dist” or “Grav. Border”) and time-varying
measures of market size (“Agg. Imports”).
Specifically, the regressions in columns I to VI differ in the exact set of firm and country characteristics they
include. While regressions II and VI include only domestic sales as a summary statistic of all firm characteristics
that matter to predict export revenues, regressions I, III, IV and V include instead information on the number
of employees, average wages for skilled and unskilled workers, and value added per worker. Similarly, while
specifications I to V include a large set of gravity and extended gravity covariates, specification VI only accounts
for distance to Chile and aggregate sectoral imports in the destination market.
As discussed in Section 3.1, we are not intrinsically interested in the estimates presented in Table B.1.
They are useful only as an intermediate step to generate an observed proxy of potential export revenues for
every firm-country-year triplet in the sample. To measure how sensitive our predicted potential export revenues
are to the specification of the revenue equation, we present in Table B.2 pairwise correlation coefficients across
the nine vectors of predicted revenues generated using the estimates reported in the nine columns in Table B.1.
We can extract several conclusions from the correlation matrix in Table B.2. First, there is no evidence
that regressions with country-year fixed effects yield different revenue predictions than those without them.
Therefore, we can approximate well the observed export revenues even if we do not account for these fixed
effects. Second, as long as we include in the revenue regression the firm’s domestic sales, the destination market’s

13

distance to Chile and aggregate sectoral imports, and firm and year fixed effects, the resulting predicted revenues
are highly correlated with those that we would obtain if we add other observed firm and country characteristics.
Given that our focus is on estimating the impact of extended gravity on export sunk costs, the main
implication of the high correlation coefficients shown in Table B.2 is that we will obtain very similar estimates
of our parameters of interest independently of the exact model we use to generate predicted export revenues.
In fact, both the mixed logit estimates in Table A.6 in Appendix A.5 and the moment inequality estimates in
Table 4 in Section 6 show that this is the case.

Table B.2: Revenue - Correlation Matrix
Specification
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX

I
1.000
0.938
0.994
0.908
0.982
0.787
0.973
0.975
0.974

II

III

IV

V

1.000
0.956
0.951
0.948
0.900
0.983
0.985
0.985

1.000
0.943
0.986
0.832
0.972
0.974
0.973

1.000
0.934
0.930
0.974
0.976
0.976

1.000
0.847
0.974
0.972
0.970

VI

VII

VIII

IX

1.000
1.000 1.000
0.954 0.953 1.000
0.953 0.995 0.998 1.000

Notes: Correlation coefficients between the different predicted revenues generated by the corresponding regressions in Table B.1. Pairwise correlations between specifications that do not include
country-year fixed effects (i.e. all except VII to IX) are computed across the 234,896 firm-destinationyear triplets included in our sample. Pairwise correlations involving one of the specifications that
includes country-year fixed effects are computed across the 7,937 firm-destination-year triplets in
our sample that correspond to destination-year pairs in which at least one exporting firm.

14

C
C.1

Moment Inequalities: Details
Proof of Proposition 1

Equation (15) implies

E Πioit t,Lit Jit ≥ E Πioj→j0 t,Lit Jit .
h

i

h

i

it

Thus, given the definition of Πibt,Lit for any bundle b in equation (16), we know that

E πioit t +
h

Lit
X

Lit
i
h
X
0
δ l πioit+l (oit )t+l Jit ≥ E πioj→j 0 t +
δ l π j→j
it

l=1

j→j 0
ioit+l (oit
)t+l

l=1

i
Jit ,

(C.1)

where
π j→j

0
j→j 0

ioit+l (oit

)t+l
0

denotes the static profits in year t + l of a firm that chose oj→j
in period t but that selected optimally its set
it
0
) denotes the optimal export bundle
of export destinations in every subsequent period; specifically, oit+l (oj→j
it
0
j→j
in period t. Similarly,
in period t + l conditional on having exported to bundle oit

E πioj→j0 t +
h

it

Lit
X

δ l π j→j

0

j→j 0
)t+l
ioit+l (oit

l=1

Lit
i
i
h
X
j→j 0
δ l πio
J
Jit ≥ E πioj→j 0 t +
it ,
(o
)t+l
it+l it
it

(C.2)

l=1

where
0

j→j
πio
,
it+l (oit )t+l
0

denotes the static profits in year t + l of a firm that chose oj→j
in period t but that, in every subsequent
it
period, selected the export bundle that would have been optimal if it had exported to oit in period t instead;
specifically, oit+l (oit ) denotes the optimal export bundle in period t + l conditional on having exported to
bundle oit in period t.
Combining inequalities (C.1) and (C.2), we can derive the inequality

E πioit t +
h

Lit
X

Lit
i
h
i
X
j→j 0
δ l πioit+l (oit )t+l Jit ≥ E πioj→j 0 t +
δ l πio
Jit .
it+l (oit )t+l
it

l=1

l=1

As long as Lit ≥ 1, the one-period state dependence of our model (see Section 3.3 for a discussion of this
property) implies that we can rewrite this inequality as a sum over static profits in periods t and t + 1 only,
i
h
i
h
j→j 0
J
.
E πioit t + δπioit+1 (oit )t+1 Jit ≥ E πioj→j0 t + δπio
it
it+1 (oit )t+1
it

According to the definition of the static profits πibt in equation (14), we can rewrite this expression as

E

h X

πij 00 t + δ

j 00 ∈oit

J
X

i
h
dij 00 t+1 πij 00 t+1 Jit ≥ E

j 00 =1

X
j→j 0

j 00 ∈oit

πij 00 t + δ

J
X

i
j→j 0
dij 00 t+1 πij
00 t+1 Jit ,

j 00 =1

where, as indicated in Section 4.1,
0

j→j
πij
00 t+1

denotes the static profits of exporting to destination j 00 in period t + 1 for a firm that exported to the bundle
0
oj→j
in period t. Reorganizing terms in the prior inequality, we obtain
it

E

h X
j 00 ∈oit

πij 00 t −

X
j→j 0

j 00 ∈oit

πij 00 t + δ

J
X
j 00 =1

15

i
j→j 0
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) Jit ≥ 0,

0

and, taking into account that the bundles oit and oj→j
differ only in that destination j is swapped by destination
it
j 0 , this prior inequality simplifies to

E πijt − πij 0 t + δ
h

J
X

i
j→j 0
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) dijt (1 − dijt ) = 1, Jit ≥ 0.

j 00 =1

According to Assumption 3, Zit ⊆ Jit , and, thus, applying the Law of Iterated Expectations, we can derive
the following inequality

E πijt − πij 0 t + δ
h

J
X

i
j→j 0
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) dijt (1 − dijt ) = 1, Zit ≥ 0,

j 00 =1

which is identical to equation (23) in Proposition 1 with
πijj 0 t ≡ πijt − πij 0 t ,
πijj 0 t+1 ≡

J
X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ). 

j 00 =1

C.2

Proof of Proposition 2

From the conditional moment inequality in equation (23) and given that the vector (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) is a subvector
of the vector Zit (see equation (17)), we can derive the unconditional moment


E Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ) ≥ 0,
0

for any specific pair of countries j and j 0 such that oj→j
belongs to the consideration set of the firm Bit and
it
any positively valued function Ψ(·).
Given the definition of the sets Ait and Aijt in equation (18), the condition that destination j 0 belongs to
the set Aijt is sufficient for the bundle
oj→j
it

0

to belong to Bit . Therefore, we can conclude that the conditional moment inequality in equation (23) implies
that


E Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ) ≥ 0
holds for every pair of countries j and j 0 such that j 0 ∈ Aijt . Summing these inequalities across all pairs of
countries j and j 0 ∈ Aijt , we obtain
J
X
X

E Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ) ≥ 0,




j=1 j 0 ∈Aijt

and, finally, switching the order of the summatories and the expectation operator yields the inequality in
equation (25). 

C.3

Proof of Proposition 3

From the expression for the static export profits in equation (13), we can rewrite the difference in periods t
and t + 1 static profits as:
πijt − πij 0 t + δ

J
X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) =

j 00 =1

η

−1

rijt − fijt − (1 − dijt−1 )sijt − η −1 rij 0 t + fij 0 t + (1 − dij 0 t−1 )sij 0 t +

16

0

j→j
− δdij 0 t+1 sij 0 t+1 − δ
δdijt+1 sijt+1

X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (1 − dij 00 t )(sij 00 t+1 − sij
00 t+1 ),

j 00 6=j,
j 00 6=j 0
0

00
where sj→j
ij 00 t+1 denotes the potential sunk costs of exporting to country j in period t + 1 for firm i if this one
0
were to swap destination j by destination j in year t. Given the expressions for export revenues and fixed and
sunk export costs in equations (4), (6) and (9), we can rewrite the difference in periods t and t + 1 static profits
as:

πijt − πij 0 t + δ

J
X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) =

j 00 =1
o
η −1 rijt

+

η −1 εR
ijt

−

fjo

o
S
− uicj t − εF
ijt − (1 − dijt−1 )(sj − eijt + εijt )−

o
−1 R
o
S
0t − η
η −1 rij
εij 0 t + fjo0 + uicj 0 t + εF
ij 0 t + (1 − dij 0 t−1 )(sj 0 − eij 0 t + εij 0 t )+
0

S
o
o
S
δdijt+1 (soj − eo,j→j
ijt+1 + εijt+1 ) − δdij 0 t+1 (sj 0 − eij 0 t+1 + εij 0 t+1 )−
X
o
o,j→j 0
S
δ
dij 00 t+1 (1 − dij 00 t )(soj00 − eoij 00 t+1 + εS
ij 00 t+1 − sj 00 + eij 00 t+1 − εij 00 t+1 ),
j 00 6=j,
j 00 6=j 0

and, canceling terms, we obtain
πijt − πij 0 t + δ

J
X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) =

j 00 =1
o
η −1 rijt

+

η −1 εR
ijt

−

fjo

o
o
S
− uicj t − εF
ijt − (1 − dijt−1 )(sj − eijt + εijt )−

o
S
o
o
−1 R
0t − η
η −1 rij
εij 0 t + fjo0 + uicj 0 t + εF
ij 0 t + (1 − dij 0 t−1 )(sj 0 − eij 0 t + εij 0 t )+

X
0
S
o
o
S
o,j→j 0
δ dijt+1 (soj − eo,j→j
dij 00 t+1 (1 − dij 00 t )(eoij 00 t+1 − eij
00 t+1 ) .
ijt+1 + εijt+1 ) − dij 0 t+1 (sj 0 − eij 0 t+1 + εij 0 t+1 ) +



j 00 6=j,
j 00 6=j 0

In order to derive this expression, we have not imposed yet any of the restrictions in Proposition 3. We impose
first the restriction that the alternative destination j 0 must belong to the set Aijt defined in equation (18b).
If we select the counterfactual destination j 0 in this way, the difference in periods t and t + 1 static profits
simplifies to
πijt − πij 0 t + δ

J
X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) =

j 00 =1
o
η −1 rijt



δ dijt+1 (soj − eo,j→j
ijt+1

0

+

η −1 εR
ijt

o
o
S
− εF
ijt − (1 − dijt−1 )(sj − eijt + εijt )−

o
−1 R
o
o
S
0t − η
η −1 rij
εij 0 t + εF
ij 0 t + (1 − dij 0 t−1 )(sj 0 − eij 0 t + εij 0 t )+

X
0
o
o
S
+ εS
dij 00 t+1 (1 − dij 00 t )(eoij 00 t+1 − eo,j→j
ijt+1 ) − dij 0 t+1 (sj 0 − eij 0 t+1 + εij 0 t+1 ) +
ij 00 t+1 ) .
j 00 6=j,
j 00 6=j 0

Therefore, the restriction that destination j 0 must belong to the set Aijt defined in equation (18b) implies that
the resulting difference in static profits will depend neither on the observable parts of fixed export costs, fjo
and fjo0 , nor on the unobserved fixed cost components uicj t and uicj 0 t . If we additionally impose the restriction
that both destinations j and j 0 must share neither continent, nor language nor similar income per capita with
S
Chile (i.e. soj = soj0 = γall
, as imposed in equation (26)), the expression for the difference in in periods t and
t + 1 static profits simplifies to
πijt − πij 0 t + δ

J
X

0

j→j
dij 00 t+1 (πij 00 t+1 − πij
00 t+1 ) =

j 00 =1
o
η −1 rijt

+

η −1 εR
ijt

S
o
S
− εF
ijt − (1 − dijt−1 )(γall − eijt + εijt )−

17

o
−1 R
S
o
S
0t − η
η −1 rij
εij 0 t + εF
ij 0 t + (1 − dij 0 t−1 )(γall − eij 0 t + εij 0 t )+


X
0
0
S
S
o
S
S
dij 00 t+1 (1 − dij 00 t )(eoij 00 t+1 − eo,j→j
δ dijt+1 (γall
− eo,j→j
ijt+1 + εijt+1 ) − dij 0 t+1 (γall − eij 0 t+1 − εij 0 t+1 ) +
ij 00 t+1 ) .
j 00 6=j,
j 00 6=j 0
S
Therefore, the restriction in equation (26) that destinations j and j 0 must verify soj = soj0 = γall
implies that the
S
S
S
S
resulting difference in static profits depends on the parameter vector (γ0 , γc , γl , γg ) introduced in equation
S
(10) only through the function γall
≡ γ0S + γcS + γlS + γgS introduced in equation (21).
Given the last expression for the difference in periods t and t + 1 static profits and the following mean
independence restriction

 −1 R
 
η εijt
−1
R

 η εij 0 t
 

 F
 

 εijt
 

 F
 

 εij 0 t
 

 
0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )
E
Ψ(Z
,
Z
×
(C.3)
ijt
ij
S

 (1 − dijt−1 )εijt   = 0


 

 (1 − dij 0 t−1 )εS 0  
ij t  



 dijt+1 εS
 
ijt+1

dij 0 t+1 εS
ij 0 t+1
we can rewrite the moment in equation (27) as
" J

X X
o
o
S
o
S
o
0 t ) − (1 − dijt−1 )(γall − eijt ) + (1 − dij 0 t−1 )(γall − eij 0 t )
E
Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t ) η −1 (rijt
− rij
j=1 j 0 ∈Aijt
S
+δ(dijt+1 (γall

−

0
eo,j→j
ijt+1 )

−

S
dij 0 t+1 (γall

−

eoij 0 t+1 ))

+δ

 X

dij 00 t+1 (1 −

dij 00 t )(eoij 00 t+1

−

0
eo,j→j
ij 00 t+1 )



#
. (C.4)

j 00 6=j,
j 00 6=j 0

The mean independence conditions in equation (C.3) are implied by assumptions 1 and 3, the definition of
Zijt in equation (17b), and the mean independence conditions in equations (5), (8), and (12). Equation (C.4)
S
is still not expressed as a function of the parameter vector (α, κ, η̃, γall
). To do so, one has to realize that,
according to equation (11), for any firm, country and time period, the function eoijt is linear in the parameter
vector (γbE , γcE , γlE , γgE ) and, therefore, we can define a function
ẽoijt ≡

1 o
eijt ,
S
γall

(C.5)

that is linear in the parameter vector κ defined in equation (21). In words, ẽoijt denotes the extended gravity
component eoijt normalized by the sunk cost of exporting to a country that shares neither continent, nor
S
language, nor similar income per capita with the firm’s home market, γall
. Using the equality in equation
(C.5), we can rewrite the moment in equation (C.4) as
" J

X X
S
o
o
o
o
0 t ) − (1 − dijt−1 )(1 − ẽijt ) + (1 − dij 0 t−1 )(1 − ẽij 0 t )
E
Ψ(Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )γall
η̃ −1 (rijt
− rij
j=1 j 0 ∈Aijt

+δ(dijt+1 (1 −

0
ẽo,j→j
ijt+1 )

−d

ij 0 t+1

(1 −

ẽoij 0 t+1 ))

+δ

 X

d

ij 00 t+1

(1 − d

ij 00 t

)(ẽoij 00 t+1

−

o,j→j 0
ẽij
00 t+1 )



#
,

(C.6)

j 00 6=j,
j 00 6=j 0
S
where η̃ ≡ ηγall
. As indicated in Proposition 3, this moment is a function of the parameter vector α (through
0
o
o
o
00
rijt and rij 0 t ), of the parameter vector κ (through ẽoijt , ẽoij 0 t , ẽo,j→j
ijt+1 , ẽij 0 t+1 and, for every j distinct from j
0

S
S
and j 0 , ẽoij 00 t+1 and ẽo,j→j
ij 00 t+1 ) and of the scalar parameters η̃ and γall . Furthermore, it is multiplicative in γall . 

18

C.4

Specifying Moments: Details

The instrument functions we use to compute the results in sections 6 and 7 are:
S
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. Border)j = 1, (Ext. Grav. Border)j 0 = 0},
Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
S
Ψ2 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. Border)j = 0, (Ext. Grav. Border)j 0 = 1},
S
Ψ3 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. Cont.)j = 1, (Ext. Grav. Cont.)j 0 = 0},
S
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. Cont.)j = 0, (Ext. Grav. Cont.)j 0 = 1},
Ψ4 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
S
Ψ5 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. Lang.)j = 1, (Ext. Grav. Lang.)j 0 = 0},
S
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. Lang.)j = 0, (Ext. Grav. Lang.)j 0 = 1},
Ψ6 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
S
Ψ7 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. GDPpc)j = 1, (Ext. Grav. GDPpc)j 0 = 0},
S
Ψ8 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. GDPpc)j = 0, (Ext. Grav. GDPpc)j 0 = 1},
S
, dijt−1 = 1, dij 0 t−1 = 0},
Ψ9 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
S
Ψ10 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = 0, dij 0 t−1 = 1}.

Our instrument functions are thus indicator functions that take value one only when a set of restrictions on
the characteristics of the actual and counterfactual export destinations of a firm are met.
S
: neither the actual nor the
All ten instrument functions include the restriction that soj = soj0 = γall
counterfactual destinations are in South America, have Spanish as official language, or have similar income
per capita to Chile. In other terms, neither country j nor country j 0 share any gravity characteristic with the
country of origin of the firms. This condition implies that the resulting moment inequalities depend on the
S
vector of sunk costs parameters (γ0S , γcS , γlS , γgS ) only through the parameter γall
, defined in equation (21) as
S
γall
≡ γ0S + γcS + γlS + γgS . Furthermore, as equation (7) shows, the condition that soj = soj0 implies that fjo = fjo0
and, thus, the resulting moment inequalities will not depend on the fixed costs parameters (γ0F , γcF , γlF , γgF ).
All other restrictions included in the instrument functions Ψ1 (·) to Ψ10 (·) have the purpose of creating
moments that identify upper and lower bounds for the parameter vector (κ, η̃). For example, the function
Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) takes value one only for pairs of actual and counterfactual destinations such that firm i benefits
in period t from extended gravity due to border in the actual destination j but not in the counterfactual
destination j 0 . The resulting difference in profits πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 is thus likely to depend negatively on the
parameter that determines the size of the reduction in sunk costs due to extended gravity effects in border,
κb . Consequently, the moment inequality defined by the instrument function Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) is likely to depend
negatively on κb and, thus, this inequality will help identify an upper bound on κb . Conversely, the moment
inequality defined by the instrument function Ψ2 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) is likely to depend positively on κb and, thus, this
inequality will help identify a lower bound on κb .
The functions Ψ3 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) and Ψ4 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) are analogous to Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) and Ψ2 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) for the
case of the extended gravity parameter due to continent, κc . The functions Ψ5 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) and Ψ6 (Zijt , Zij 0 t )
play the same role for the case of extended gravity in language, κl , and the functions Ψ7 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) and
Ψ8 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) do so for extended gravity effects due to sharing income per capita, κg .
The instrument functions Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) to Ψ8 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) select observations for which actual and counterfactual export paths imply the same number of export entries; i.e. the same number of countries to which the
firm i export in period t without exporting to them in period t − 1. The instrument functions Ψ9 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) to
Ψ10 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) alter the total number of foreign market entries. Specifically, in all cases in which Ψ9 (Zijt , Zij 0 t )
equals one, the firm enters the counterfactual destination j 0 (because dij 0 t−1 = 0) while, on the actual path, it
was not entering the actual destination j (because dijt−1 = 1). The opposite is true in those cases in which
Ψ10 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) equals one.

C.5

Using Inequalities to Bound Parameters: Extra Example

As mentioned in Section 4.3, when swapping an observed destination by an alternative one in a year t, one
needs to keep track of how this change affects, through extended gravity effects, the sunk costs in any other
country to which the firm starts exporting in year t + 1.
To illustrate, we consider in Table C.1 an example similar to that in Table 3, but in which the firm starts
exporting to Australia in year 9. In this example, the difference in static profits πijj 0 8 is identical to that in

19

equation (29), the difference in export profits to the United Kingdom in year 9 equals that in equation (35),
but the difference in export profits to Australia, indexed here by j 00 , in year 9 now equals
0

j→j
E
dij 00 9 (πij 00 9 − πij
00 9 ) = −γl ,

(C.7)

reflecting the fact that Australia shares language with the firm’s observed destination in year 8, the United
Kingdom, but not with its alternative one, Germany. Thus, the difference in profits between the actual and
counterfactual paths described in Table C.1 is
πijj 0 8 + δπijj 0 9 =
S
o
γall
(η̃ −1 (rij8

−

o
08
rij

+

εR
ij8

−

εR
ij 0 8 )

(C.8)

+ κl + δ(1 − κc − κg − κl )) −

εF
ij8

+

εF
ij 0 8

−

εS
ij8

+

εS
ij 0 8

+

δεS
ij9 .

Table C.1: Example of a 1-period Export Event

Observed

Alternative

C.6
C.6.1

United Kingdom
Germany
Australia
United Kingdom
Germany
Australia

t=7
0
0
0
0
0
0

t=8
1
0
0
0
1
0

t=9
1
0
1
1
0
1

Inference: Details
Confidence Set for the True Parameter

We describe here the procedure we follow to compute the confidence set for the true parameter vector (κ, η̃).
This procedure implements the asymptotic version of the Generalized Moment Selection (GMS) test described
on page 135 of Andrews and Soares (2010), corrected following the procedure described in Section 10.2 of
the same paper to account for the fact that our moments depend on a consistent and asymptotically normal
preliminary estimator α̂.
We base our confidence set on the modified method of moments (MMM) statistic. Specifically, we index
the finite set of inequalities that we use for estimation by k = 1, . . . , K and denote them as
m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) ≥ 0,

k = 1, . . . , K,

where θκ denotes the unknown parameter vector whose true value is κ and θη̃ denotes the unknown scalar
parameter whose true value is η̃. For each k = 1, . . . , K, the moment function m̄k (·) is the sample analogue of
S
the moment in equation (28) after normalizing it by γall
:
( T N  J
)
t
1 XX X X
S
m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) =
Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(1/γall
)(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 )
,
N t=1 i=1 j=1 0
j ∈Aijt

where, conditional on equation Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) satisfying the restrictions in equation (24) and (26) and Aijt being
S
S
0
0
defined as in equation (18b), the true difference in static profits normalized by
P γall , (1/γall )(πijj t + δπijj t+1 ),
is exclusively a function of the parameter vector (α, κ, η̃). The number N = Tt=1 Nt denotes the total number
of observations. To simplify the notation for the rest of this section, we define
mk,it (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) ≡

J
X
X

S
Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(1/γall
)(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ),

j=1 j 0 ∈Aijt

20

(C.9)

and, thus, for every k = 1, . . . , K, we rewrite m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) as
m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) =

T Nt
1 XX
mk,it (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ),
N t=1 i=1

(C.10)

The MMM statistic is therefore defined as
Q(θ) =

K 
X
k=1

min

n m̄ (α̂, θ , θ ) o2
κ η̃
k
,0
,
σ̂k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ )

(C.11)

where
σ̂k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) =

Nt
T X
1 X
2  21
.
mk,it (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) − m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ )
N t=1 i=1

(C.12)

The total number of moment inequalities employed for identification, K, will depend on the finite number of
unconditional moment inequalities that we derive from the conditional revealed-preference moment inequalities
described in equation (23); Appendix C.4 contains additional details on the unconditional moments that we
employ. Given the set of unconditional moment inequalities k = 1, . . . , K and the test statistic in equation
(C.11), we compute confidence sets for the true parameter value (κ, η̃) using the following steps:
Step 1: define a grid Θg that will contain the confidence set. We define this grid as an orthotope
with as many dimensions as there are scalars in the parameter vector (θκ , θη̃ ). In the case of the confidence
set for the parameter vector (κb , κc , κl , κg , η̃), (θκ , θη̃ ) is a 5-dimensional orthotope. To define the limits of this
5-dimensional orthotope, we solve the following nonlinear optimization
min(θκ ,θη̃ )
where

d · (θκ , θη̃ )

subject to

m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) + ln N ≥ 0,

(C.13)

d is one of the elements of the matrix








0
D = (d1+ , d1− , d2+ , d2− , d3+ , d3− , d4+ , d4− , d5+ , d5− ) = 








1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
1
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
1
−1
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
1
−1
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
−1









.








Given that D has ten elements, we will therefore solve ten nonlinear optimizations like that in equation (C.13).
Denote the six 10-dimensional vectors (θκ , θη̃ ) that solve each of these optimizations as
((θκ , θη̃ )1+ , (θκ , θη̃ )1− , (θκ , θη̃ )2+ , (θκ , θη̃ )2− , (θκ , θη̃ )3+ , (θκ , θη̃ )3− , (θκ , θη̃ )4+ , (θκ , θη̃ )4− , (θκ , θη̃ )5+ , (θκ , θη̃ )5− )0 ,
and compute the ten boundaries of the 5-dimensional orthotope Θg as

d1+ · (θκ , θη̃ )1+ d1− · (θκ , θη̃ )1−
 d2+ · (θκ , θη̃ )2+ d2− · (θκ , θη̃ )2−

 d3+ · (θκ , θη̃ )3+ d3− · (θκ , θη̃ )3−

 d4+ · (θκ , θη̃ )4+ d4− · (θκ , θη̃ )4−
d5+ · (θκ , θη̃ )5+ d5− · (θκ , θη̃ )5−




,



where the first column contains the minimum value of the element of (θκ , θη̃ ) indicated by the corresponding
row and the second column contains the corresponding maximum. Once we have these ten limits of the 5dimensional orthotope Θg we fill it up with 400,000 equidistant points.
Step 2: choose a point θp ∈ Θg . The following steps will test the null hypothesis that the vector θp is

21

identical to the true value of θ:
H0 : (κ, η̃) = θp

H1 : (κ, η̃) 6= θp .

vs.

Step 3: evaluate the MMM test statistic at θp :
Q(α̂, θp ) =

K 
X

min

k=1

n m̄ (α̂, θ ) o2
p
k
,0
,
σ̂k (α̂, θp )

(C.14)

where m̄k (α̂, θp ) is equal to the moment m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) evaluated at (θκ , θη̃ ) = θp ; and analogously for σ̂k (α̂, θp ).
Step 4: compute the correlation matrix of moments evaluated at θp :
1

1

Ω̂(α̂, θp ) = Diag − 2 (Σ̂(α̂, θp ))Σ̂(α̂, θp )Diag − 2 (Σ̂(α̂, θp )),

(C.15)

where Diag(Σ̂(α̂, θp )) is the K × K diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are equal to those of Σ̂(α̂, θp ),
1
1
1
Diag − 2 (Σ̂(α̂, θp )) is a matrix such that Diag − 2 (Σ̂(α̂, θp ))Diag − 2 (Σ̂(α̂, θp )) = Diag −1 (Σ̂(α̂, θp )) and Σ̂(α̂, θp )
is an asymptotic variance matrix computed to reflect the fact that α̂ has been previously estimated. Specifically,
the variance matrix Σ̂(α̂, θp ) is the sum of two terms:
Σ̂(α̂, θp ) = Σ̂1 (α̂, θp ) + Σ̂2 (α̂, θp ),

(C.16)

where the first term takes into account the variance of the moments given α̂ and the second term takes into
account how the variance of α̂ affects the variance of our moments. Generally, the variance matrix Σ̂(α̂, θp )
should include an extra term that takes into account the covariance between both sources of randomness; in
our case, the observations being used to estimate α̂ do not coincide with the observations entering the moments
{m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ), k = 1, . . . , K} and, thus, we set this third term to zero for simplicity. The first term in equation
(C.16) equals:
Σ̂1 (α̂, θp ) =

I
T
1 XX
mit (α̂, θp ) − m̄(α̂, θp ))(mit (α̂, θp ) − m̄(α̂, θp ))0 ,
N i=1 t=1

(C.17)

where both mit (α̂, θp ) and m̄(α̂, θp ) are K × 1 vectors
mit (α̂, θp ) = (m1,it (α̂, θp ), . . . , mK,it (α̂, θp )),
m̄(α̂, θp ) = (m̄1 (α̂, θp ), . . . , m̄K (α̂, θp )).
Let’s denote the element in row k and column k0 of matrix Σ̂2 (α̂, θp ) as Σ̂2,kk0 (α̂, θp ). Then,
Σ̂2,kk0 (α̂, θp ) =

I
T
I X
T X
J
 1 X

o
1 XXn
δk,it (α̂, θp )0
di0 j 0 t0 ti0 j 0 t0 (α̂)ti0 j 0 t0 (α̂)0 δk0 ,it (α̂, θp ) ,
N i=1 t=1
Nobs 0
0
0

(C.18)

i =1 t =1 j =1

where δk,it denotes the Jacobian of the function mk,it (α, θp ) with respect to α:
δk,it =
J
X
X

∂mk,it (α, θp )
∂α

=
α=α̂


r
r
r
r
0 t exp(Xij 0 t α̂) .
Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )η̃ −1 Xijt
exp(Xijt
α̂) − Xij

(C.19)

j=1 j 0 ∈Aijt
S
This expression takes into account that the function (1/γall
)πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 depends on the parameter vector
r
r
α only through the term η̃ −1 (exp(Xijt
α̂) − exp(Xij
0 t α̂)); see equation (C.6) in Appendix C.3 for more details
S
on the function (1/γall
)πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 .
The function tijt (α̂) in equation (C.18) is such that we can write the following asymptotic expansion for
our estimator of α:

(α̂ − α) =

I
T
J
1 XXX
−1
tijt (α̂) + op (Nobs2 ),
Nobs i=1 t=1 j=1

22

where NP
obs denotes the total number of firm-country-year triples for which we observe positive exports; i.e.
PT PJ
I
Nobs ≡
j=1 dijt , which corresponds to the total number of observations used to compute the
t=1
i=1
estimate α̂. Given that α̂ is a nonlinear least squares estimate of α (see Appendix B.2 for more details), the
term tijt (α̂) is equal to
tijt (α̂) =

I X
T X
J
h 1 X

 R
0 i−1 R
R
R
R
R
Xijt exp(Xijt
α̂) ε̂R
Xijt
exp(Xijt
α̂) Xijt
exp(Xijt
α̂)
ijt ,
Nobs i=1 t=1 j=1

(C.20)

obs
R
where ε̂R
ijt ≡ rijt − exp(Xijt α̂). See page 153 in Cameron and Trivedi (2005) for additional details on the shape
of the function tijt (α̂) for a nonlinear least squares estimator of α.
Putting together the expressions in equations (C.16) to (C.20), we construct Σ̂(α̂, θp ). Using equation
(C.15), we construct the correlation matrix of moments evaluated at θp , Ω̂(α̂, θp ).

Step 5: simulate the asymptotic distribution of Q(θp ). Take r = 1, . . . , R draws from the multivariate
normal distribution N(0K , IK ) where 0K is a vector of 0s of dimension K and IK is the identity matrix of
dimension K. Denote each of these draws as ζr . Define the simulated criterion function Qr (θp ) as
Qr (α̂, θp ) =

K n
X
k=1

o
√
√ m̄k (α̂, θp )
1
≤ ln N }
(min{[Ω̂ 2 (α̂, θp )ζr ]k , 0})2 × 1{ N
σ̂k (α̂, θp )

1
2

1

where [Ω̂ (α̂, θp )ζr ]k is the kth element of the vector Ω̂ 2 (α̂, θp )ζr .
Step 6: compute the critical value. The critical value ĉ(α̂, θp , 1 − β) is the (1 − β)-quantile of the distribution of Qr (α̂, θp ) across the R draws taken in the previous step.
Step 7: accept/reject θp . Include θp in the estimated (1 − β)% confidence set, Θ̂1−β , if
Q(α̂, θp ) ≤ ĉ(α̂, θp , 1 − β).
Step 8: repeat steps 2 to 7 for every θp in the grid Θg .
Step 9: compare the points included in the set Θ̂1−β to those in the set Θg . If (a) some of the points
included in the set Θ̂1−β are at the boundary of the set Θg , expand the limits of Θg and repeat steps 2 to 9. If
(b) the set of points included in Θ̂1−β is only a small fraction of those included in Θg , redefine a set Θg that
is again a 5-dimensional orthotope whose limits are the result of adding a small number to the corresponding
limits of the set Θ̂1−β and repeat steps 2 to 9. If neither (a) nor (b) applies, define Θ̂1−β as the 95% confidence
set for (κ, η̃).

C.6.2

Specification Tests

We describe here the procedure we follow to test the validity of the model defined by our moment inequalities.
This procedure implements the “test BP” and the “test RS”, as described in Bugni et al. (2015). We use the
same notation as in Appendix C.6.1 and thus describe the set of moment inequalities we use for identification
as

mk (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) ≥ 0,

k = 1, . . . , K,

where θκ denotes the unknown parameter vector whose true value is κ and θη̃ denotes the unknown scalar
parameter whose true value is η̃. For each k = 1, . . . , K, the moment mk (·) is defined in equation (28) as:

mk (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) = E

X
J
X


S
Ψk (Zijt , Zij 0 t )dijt (1 − dij 0 t )(1/γall
)(πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 ) ,

j=1 j 0 ∈Aijt

where the difference in profits πijj 0 t + δπijj 0 t+1 depends on the estimated vector α̂ and the parameter vector
(θκ , θη̃ ). We denote the identified set as ΘI , which, by definition, includes all values of the parameter vector
(θκ , θη̃ ) consistent with these K moment inequalities. The model defined by these inequalities is said to be

23

correctly specified (or statistically adequate) when ΘI is non-empty. Thus, formally, we want to test
H0 : ΘI 6= ∅

H1 : ΘI = ∅.

vs.

Therefore, the null hypothesis in our specification test is that the model is correct; i.e. ΘI is non-empty. The
traditional approach to perform this test checks whether a confidence set for θ is empty: Bugni et al. (2015)
denote this test as the “test BP”. Bugni et al. (2015) suggest two additional specification tests that dominate
the “test BP” in terms of power. They denote them “test RS” and “test RC”. Among these two, we compute
only the “test RS”, as it has better power properties than the “test RC”.

Test BP This test has been proposed by Romano and Shaikh (2008), Andrews and Guggenberger (2009),
and Andrews and Soares (2010). This test arises as a by-product of the confidence sets described in Appendix
C.6.1. Specifically, we reject the model in a test with size β if the (1 − β)% confidence set for the true value
of the parameter vector is empty (see Appendix C.6.1 for a description of how we compute such confidence
set). As pointed out by Andrews and Guggenberger (2009), Andrews and Soares (2010), and Bugni et al.
(2015), this test is conservative, i.e., if the model defined by moment inequalities being tested is correctly
specified, asymptotically, the test with size β will actually reject the null hypothesis less than 100β% of times.
Additionally, Bugni et al. (2015) show that this test can have strictly less power than the “test RS”.

Test RS This test has been proposed by Bugni et al. (2015). The steps we follow to compute this test are
the following:
Step 1: define a grid Θg on the parameter space. This step is identical to that in Appendix C.6.1.
Step 2: evaluate the MMM test statistic defined in equation (C.11) at every θp ∈ Θg :
{Q(α̂, θp ); ∀θp ∈ Θg }
where
Q(α̂, θp ) =

K 
X
k=1

min

n m̄ (α̂, θ ) o2
p
k
,0
,
σ̂k (α̂, θp )

(C.21)

m̄k (α̂, θp ) is equal to the moment m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) evaluated at (θκ , θη̃ ) = θp , and analogously for σ̂k (α̂, θp ). The
functions m̄k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) and σ̂k (α̂, θκ , θη̃ ) are defined in equations (C.10) and (C.12).
Step 3: compute the minimum of the set of MMM test statistics computed in step 2:
T (α̂) = inf Q(α̂, θp ).
θp ∈Θg

(C.22)

Step 4: for every θp in Θg , compute the correlation matrix of the K moments, Ω̂(α̂, θp ). For each
θp , this step is identical to that in Appendix C.6.1.
Step 5: simulate the asymptotic distribution of T (α̂). Take r = 1, . . . , R draws from the multivariate
normal distribution N(0K , IK ) where 0K is a vector of 0s of dimension K and IK is the identity matrix of
dimension K. Denote each of these draws as ζr . Conditional on a value θp in Θg , define the simulated criterion
function corresponding to the draw ζr as
Qr (α̂, θp ) =

K n
X
k=1

o
√
√ m̄k (α̂, θp )
1
(min{[Ω̂ 2 (α̂, θp )ζr ]k , 0})2 × 1{ N
≤ ln N }
σ̂k (α̂, θp )

1

1

where [Ω̂ 2 (α̂, θp )ζr ]k is the kth element of the vector Ω̂ 2 (α̂, θp )ζr . For each r, compute Qr (α̂, θp ) for every
θp ∈ Θg :
{Qr (α̂, θp ); ∀θp ∈ Θg },

24

and compute the minimum of all these values as
Tr (α̂) = inf Qr (α̂, θp ).

(C.23)

θp ∈Θg

Step 6: compute critical value. The critical value ĉRS (α̂, 1 − β) is the (1 − β)-quantile of the distribution
of Tr (α̂) across the R draws taken in the previous step.
Step 7: accept/reject H0 . Reject H0 if
T (α̂) > ĉRS (α̂, 1 − β).

C.7

Additional Results

We report here results that rely on the “short” revenue regression described in column VI of Table B.1. We do
so with the purpose of comparing the moment inequality estimates in tables C.2 and C.3 to those computed
using the “long” revenue regression described in column I of Table B.1, reported in tables 4 and 5.
The “long” revenue regression includes: firm and year fixed effects; the firm’s value added per worker,
share and average wages of skilled and unskilled workers; a large set of distance measures between foreign and
home countries; this same set interacted with a dummy for first year of exports to a country; extended gravity
covariates; and a measure of the foreign market’s size. The “short” revenue regression includes only: firm and
year fixed effects; the firm’s domestic sales; the physical distance between foreign and home countries; and the
aggregate imports in the foreign market. Besides fixed effects, the “long” regression includes 28 regressors,
while the “short” one only 3.
A comparison of tables C.2 and C.3 to tables 4 and 5 shows that, no matter which specification we use
to construct r̂ijt , the moment inequality estimates are very similar. This is consistent with Table B.2 in
Appendix B.2: the pairwise correlation coefficients among the r̂ijt computed using different revenue regression
specifications are always very close to one.

Table C.2: Bounds on Individual Extended Gravity Parameters
Border

Continent

Language

GDPpc

[5.71%, 13.33%]

[17.14%, 28.57%]

[30.48%, 34.29%]

[0%, 30.48%]

Notes: This table report bounds on the vector κ defined in equation (21). It
reports results for the revenue regression described in column VI of Table B.1.
The confidence intervals are projections of a confidence set for (κ, η̃) computed
following the procedure in Section 10.2 of Andrews and Soares (2010).

Table C.3: Bounds on Combinations of Extended Gravity Parameters
Border + Language + Continent + Continent + Continent + Continent + Continent + All
Continent GDPpc
GDPpc
GDPpc +
Language
Language + Language +
Border
Border
GDPpc
[24.76%,
38.10%]

[32.38%,
62.86%]

[22.86%,
49.52%]

[34.29%,
59.05%]

[47.62%,
62.86%]

[55.24%,
72.38%]

[57.14%,
81.90%]

[68.57%]
91.43%]

Notes: This table reports bounds on sums of elements of the vector κ defined in equation (21). It reports results
conditional on the revenue regression described in column VI in Table B.1. The confidence intervals reported in this
table are projections of a 5-dimensional confidence set for (κ, η̃) computed following the procedure in Section 10.2 of
Andrews and Soares (2010).

25

D

Simulation

The model described in Section 3 imposes only necessary conditions on the planning horizon, Lit , information
set, Jit , and consideration set, Bit , of every firm and year in the sample. It also imposes only weak assumptions
F
S
on the distribution of the unobserved determinants of export revenues εR
ijt , fixed costs εijt , and sunk costs εijt :
they are mean independent of any variable affecting the export participation decision of the firm. Similarly, no
restriction is imposed on the distribution of the unobserved determinant of export fixed costs uicj t .
In this section, we simulate data from several models that are consistent with the assumptions on planning
horizons, information and consideration sets, and distributions of unobserved terms introduced in Section
3. The different models we simulate differ thus on the exact assumptions we impose on the firm’s planning
horizon, Lit the firm’s information set, Jit , and the distribution of the unobserved determinants of export
fixed costs, uicj t . We use these different models to explore in Appendix D.2 how sensitive maximum likelihood
estimates of fixed and sunk export costs are to misspecifications of the firm’s planning horizon, information
and consideration set, and the functional form of the distribution of uicj t .
Additionally, to explore the sensitivity of our moment inequality estimator to the presence of firm-, year-,
and country-specific unobserved heterogeneity in export profits that is known to the firm when determining its
set of export destinations, we extend the fixed costs specification in equation (6) to account for such unobserved
heterogeneity through a term νijt . We show in Appendix D.3 how sensitive our moment inequality estimates
are to the variance of such firm-, year-, and country-specific unobserved determinant of export participation.

D.1

Simulated Models

Basic characteristics. In every model we simulate, we generate data for N = 500 firms, T = 20 years, and
J = 5 foreign markets. The total number of observations in our simulated datasets is thus 50,000. Neither
of the five simulated countries shares neither continent, nor language, nor similar income per capita with the
firm’s home market; i.e.
F
fjo = γall
= γ0F + γcF + γlF + γgF ,

soj

=

S
γall

=

γ0S

+

γcS

+

γlS

+

γgS .

(D.1)
(D.2)

In terms of extended gravity relationships in border, continent, and language, we assume that the indicator
functions border(j, j 0 ), continent(j, j 0 ), and language(j, j 0 ), are equal to

1 if (j, j 0 ) ∈ {(2, 3), (3, 2)},
border(j, j 0 ) =
(D.3)
0 otherwise;

1 if (j, j 0 ) ∈ {(2, 3), (3, 2), (2, 4), (4, 2), (3, 4), (4, 3)},
continent(j, j 0 ) =
(D.4)
0 otherwise;

1 if (j, j 0 ) ∈ {(3, 4), (4, 3), (3, 5), (5, 3), (4, 5), (5, 4)},
language(j, j 0 ) =
(D.5)
0 otherwise,
where, as a reminder, any of these functions equals 1 for a pair of countries (j, j 0 ) if and only if these two
countries share the corresponding characteristics. For simplicity, we ignore any extended gravity relationship
due to continent.
Fixed and sunk export costs. Fixed and sunk export costs in each of the five simulated countries are
F
fijt = γall
+ uicj t + σν νijt ,

sijt =

S
γall

+

eoijt ,

(D.6)
(D.7)

with νijt distributed logistically with location parameter equal to zero and scale parameter equal to one, and
eoijt depends on equations (D.3), (D.4), and (D.5). We define uicj t as a variable that is common to all countries
located in the same continent (uicj t = uicj 0 t if continent(j, j 0 )=1) and, to explore how sensitive the maximum
likelihood estimates are to the assumed distribution of uicj t , we generate different datasets in which we explore
different distributions for it. The key fixed and sunk costs parameters in our simulated models are thus
F
S
(γall
, γall
, γbE , γcE , γlE , σν ).

26

In all simulated datasets, we fix
F
γall
= 9;

S
γall
= 6.1;

γbE = 0.93;

γcE = 1.86;

γlE = 1.2,

(D.8)

and, thus, the relative reduction in sunk export costs due to each of the extended gravity effects equals
S
κb = γbE /γall
= 0.15;

S
κc = γcE /γall
= 0.30;

S
κl = γlE /γall
= 0.20,

(D.9)

and that due to their combined effect is
κb + κc + κl = 0.65.

(D.10)

Potential export revenues. Across all simulated models, we assume that
rijt = exp(α0 + α1 r̃ijt )

with

r̃ijt = 0.5r̃ijt−1 + ωijt ,

(D.11)

and ωijt is assumed to be independent over time and distributed normally with mean zero and variance σω2 .
Except otherwise indicated, we build simulated series for r̃ijt and rijt under the assumption that α0 = 14,
α1 = 0.55 and σω = 4.
Elasticity of demand. We assume that η −1 = 0.2.
Consideration set. All 2J = 32 possible bundles of countries belong to the consideration set Bit of all firms in
every time period.
Planning horizon. We impose in all simulated datasets that all firms have the same planning horizon, Lit = L.
We vary the value of L across the different datasets we generate.
Information set. We impose in all simulated datasets that firms know fijt and sijt . While in some datasets
we also assume that firms know rijt , in others we assume that they only know rijt−1 when deciding on their
optimal set of export destinations.
State vector. Given that generating some of the simulated datasets we create requires solving a dynamic
discrete choice problem, we discretize rijt . Specifically, we assume that rijt can take six values. Consequently,
the exogenous state space of a firm has 65 = 7, 776 elements and the transition matrix of this exogenous state
vector thus has (7, 7762 − 7, 776)/2 = 30, 229, 200 distinct elements. The endogenous state space determines all
possible lagged export status of the firm in the five destination markets and, thus, includes 25 = 32 elements.
As a result, the complete state space of the firm incorporates 7, 776 × 32 = 248, 832 elements. Extending
either the set of countries J beyond 5, or the number of distinct values that rijt can take beyond 6, increases
significantly the size of the state space, causing significant computational complications.
Data available to the researcher. For each firm, country and year in the simulated sample, the researcher only
observes: (a) a dummy determining the export status, dijt ; (b) the exogenous determinant of export revenues,
r̃ijt ; and (c) realized export revenues, rijt dijt .

D.2

Impact of Model Misspecification on Maximum Likelihood Estimates

F
S
In this section, we explore the sensitivity of the maximum likelihood estimator of (η, γall
, γall
, γbE , γcE , γlE ) to the
assumptions imposed on: (a) the planning horizon, Lit ; (b) the information set, Jit ; (c) the consideration set,
Bit ; and (d) the parametric distribution of uicj t . We consider the case of a researcher that correctly assumes
that νijt is distributed logistically with location parameter equal to zero and scale parameter equal to one.

Misspecification of planning horizon, Lit . To explore how sensitive maximum likelihood estimates are to the researcher’s assumptions on the firm’s planning horizon, we assume that the researcher
correctly specifies the firm’s information set, Jit , the firm’s consideration set, Bit , and the distribution of uicj t .
Specifically, the researcher assumes an information set Jit such that,

E[rijt |Jit ] = rijt ,
27

(D.12)

Table D.1: Robustness to Different Planning Horizons
Correct
Lit = 0
η −1
F
γall
S
γall

γbE
γcE
γlE
κb
κc
κl

Lit = 1

Wrong
Lit = 2

Lit = 3

0.201

0.209

0.206

0.209

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

9.032

8.063

7.133

6.989

(0.157)

(0.249)

(0.335)

(0.394)

6.121

5.016

5.077

5.390

(0.064)

(0.096)

(0.135)

(0.189)

0.989

0.418

0.344

0.458

(0.081)

(0.142)

(0.194)

(0.224)

1.818

1.063

0.813

0.846

(0.072)

(0.132)

(0.191)

(0.242)

1.226

0.535

0.309

0.248

(0.057)

(0.099)

(0.144)

(0.191)

0.162
0.297
0.200

0.083
0.212
0.107

0.067
0.160
0.061

0.085
0.157
0.046

Notes: standard errors appear in parenthesis. The underlying data is generated under the assumption that
Lit = 0. The model reported in each column is estimated under the assumption on the value of Lit indicated in the corresponding column.

a consideration set Bit such that,
Bit = {all possible bundles of the J = 5 countries},

(D.13)

a planning horizon Lit such that
Lit = 0,

for all firms and time periods,

(D.14)

and sets uicj t
uicj t = 0,

(D.15)

for every firm, country and year. In words, assuming equation D.12 is equivalent to assuming that firms
have perfect foresight; assuming equation (D.13) is equivalent to assuming that firms consider exporting to all
countries (i.e. the consideration set and the potential choice set of the firm are identical); and assuming equation
(D.14) is equivalent to assuming that firms are not forward looking. We simulate four different datasets that
are consistent with the assumptions in equations (D.12), (D.13), and (D.15), but in which Lit takes values zero,
one, two, and three, respectively, for every firm and time period. We present the results in Table D.1.
As the results in Table D.1 show, the maximum likelihood estimates of a model that corresponds exactly
to the data generating process except for the assumption imposed on the firm’s planning horizon may still be
quite different from the true parameter values. As the difference between the true planning horizon (Lit = 0)
and the assumed planning horizon (indicated at the top of each column in Table D.1) increases, all estimates
other than η −1 become smaller in absolute value. The intuitive explanation for why this happens is that the
difference between the true value function of the firm and that assumed by the researcher increases with the
difference between the true and the assumed planning horizon. Misspecifying the planning horizon not only
causes a bias in the scale of all parameter estimates, but it also causes a bias in the relative magnitude of these
estimates. This is illustrated by the relative extended gravity parameters, κb , κc , and κl , which also become
smaller as the difference between the the true and the assumed planning horizon increases. For example, while

28

Table D.2: Robustness to Different Information Sets
Correct
η −1
F
γall
S
γall

γbE
γcE
γlE
κb
κc
κl

Wrong With
σω = 2 σω = 4 σω = 6

0.201

0.038

0.033

0.028

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

9.032

(0.057)

-1.933
(0.326)
5.919
(0.014)
0.563
(0.083)
1.777
(0.065)
1.089
(0.023)

-1.045
(0.019)
5.879
(0.004)
0.846
(0.009)
1.721
(0.007)
1.143
(0.005)

-0.269
(0.006)
5.663
(0.002)
0.831
(0.004)
1.722
(0.003)
1.079
(0.003)

0.162
0.297
0.200

0.095
0.300
0.184

0.144
0.293
0.194

0.147
0.304
0.190

(0.157)

6.121
(0.064)

0.989
(0.081)

1.818
(0.072)

1.226

Notes: standard errors appear in parenthesis. The data
is generated under the assumption that [rijt |Jit ] =
rijt , which is also the assumed imposed by the researcher compute the estimates in column 1. The estimates in columns 2 to 4 are computed under the wrong
assumption that [rijt |Jit ] = [rijt |rijt−1 ]. From
equation (D.11), as we increase the value of σω we also
increase the difference between rijt and [rijt |rijt−1 ].

E

E

E

E

the total reduction in sunk costs due to all extended gravity effects in the simulated model is 65% according
to equation (D.10), the estimated value of this parameter is 40% when the planning horizon is underestimated
by a year, and approximately 29% when is underestimated by either two or three years.

Misspecification of information set, Jit . To explore how sensitive maximum likelihood estimates
are to the researcher’s assumptions on the firm’s information set, we assume that the researcher correctly
specifies the firm’s planning horizon, Lit , the firm’s consideration set, Bit , and the distribution of the unobserved
term uicj t . Specifically, the researcher maximizes a likelihood function that relies on the assumptions on
information set, consideration set, planning horizon and distribution of uicj t indicated in equations (D.12) to
(D.15).
We simulate four different datasets that respect the assumptions in equations (D.13), (D.14) and (D.15),
but that differ in the assumed content of the firm’s information set. While the first dataset is consistent
with equation (D.12), E[rijt |Jit ] = rijt , datasets two to four are simulated assuming instead that E[rijt |Jit ] =
E[rijt |rijt−1 ]. The difference between rijt and E[rijt |rijt−1 ] increases in the variance of the export revenue shock
ωijt defined in equation (D.11). To show how sensitive the maximum likelihood estimates are to differences
between the true firms’ expectations, E[rijt |rijt−1 ], and the researcher’s assumed ones, rijt , datasets two to
four are different only in the value of the variance of the revenue shock ωijt , σω2 . We present the results in
Table D.2.
As the results in Table D.2 show, the maximum likelihood estimates of the coefficient on the expected
potential export revenues, η −1 , are very sensitive to the researcher’s assumption on the information set used
by the firm to construct such expectations. If the firm has imperfect information about the potential export
revenue that it would obtain in a country j and period t if it were to export to it, rijt , but the researcher
assumes that its information is perfect, then the maximum likelihood estimate of the coefficient on rijt will be
downward biased. Comparing the results across columns two to four in Table D.2, we can see that wrongly

29

Table D.3: Robustness to Different Consideration Sets
Correct
1
η −1
F
γall
S
γall

γbE
γcE
γlE
κb
κc
κl

Wrongly Excludes Country:
2
3
4

5

0.201

0.188

0.178

0.182

0.179

0.176

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

9.032

9.296

8.504

8.470

8.442

8.573

(0.157)

(0.033)

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.029)

6.121

3.598

4.252

4.435

4.293

3.867

(0.064)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.018)

(0.001)

0.989

0.315

0.430

0.279

(0.081)

(0.003)

(0.001)

(0.003)

1.818

0.736

0.715

0.832

0.594

0.872

(0.072)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.004)

1.226

0.396

0.547

0.321

0.418

0.335

(0.057)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.003)

0.162
0.297
0.200

0.088
0.205
0.110

0.168
0.128

0.187
0.072

0.100
0.138
0.097

0.072
0.225
0.086

Notes: standard errors appear in parenthesis. The underlying data is generated under the assumption that all possible bundles of the five countries
described in equations (D.3) to (D.5) are included in the firm’s consideration set Bit . The model reported in the first column assumes the correct
consideration set. The models reported in columns 2 to 7 assume a consideration set Bit formed by all possible bundles of a subset of four countries
extracted from the actual set of five countries. The country dropped in
each case is indicated in the corresponding column.

assuming that firms have perfect foresight generates estimates of η −1 that are significantly below the true value
of this parameter, 0.2, and the downward bias increases as we increase the variance of the revenue shock, ωijt .
Consistent with the results in Dickstein and Morales (2016), the misspecification of the firm’s information set
F
also biases significantly the maximum likelihood estimate of the export fixed costs, γall
.
F
, suffer
Surprisingly, while the estimates of the inverse elasticity of demand, η −1 , and fixed export costs, γall
from sever bias when the researcher misspecifies the firm’s information set, the maximum likelihood estimates
S
, γbE , γcE , γlE are not affected by this misspecification. As a consequence, the
of the sunk costs parameters γall
estimates of the relative extended gravity parameters κb , κc , and κl are invariant to the assumptions imposed
on the information set used by firms to predict their potential export revenue upon entry.

Misspecification of consideration set, Bit . To explore how sensitive maximum likelihood estimates are to the researcher’s assumptions on the firm’s consideration set, we assume that the researcher
correctly specifies both the firm’s planning horizon, Lit , the firm’s information set, Jit , and the distribution of
the unobserved term uicj t . Specifically, the researcher imposes on the firm’s information set, the firm’s planning horizon, and the distribution of uicj t the same assumptions as in equations (D.12), (D.14), and (D.15),
respectively. Concerning the specification of the firm’s consideration set, we simulate a dataset that imposes
the consideration set described in equation (D.13), but estimate models in which the consideration set assumed
by the researcher is smaller than the actual one. Specifically, we estimate five misspecified models, each of
them characterized by a consideration set that ignores one of the five countries included the actual choice set
of the firm. We present the results in Table D.3.
As the results in Table D.3 show, misspecifications of the firm’s consideration set do not have a large impact
F
neither on the coefficient on potential export revenues, η −1 , nor on the fixed export costs parameter, γall
.
Conversely, they have a large impact on the estimates of the sunk costs parameters. It is interesting to remark
that this bias in the estimated sunk costs parameters caused by misspecification of the firm’s consideration set
30

happens even when the excluded country does not share any extended gravity characteristic with any other
destinations; as shown in equations (D.3) to (D.5), the country j = 1 does not share neither border, not
continent, nor language with any of the other four destinations in the simulated data.
When we exclude either country j = 2 or country j = 3, the coefficient on extended gravity due to border
is not identified, as countries two and three are the only ones to share border; i.e. if one of them is excluded, no
firm can enter a country having previously exported to a bordering market. Looking at the estimates of κc and
κl , one can observe that the downward bias in these estimates is larger when the excluded country shares the
corresponding extended gravity covariate with at least one of the other destinations. Specifically, as equation
(D.4) indicates, countries 2, 3 and 4 share continent and, as Table D.3 shows, the estimates of κc are lowest
when one of these three countries is excluded from the consideration set. Similarly, as equation (D.5) indicates,
countries 3, 4, and 5 share language and, as Table D.3 shows, the estimates of κl are lowest when one of these
three countries is excluded from the consideration set.

Misspecification of the distribution of the random effect, uicj t . To explore how sensitive
maximum likelihood estimates are to the researcher’s assumptions on the distribution of the firm-continent
random effects uicj t , we assume that the researcher correctly specifies the firm’s planning horizon, Lit , the
firm’s information set, Jit , and the consideration set, Bit . Specifically, the researcher imposes the assumptions
in equations (D.12), (D.13), and (D.14), respectively.
Concerning the researcher’s assumptions on the distribution of the firm-continent random effects uicj t , we
consider two cases. First, a case in which the researcher assumes that uicj t = 0 for all firms, countries and years
(consistently with equation (D.15)) and, thus, estimates a binary logit model; the results corresponding to this
case are in Table D.4. Second, a case in which the researcher assumes that uicj t = uicj and that uicj follows a
normal distribution independent across firms and continents; the results corresponding to this case are in Table
D.5. Each of the different columns in tables D.4 and D.5 show the estimates of the corresponding statistical
model for a different dataset, and each of these datasets differ in the actual distribution of uicj , which may be
the same or different from that assumed by the researcher. In all of these datasets, we generate the random
variable uicj as a recentered at zero transformation g(·) of an independently and normally distributed random
variable ξicj that has mean zero and a standard deviation equal to σξ ; i.e. uicj = g(ξicj ) − E[g(ξicj )] with
ξicj ∼ N(0, σξ2 ). The different datasets we generate to compute the estimates reported in tables D.4 and D.5
differ in the transformation function g(·) and the standard deviation parameter σξ . Specifically, we generate
two vectors {ξicj , ∀ i and cj } that correspond to values of σξ in the set {1, 3} and, for each of them, we generate
two different vectors {uicj , ∀ i and cj } that correspond to the following two functions g(·): the normal case
g(ξicj ) = ξicj ;

(D.16)

g(ξicj ) = 1{ξicj ≥ 0} × percentile75 (ξicj ) + 1{ξicj < 0} × percentile25 (ξicj ),

(D.17)

and the Bernoulli case,

where percentileq (ξicj ) denotes the percentile q of ξicj . Additionally, for the specific case in which σξ = 1, we
also generate two different vectors {uicj , ∀ i and cj } that correspond the log-normal case,
g(ξicj ) = exp(ξicj );

(D.18)

g(ξicj ) = (ξicj )2 .

(D.19)

the “chi-squared” case,

As Table D.4 shows, ignoring the presence of firm-continent random effects by estimating binary logit
models results in an upward bias in the estimate of the reduction in the export entry costs due to extended
S
gravity effects in continent, γcE . Simultaneously, the baseline value of these export entry costs, γall
is also
upward biased. The consequence is that the relative reduction in export sunk costs due to extended gravity
continent, κc , is only slightly biased upwards, but the relative reductions due to extended gravity in border,
κb , and language, κl , are severely biased downwards. The size of these biases increase as the variance of the
firm-continent random effect increases, as illustrated by: (a) the comparison of the normal and Bernoulli cases
with σξ = 3 to those with σξ = 1; (b) the comparison of the log-normal and Chi-squared cases to the normal
case.

31

Table D.4: Robustness to Firm-Continent Random Effects: Binary Logit
Distribution
σξ
η −1
F
γall
S
γall

γbE
γcE
γlE
κb
κc
κl

Normal
1
3

Bernoulli
1
3

Ln-Nrm
1

Chi-Sq.
1

0.225

0.454

0.209

0.289

0.334

0.259

(0.003)

(0.010)

(0.003)

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.004)

9.816

9.231

(0.070)

15.747
(0.616)
23.339
(0.201)
1.278
(0.345)
8.245
(0.268)
0.511
(0.186)

(0.066)

11.190
(0.345)
13.398
(0.115)
0.745
(0.174)
3.322
(0.136)
1.366
(0.103)

13.323
(0.357)
12.879
(0.118)
0.557
(0.201)
4.983
(0.163)
0.567
(0.110)

10.680
(0.265)
9.627
(0.089)
0.708
(0.148)
3.696
(0.119)
0.530
(0.082)

0.091
0.331
0.133

0.054
0.353
0.022

0.107
0.318
0.173

0.055
0.247
0.102

0.043
0.386
0.044

0.073
0.384
0.055

(0.215)

7.734
(0.071)

0.704
(0.117)

2.559
(0.098)

1.032

(0.193)

6.829
(0.064)

0.732
(0.110)

2.175
(0.089)

1.181

Notes: standard errors appear in parenthesis. All columns estimate a binary logit model
and, to facilitate the comparability across models, all estimates are scaled by the true
standard deviation of uicj + σν νijt .

Table D.5: Robustness to Firm-Continent Random Effects: Mixed Logit
Distribution
σξ
η −1
F
γall
S
γall

γbE
γcE
γlE
κb
κc
κl
Num. Obs. per (i, cj )

Normal
1

Bernoulli
1
3

3

Ln-Nrm
1

Chi-Sq.
1

0.213

0.195

0.217

0.213

0.205

0.211

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

11.404
(0.222)
6.241
(0.065)
0.856
(0.104)
1.933
(0.090)
1.357
(0.065)

12.245
(0.263)
6.272
(0.076)
0.831
(0.119)
2.242
(0.101)
0.963
(0.071)

11.327
(0.237)
6.273
(0.066)
0.871
(0.108)
1.867
(0.095)
1.395
(0.068)

13.820
(0.259)
6.325
(0.073)
0.924
(0.096)
1.859
(0.081)
1.377
(0.060)

10.986
(0.234)
6.225
(0.070)
0.767
(0.114)
2.051
(0.101)
1.158
(0.072)

11.205
(0.233)
6.338
(0.068)
0.867
(0.116)
1.985
(0.100)
1.256
(0.072)

0.137
0.309
0.217

0.132
0.357
0.226

0.138
0.297
0.222

0.146
0.294
0.217

0.123
0.329
0.186

0.136
0.313
0.198

32

32

32

32

32

32

Notes: standard errors appear in parenthesis. All columns estimate a mixed logit model with
normally distributed firm-continent random effects.

32

As Table D.5 shows, estimating mixed logit models allows to deal with firm-continent random effects.
F
Specifically, while the fixed cost component γall
is severely upward biased, the estimates of both the baseline
S
sunk costs γall and all the extended gravity covariates, γbE , γcE and γlE , are large unbiased. This results in
the estimates of the relative extended gravity parameters, κb , κc , and κl being also very close to their true
parameter values. Importantly, this seems to be generally true even in those cases in which the true distribution
of the firm-continent random effect does not follow the distribution imposed when estimating the mixed logit
model: even in the cases in which the firm-continent unobservable is simulated from a log-normal distribution
or from a Chi-squared distribution (both recentered to have mean zero), the mixed logit estimates of κb , κc ,
and κl are very close to their true values.

D.3

Impact of Model Misspecification on Moment Inequality Estimates

In this section, we explore how the confidence set for the parameter vector (κb , κc , κl ) is affected when there
are unobserved (to the researcher) components that determine the optimal set of export destinations of a
firm. We consider two cases. First, we study the effect of ignoring the presence of a country-, firm-, yearspecific unobserved component in our inequalities; we denote this case below as country-specific unobserved
heterogeneity and model it through the term νijt in equation (D.6). Second, we study the effect of ignoring the
presence of a continent-, firm-, year-specific unobserved component; we refer to this case below as continentspecific unobserved heterogeneity and model it through the term uicj t in equation (D.6), with the index cj
defined as the continent to which country j belongs.
In order to focus on the sensitivity of the moment inequality estimator to the assumptions imposed on
the distribution of the unobserved terms νijt and uicj t , we assume that the researcher’s assumptions on the
firm’s planning horizon, Lit , information set, Jit , and consideration set, Bit are correct. Specifically, we
simulate data from the simplest possible model that is compatible with the restrictions on the planning horizon
and information set imposed in assumptions 2 and 3 in Section 3.4: firms make decisions at any period t
taking into account the impact of these decisions only on periods t and t + 1 (i.e. Lit = 1) and have perfect
foresight about the potential revenues of exporting to any country in the choice set in both periods t and
t + 1 (i.e. (rijt , rijt+1 ) ∈ Jit ). Concerning the consideration set, we assume that the set Ait imposed by the
researcher when deriving her moment inequalities coincides with the true consideration set, Bit , which includes
all combinations of the five countries described in Appendix D.

Country-specific unobserved heterogeneity. To explore how sensitive moment inequality estimates are to the assumption, imposed in the model described in Section 3, that there are no country-, firm-,
year-specific unobserved determinants of export profits, we apply the moment inequality estimator described
in Section 4 (which is derived under the assumption that σν = 0) to datasets simulated under different values
of σν . The general pattern we observe is that, as the value of σν increases, the estimated confidence set for
the parameter vector (κb , κc , κl ) becomes smaller and, eventually, it becomes empty. However, interestingly,
whenever the value of σν is such that the moment inequality confidence set is nonempty, this one does contain
the true p
value of the parameter vector. The values of σν that we use to generate simulated data are such
σνr = σν / var(η −1 rijt ) is equal to either 0 (the case corresponding to the model described in Section 3), 0.4,
0.6, 1, or 1.4. The resulting confidence sets are represented in figures D.1 to D.5.

Continent-specific unobserved heterogeneity. To explore the sensitivity of our moment inequality estimates to wrongly ignoring the presence of firm-, year-, continent-specific unobserved determinants
of export profits, we apply a moment inequality estimator that assumes that the standard deviation of uicj t
equals zero, σu = 0, to datasets simulated under different values of σu . The general pattern we observe is that,
as the true value of σu increases, the estimated confidence set for the parameter vector (κb , κc , κl ) changes its
shape in a way such that the estimated bounds for κc become tighter and the estimated bounds for κb and κl
become wider. However, interestingly, for a very large range of values of σu , the confidence set for (κb , κc , κl )
still contains the true value of the parameter vector. The values of σu that we use to generate simulated data
are such that the ratio between σu and the standard deviation of the remaining part of export profits η −1 rijt ,
σur , is equal to either 0 (the case corresponding to the model described in Section 3), 0.4, 0.6, 1, 1.4, or 2. The
resulting confidence sets are represented in figures D.6 to D.10.

Number of countries and identification power. The confidence sets in Figure D.1 result from
applying our moment inequality estimator to a dataset that is consistent with the assumptions under which

33

such estimator is valid; i.e. (σνr , σur ) = (0, 0). However, the resulting confidence sets are much wider than those
reported in Section 6. The reason why this happens is that, in our simulated sample, the set of observed and
alternative export bundles we can choose from to form our moments is much smaller than in the actual data.
This limitation is due to the small number of export destinations (J = 5) in our simulated data. The reason for
limiting ourselves to such a small number of destinations is purely due to computational costs. Simulating a
model consistent with our moment inequality framework requires computing the firm’s value function for each
of the elements in its potential choice set and for each possible value of the state vector. As indicated above,
the state space of our simulated firms already includes 248,832 points. If we had allowed for one more country
in the choice set (i.e. J = 6), then the state space would have included 66 × 26 =2,985,984 elements. In fact,
these computational limitations are the main reason why we opted for using a moment inequality estimator on
the actual data in the first place.
What Figure D.1 illustrates is that the identification power of our moment inequality approach increases
significantly with the size of the firm’s choice set, as this facilitates finding alternative export destinations that,
when compared to the firm’s observed destination, help identify the model parameters. To illustrate this point
through an example, notice that, as indicated in Appendix C.4, one of the instrument functions that we use to
define our moment inequalities is
S
Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) = 1{soj = soj0 = γall
, dijt−1 = dij 0 t−1 = 0, (Ext. Grav. Border)j = 1, (Ext. Grav. Border)j 0 = 0}.

This function will take value one only when we observe a firm entering a new destination j in year t that shares
border with a previous destination of the firm and, at the same time, not entering an alternative destination
j 0 that does not share any border with any prior export destination of this firm. In our simulated data, only
countries 2 and 3 share border and, thus, the function Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) will equal one only for those firms that
happen to enter country 2 when they were previously exporting to country 3 (or vice versa). Only a very
small number of firms in our simulated data will have this particular export pattern, meaning that the moment
inequality defined by the instrument function Ψ1 (Zijt , Zij 0 t ) will average only over very few observations. It is
this small number of observations per moment inequality in our simulation that explains the large size of the
confidence sets in Figure D.1.

Figure D.1: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0, 0)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.2: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0.4, 0)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

34

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.3: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0.6, 0)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.4: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (1, 0)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.5: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (1.4, 0)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.6: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0, 0.4)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

35

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.7: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0, 0.6)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.8: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0, 1)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.9: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0, 1.4)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

(c) Continent vs. Language

Figure D.10: Projected Confidence Set: (σνr , σur ) = (0, 2)
(a) Border vs. Continent

(b) Border vs. Language

36

(c) Continent vs. Language

