                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE ARGENTINA PARADOX:
                       MICROEXPLANATIONS AND MACROPUZZLES

                                           Alan M. Taylor

                                        Working Paper 19924
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19924


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




Prepared for the conference “Exceptional Argentina” at Harvard University organized by Rafael
Di Tella, Edward Glaeser, and Lucas Llach. I thank the organizers/editors, anonymous referees, and
conference participants for useful comments and suggestions on this paper. All errors are mine. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Argentina Paradox: Microexplanations and Macropuzzles
Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 19924
February 2014
JEL No. F43,N16,O11,O54,O57,P52

                                               ABSTRACT

The economic history of Argentina presents one of the most dramatic examples of divergence in the
modern era. What happened and why? This paper reviews the wide range of competing explanations
in the literature and argues that, setting aside deeper social and political determinants, the various economic
mechanisms in play defy the idea of a monocausal explanation.


Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics and
Graduate School of Management
University of California
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
1.	  Introduction	  
There	   is	   an	   old	   saying	   among	   economists,	   possibly	   apocryphal,	   and	   of	   unclear	  

attribution:	  “throughout	  history	  there	  have	  been	  only	  four	  kinds	  of	  economies	  in	  the	  

world:	  advanced,	  developing,	  Japan,	  and	  Argentina.”	  

           This	  idea	  can	  be	  more	  concretely	  grasped	  by	  looking	  at	  evidence	  on	  the	  long	  

run	   levels	   of	   income	   per	   capita	   in	   a	   broad	   range	   of	   countries	   over	   the	   last	   two	  

centuries	   in	   Figure	   1.	   Material	   living	   standards	   have	   advanced	   across	   the	   entire	  

world,	  but	  the	  well-­‐known	  Great	  Divergence	  is	  quite	  apparent.	  A	  few	  rich	  countries	  

have	   become	   much	   richer;	   a	   larger	   group	   of	   poorer	   countries	   have	   grown	   more	  

slowly	   average.	   Within	   each	   group	   are	   notable	   exceptions,	   with	   some	   very	   poor	  

countries	   making	   little	   progress	   at	   all.	   However,	   most	   striking	   are	   those	   countries	  

witnessing	  a	  reversal	  of	  fortune,	  moving	  from	  one	  group	  to	  the	  other.	  

           The	   set	   of	   once-­‐poor	   countries	   that	   are	   now	   rich	   include	   Japan,	   where	   the	  

transition	   began	   more	   than	   100	   years	   ago,	   and	   some	   other	   East	   Asian	   countries	   like	  

Korea	   and	   Taiwan,	   whose	   transition	   started	   only	   50	   years	   ago	   and	   is	   now	   almost	  

complete.	  But	  going	  the	  other	  way	  there	  is	  only	  one	  notable	  case	  of	  a	  country	  that	  

started	   life	   relatively	   rich	   and	   ended	   up	   comparatively	   poor:	   this	   is	   the	   great	   puzzle	  

or	   paradox	   of	   Argentina.	   In	   the	   late	   nineteenth	   century	   it	   was	   among	   the	   top	   five	  

countries	  in	  income	  per	  capita,	  richer	  than	  all	  European	  countries	  except	  Britain	  and	  

on	   a	   par	   with	   other	   rich	   settler	   societies	   like	   the	   United	   States,	   Canada,	   and	  

Australia.	   Its	   status	   among	   the	   richest	   economies	   reached	   a	   peak	   around	   1913,	  

when	   income	   convergence	   stopped.	   But	   even	   until	   1929	   it	   still	   on	   clung	   in	   this	   club,	  


	                                                                    1	                                                                      	  
only	   to	   face	   a	   slow	   and	   widening	   relative	   decline	   thereafter.	   It	   is	   now	   close	   to	   the	  

average	   country	   in	   the	   world	   given	   its	   level	   of	   income	   per	   capita,	   and	   its	   citizens	  

enjoy	  only	  40%	  of	  the	  average	  income	  per	  capita	  of	  the	  12	  core	  countries	  of	  Western	  

Europe.	  



1.1.	  “MicroExplanations”:	  Trade	  and	  Investment	  

In	  a	  complementary	  chapter	  by	  Lucas	  Llach	  in	  this	  volume,	  written	  with	  a	  different	  

focus,	  some	  important	  background	  is	  developed	  for	  the	  topics	  explored	  here.	  Llach	  

discusses	   how	   the	   prosperity	   of	   Argentina	   in	   the	   circa	   1913–1929	   period	   was	  

potentially	   fragile,	   and	   thus	   vulnerable	   to	   reversal:	   the	   pre-­‐1914	   boom	   had	   been	  

narrowly	  built	  on	  the	  physical	  capital	  of	  railways	  and	  the	  cereal	  lands	  of	  the	  pampas	  

they	   made	   viable,	   but	   the	   potential	   for	   broader	   growth	   via	   industrial	   and	   human	  

capital	   was	   constrained.	   On	   wider	   human	   development	   measures,	   including	  

schooling	   and	   health,	   Argentina	   lagged	   its	   rich	   country	   rivals,	   and	   on	   a	   regional	  

basis	   its	   wealth	   was	   heavily	   concentrated	   in	   the	   city	   of	   Buenos	   Aires	   and	   its	  

surrounding	   province.	   Such	   were	   the	   peculiar	   initial	   economic	   conditions	   in	  

Argentina	  circa	  1929.	  

            To	   complement	   those	   findings,	   this	   chapter	   looks	   elsewhere,	   and	   in	   two	  

different	   directions:	   it	   looks	   backwards	   to	   some	   of	   the	   theories	   of	   historical	   “deep	  

determinants”	   and	   how	   they	   might	   relate	   to	   Argentina’s	   malaise;	   and	   it	   steps	  

forward	   to	   look	   at	   the	   evolving	   story	   after	   the	   Great	   Depression	   with	   these	   initial	  

conditions	   kept	   in	   mind.	   I	   explore	   some	   of	   the	   main	   contours	   of	   the	   Argentina	  

“macropuzzle”	   as	   the	   great	   divergence	   in	   per	   capita	   incomes	   emerged	   and	   then	  


	                                                                      2	                                                                        	  
widened	   after	   1929,	   and	   look	   at	   some	   of	   the	   quantitative	   explanations	   that	   have	  

been	  advanced	  for	  it,	  in	  particular	  the	  central	  roles	  played	  by	  barriers	  to	  trade	  and	  

investment.	  

            There	   are	   many	   of	   these	   (and	   other)	   distortions	   in	   Argentina—perhaps	   too	  

many	  for	  the	  tastes	  of	  economists	  easily	  seduced	  by	  monocausal	  explanations	  tied	  to	  

a	  toy	  model	  with	  a	  minimum	  of	  parameters.	  But	  we	  are	  in	  a	  country	  with	  an	  untidy	  

economic	  history:	  in	  economic	  policy	  terms,	  it	  is	  a	  place	  where	  almost	  anything	  that	  

could	  go	  wrong	  has,	  at	  some	  time,	  actually	  gone	  wrong.	  In	  this	  weirdest	  of	  historical	  

laboratories,	   dozens	   of	   strange	   economic	   policy	   experiments	   have	   been	   run	   in	   the	  

last	   200	   years,	   often	   for	   long	   periods,	   and	   not	   infrequently	   with	   lasting	  

consequences.	  Still,	  in	  sum,	  a	  focus	  on	  some	  key	  “microexplanations”	  can	  help	  us	  to	  

understand	   a	   lot	   of	   what	   went	   wrong	   at	   the	   nexus	   of	   public	   policy	   and	   economic	  

performance.	  



1.2	  “Macropuzzles”:	  Elusive	  Deep	  Determinants?	  

Yet	   beyond	   the	   search	   for	   immediate	   causes,	   of	   equal	   or	   greater	   concern	   to	   some	  

economists	   has	   been	   the	   search	   for	   so-­‐called	   “deep	   determinants”	   of	   economic	  

outcomes,	  consisting	  of	  causally—and	  often	  temporally—distant	  factors	  that	  might	  

be	  placed	  as	  primal	  or	  exogenous	  factors	  which	  “explain”	  the	  proximate	  cause	  and,	  

hence,	   the	   ultimate	   outcome	   of	   economic	   underperformance.	   Among	   the	   most	  

widely	   cited	   explanations	   are	   a	   country’s	   geography	   (including	   land/resource	  

endowments	   as	   well	   as	   climate/disease	   environment),	   its	   colonial	   experience,	   and	  

the	  origins	  of	  its	  legal	  system.	  	  


	                                                                 3	                                                                   	  
           We	  shall	  review	  each	  of	  these	  explanations	  as	  applied	  to	  the	  Argentine	  case,	  

and	  find	  that,	  in	  contrast	  to	  many	  other	  countries,	  most	  of	  these	  explanations	  do	  not	  

fit	  all	  that	  well.	  For	  example:	  Argentina	  is	  a	  predominantly	  temperate	  country,	  it	  has	  

been	   dominated	   by	   European	   settlement,	   it	   has	   maintained	   high	   literacy	   despite	  

inequality,	  and	  its	  legal	  origins	  are	  a	  peculiar	  hybrid	  of	  common	  and	  civil	  law	  ideas.	  

Thus,	   in	   the	   debate	   over	   the	   causes	   of	   economic	   success	   and	   failure,	   Argentina	  

stands	   as	   an	   exception	   to	   many	   of	   the	   rules	   which	   seem	   to	   apply	   elsewhere,	  

deepening	  the	  mystery.	  

           This	  contrast	  leaves	  us	  with	  the	  “macropuzzles”:	  we	  have	  much	  work	  left	  to	  

do	  in	  order	  to	  piece	  together	  a	  plausible	  story	  not	  only	  of	  what	  went	  wrong,	  but	  why	  

it	   went	   wrong.	   What	   were	   the	   political	   economy	   mechanisms	   that	   derailed	  

Argentina	   in	   the	   twentieth	   century?	   A	   century	   ago,	   despite	   some	   bumps	   in	   the	   road,	  

the	   country	   was	   prosperous	   and	   literate,	   in	   a	   temperate-­‐zone,	   economically	   open,	  

had	  reasonably	  tolerable	  rule	  of	  law,	  and	  was	  progressing	  towards	  macroeconomic	  

stability	  and	  a	  liberal	  constitutional	  democracy.	  It	  was	  not	  so	  unlike	  the	  other	  settler	  

countries.	  Today,	  a	  century	  later,	  it	  looks	  very	  different.	  



1.3	  The	  Explicandum	  

In	   the	   two	   main	   sections	   of	   the	   paper	   that	   follow	   we	   look	   at	   some	   commonly	  

discussed	   proximate	   factors	   behind	   Argentina’s	   relative	   economic	   decline.	   We	  

attempt	  to	  put	  these	  factors	  in	  some	  kind	  of	  empirical	  perspective	  and	  evaluate	  how	  

much	  they	  might	  have	  contributed	  to	  Argentina’s	  economic	  slow	  down.	  




	                                                                 4	                                                                   	  
           To	  do	  so	  we	  will	  be	  primarily	  concerned	  with	  the	  steady	  state	  impact	  of	  such	  

effects	   on	   output.	   In	   all	   cases	   the	   exact	   levels	   of	   these	   distortions	   have	   varied	  

substantially	   over	   time,	   but	   given	   the	   slow	   convergence	   to	   steady	   state	   in	   any	  

benchmark	   neoclassical	   model	   (empirically	   or	   theoretically),	   these	   factors	   will	   have	  

a	   high	   degree	   of	   historical	   persistence	   across	   years	   and	   decades	   in	   any	   calibrated	  

dynamic	  model.	  

           With	  the	  strong	  forces	  of	  inertia	  noted,	  it	  is	  worth	  keeping	  in	  mind	  the	  kind	  of	  

income	   gaps	   we	   have	   to	   explain.	   The	   income	   per	   person	   level	   in	   Argentina	   today	  

(about	  $8,000)	  is	  about	  two-­‐fifths	  of	  that	  in	  the	  rich	  world	  Western	  Europe	  (about	  

$20,000).	  Thus	  we	  are	  looking	  for	  a	  factor,	  or	  set	  of	  factors,	  that	  when	  imposed	  on	   a	  

rich	   country	   can	   cause	   income	   to	   fall	   by	   a	   factor	   of	   2/5	   (or	   drop	   60%);	   or	  

equivalently,	   factors	   which	   when	   removed	   from	   a	   poor	   economy	   could	   cause	  

incomes	  to	  rise	  by	  a	  factor	  of	  5/2	  (or	  increase	  by	  150%).	  Or,	  perhaps	  more	  cleanly,	  

in	  log	  terms	  we	  seek	  to	  explain	  a	  change	  in	  relative	  income	  of	  just	  under	  1.000	  log	  

points.	  



2.	  Argentine	  Trade	  in	  the	  20th	  Century	  

For	  most	  of	  the	  twentieth	  century,	  Argentina’s	  trade	  volumes	  (as	  a	  fraction	  of	  GDP)	  

have	  been	  very	  low,	  whether	  relative	  to	  their	  initial	  levels	  in	  the	  1900–14	  period,	  or	  

relative	   to	   the	   trade	   levels	   one	   might	   predict	   in	   a	   similar	   economy	   of	   comparable	  

size	  and	  geographic	  remoteness.	  

	         Figure	   2	   traces	   the	   evolution	   of	   the	   trade	   share	   over	   time	   in	   Argentina,	  

measured	  by	  exports	  plus	  imports	  divided	  by	  GDP.	  From	  a	  high	  of	  80%	  or	  more	  on	  


	                                                                  5	                                                                    	  
the	  eve	  of	  World	  War	  One,	  this	  ratio	  fell	  to	  levels	  below	  20%	  in	  the	  1920s	  and	  1930s	  

and	   has	   remained	   there	   ever	   since	   (Berlinski	   2003).	   Even	   with	   the	   push	   towards	  

liberalization	   in	   the	   1990s	   this	   ratio	   barely	   ticked	   up	   during	   that	   decade.	   This	  

pattern	   constitutes	   the	   main	   empirical	   fact	   about	   trade	   in	   Argentina	   in	   the	   20th	  

century.	  

	         One	  question	  is	  how	  much	  of	  this	  trend	  is	  explicable	  in	  terms	  of	  (potentially	  

changeable)	   trade	   policy	   frictions?	   And	   importantly,	   in	   addition,	   how	   much	   of	   those	  

frictions	   reflected	   policies	   in	   Argentina	   as	   compared	   to	   the	   Rest	   of	   the	   World?	   From	  

the	   1930s	   to	   the	   1960s,	   trade	   barriers	   were	   high	   almost	   everywhere	   in	   the	   global	  

economy.	  As	  Díaz	  Alejandro	  and	  others	  have	  noted,	  Argetina’s	  policy	  decisions	  were	  

therefore	  not	  that	  unusual,	  and,	  as	  in	  many	  other	  countries,	  the	  shift	  towards	  impost	  

substitution	   industrialization	   (ISI),	   were	   a	   reflection	   of	   path	   dependence	   and	  

political	  economy	  dynamics:	  when	  the	  world’s	  rich,	  core	  economies	  chose	  autarky	  in	  

the	   1920s	   and	   especially	   1930s—forces	   then	   amplified	   by	   wartime	   frictions—the	  

countries	   of	   the	   periphery	   had	   to	   seek	   another	   economic	   strategy	   in	   the	   short	   term,	  

and	   having	   been	   exposed	   to	   the	   downside	   risks	   of	   openness	   and	   specialization	   in	  

the	  primary-­‐product	  “lottery,”	  they	  were	  understandably	  wary	  of	  again	  placing	  large	  

bets	  predicated	  on	  the	  assumption	  of	  a	  stable,	  globalized,	  liberal	  world	  order	  with	  

open	  markets	  for	  trade.	  Argentina	  fits	  this	  pattern.	  

           However,	  while	  Argentina’s	  stance	  was	  not	  that	  peculiar	  by	  the	  standard	  of	  

developing	  countries,	  where	  inward	  looking	  development	  strategies	  were	  the	  norm,	  

it	   was	   unusual	   by	   the	   standard	   of	   the	   rich	   countries,	   the	   club	   to	   which	   ostensibly	  

Argentina	   wished	   to	   belong,	   or	   rather	   remain.	   After	   1945,	   the	   gradual	   progress	   of	  


	                                                                   6	                                                                     	  
GATT	  (and	  in	  Europe	  of	  the	  EU	  project	  after	  1957),	  carried	  trade	  integration	  rapidly	  

forward.	   But	   until	   the	   Uruguay	   Round	   (circa	   1990)	   of	   negotiations,	   Argentina,	   like	  

most	   other	   developing	   countries,	   stood	   apart	   from	   this	   process,	   and	   policies	  

remained	  strongly	  protectionist.	  

	         Data	  on	  the	  distortionary	  impact	  of	  quotas	  is	  scant,	  but	  these	  barriers	  were	  

often	  very	  significant	  in	  the	  Argentine	  context,	  whether	  imposed	  directly	  or	  by	  the	  

quota	  rationing	  of	  foreign	  exchange	  (as	  in	  the	  1940s	  and	  early	  1950s).	  Trade	  taxes	  

are	   easier	   to	   document,	   and	   Figure	   3	   shows	   what	   we	   know	   about	   average	   import	  

and	  export	  taxes	  in	  the	  long	  run	  (Berlinski	  2003).	  Import	  taxes	  were	  not	  trivial	  prior	  

to	  World	  War	  One	  as	  they	  were	  a	  key	  revenue	  source,	  but	  export	  taxes	  were	  zero.	  

Subsequently,	   in	   the	   1920s	   and	   1930s,	   average	   trade	   taxes	   began	   to	   climb.	   They	  

abated	   during	   World	   War	   2	   and	   the	   early	   postwar	   exchange	   control	   epoch.	   Then	  

import	  and	  export	  taxes	  climbed	  rapidly	  after	  1960,	  to	  about	  a	  15%	  level	  for	  each,	  

or	  a	  30%	  distortion	  total.	  Judging	  from	  the	  timing	  of	  two	  asymmetrical	  spikes	  in	  the	  

1980s,	   export	   taxes	   tended	   to	   evaporate	   in	   hyperinflation	   episodes,	   while	   import	  

taxes	   tended	   to	   rise	   in	   an	   offsetting	   fashion,	   but	   these	   figures	   may	   also	   reflect	  

accounting	   problems.	   In	   the	   liberalization	   period	   of	   the	   1990s	   export	   taxes	   were	  

lifted,	   but	   import	   taxes	   remained	   high,	   although	   trade	   policy	   become	   somewhat	  

more	  liberal	  on	  other	  dimensions	  (e.g.,	  quota	  removals	  for	  GATT/WTO	  compliance	  

and	  an	  attempt	  to	  start	  a	  regional	  trade	  area,	  MERCOSUR).	  

	         What	  would	  be	  the	  likely	  impact	  of	  these	  trade	  barriers	  on	  income	  levels?	  We	  

cannot	  hazard	  a	  precise	  answer	  but	  we	  can	  use	  some	  simple	  impacts	  based	  on	  either	  

calibrated	   models	   or	   econometric	   estimates.	   In	   this	   setting	   I	   will	   neglect	   the	  


	                                                                 7	                                                                  	  
standard	   dead-­‐weight	   loss	   considerations	   since	   utility	   losses	   arising	   from	   static	  

consumption	   and	   production	   distortions	   are	   typically	   an	   order	   of	   magnitude	   too	  

small	  to	  be	  useful	  in	  discussions	  of	  the	  Great	  Divergence	  (usually	  1%–2%	  at	  most).	  I	  

narrow	   the	   focus	   further	   by	   examining	   the	   impact	   of	   trade	   frictions	   on	   two	   of	   the	  

most	   widely	   discussed	   channels	   through	   which	   protectionist	   policies	   might	   lower	  

incomes.	  	  

	         First,	   higher	   trade	   costs	   raise	   the	   costs	   of	   imported	   capital	   goods	   and	  

intermediate	   inputs.	   These	   costs	   are	   nontrivial,	   and	   they	   matter	   all	   the	   more	   in	  

countries	   that	   are	   both	   very	   open	   and	   have	   comparative	   disadvantage	   in	   these	  

products.	  Argentina	  is	  a	  classic	  example	  of	  such	  a	  country,	  and	  the	  understanding	  of	  

this	   type	   of	   drag	   on	   economic	   performance	   dates	   back	   to	   the	   classic	   analysis	   of	  

postwar	   underperformance	   by	   Díaz	   Alejandro	   (1970),	   who	   noted	   that	   many	   key	  

imported	   capital	   inputs	   (e.g.,	   farm	   or	   industrial	   machinery)	   bore	   domestic	   prices	  

that	  were	  very	  high	  indeed	  compared	  to	  world	  prices.	  

           Let’s	  now	  feed	  some	  numbers	  into	  a	  model,	  backed	  by	  econometric	  support,	  

that	   can	   capture	   this	   effect.	   Suppose,	   as	   noted	   above,	   trade	   costs	   increase	   by	   50%	  

due	  to	  trade	  barriers	  (the	  rough	  magnitude	  of	  the	  trade	  tax	  burden	  since	  1950).	  Also	  

suppose	  also	  that,	  imports	  in	  the	  initially	  open	  economy	  would	  be	  40%	  of	  GDP	  (the	  

figure	  last	  seen	  in	  Argentina	  circa	  1910,	  the	  last	  date	  when	  both	  it	  and	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  

world	  were	  close	  to	  fully	  open).	  Let	  us	  assume	  that	  intermediate	  inputs	  account	  for	  

50%	  of	  imports,	  and	  capital	  goods	  account	  for	  25%	  the	  roughly	  stable	  figures	  seen	  

in	  decades	  of	  historical	  data	  in	  Argentina	  (Berlinski	  2003).	  




	                                                                   8	                                                                      	  
           Using	   the	   Estevadeordal	   and	   Taylor	   (2013)	   standard	   open-­‐economy	  

neoclassical	   model,	   we	   could	   conclude	   that	   the	   trade	   taxes	   would	   lower	   GDP	   by	  

roughly	   0.200	   log	   points	   or	   20%	   in	   the	   long	   run	   steady	   state,	   given	   the	   import	  

shares	   as	   above.	   Two	   thirds	   of	   this	   would	   arise	   due	   to	   higher	   costs	   of	   intermediates	  

(an	   effect	   analogous	   to	   a	   negative	   productivity	   shock)	   and	   one	   third	   would	   arise	  

from	  the	   higher	   cost	   of	   capital	   goods	  (an	  effect	  analogous	  	  to	  a	  negative	  savings	  rate	  

shock).	   These	   are	   quantitatively	   large	   effects	   when	   the	   full	   gap	   to	   be	   explained	   is	  

1.000	  log	  points,	  since	  they	  explain	  one	  fifth	  of	  Argentina’s	  decline.	  

	         A	   further	   place	   to	   look	   for	   an	   impact	   of	   trade	   frictions	   on	   output	   is	   in	   the	  

process	   of	   technology	   transfer.	   Here	   there	   are	   plenty	   of	   candidate	   theoretical	  

models,	  but	  no	  consensus	  on	  the	  structure	  and	  calibration	  that	  best	  fits	  the	  data,	  nor	  

is	  there	  solid	  statistical	  evidence	  for	  this	  channel.	  Accordingly	  let	  us	  rely	  on	  recent	  

empirical	   estimates	   and,	   since	   the	   effects	   will	   turn	   out	   to	   be	   small	   anyway,	   allow	  

ourselves	   to	   compute	   an	   upper	   bound	   for	   this	   effect.	   In	   recent	   work	   Acharya	   and	  

Keller	  (2008)	  examine	  the	  impact	  of	  expanded	  imports	  from	  the	  “technology	  leader”	  

country	   on	   the	   TFP	   levels	   in	   follower	   countries,	   controlling	   for	   import	   levels	   and	  

R&D	   intensity	   in	   the	   leader,	   and	   interactions	   between	   the	   two.	   For	   their	   analysis,	  

based	  on	  mostly	  developed	  countries,	  and	  the	  U.S.	  is	  the	  leader.	  

           Here,	   we	   consider	   how	   the	   same	   analysis	   might	   apply	   to	   Argentina	   as	   a	  

follower,	  where	  the	  OECD	  might	  serve	  as	  the	  R&D	  source.	  One	  of	  the	  upper	  bound	  

results	   in	   Acharya	   and	   Keller	   (2008,	   Table	   8)	   suggests	   that	   a	   “high”	   estimate	   (the	  

95th	  percentile)	  for	  the	  elasticity	  of	  local	  TFP	  with	  respect	  to	  import	  volume	  is	  about	  

0.06	  for	  the	  case	  of	  R&D	  intensive	  sectors.	  (For	  many	  sectors	  the	  effect	  is	  small	  or	  


	                                                                       9	                                                                          	  
negative,	   reflecting	   the	   possibility	   of	   countervailing	   forces	   where,	   say,	   import	  

competition	  is	  destructive	  of	  an	  industry	  that	  cannot	  catch	  up.)	  

            Applying	   these	   estimates,	   if	   we	   apply	   the	   0.06	   elasticity	   to	   the	   post-­‐1914	  

halving	   of	   Argentina’s	   trade	   volumes,	   then	   this	   implies	   a	   reduction	   of	   TFP	   due	   to	  

weaker	   technology	   transfer	   of	   about	   only	   3%.	   In	   steady	   state,	   given	   endogenous	  

capital	   accumulation,	   the	   impact	   on	   income	   would	   be	   somewhat	   larger	   and	   might	  

account	   for	   an	   overall	   income	   effect	   of	   5%	   or	   just	   0.050	   log	   points.	   So	   technology	  

transfer	   via	   imports	   would	   appear	   to	   be	   a	   very	   small	   part	   of	   the	   overall	   story:	   the	  

statistical	   evidence	   for	   the	   channel	   is	   quite	   weak	   in	   aggregate,	   even	   if	   we	   make	  

several	   calibration	   assumptions	   designed	   to	   make	   its	   impact	   as	   large	   as	   we	   dare.	   To	  

sum	  up,	  in	  contrast	  to	  income	  losses	  due	  to	  inhibited	  technology	  transfer	  (about	  –

5%	  or	  –0.05	  log	  points	  of	  income)	  the	  bulk	  of	  the	  income	  losses	  due	  to	  trade	  policy	  

frictions	   (about	   –20%	   or	   –0.200	   log	   points	   of	   income)	   would	   seem	   to	   derive	   from	  

the	  direct	  effect	  of	  increased	  input	  costs	  for	  capital	  and	  intermediates.	  



3.	  Argentine	  Investment	  in	  the	  20th	  Century	  

A	   second	   area	   we	   might	   examine	   as	   an	   explanation	   for	   Argentina’s	   low	   income	   is	  

capital	   scarcity.	   By	   this	   we	   mean,	   in	   a	   standard	   neoclassical	   growth	   model,	   a	  

suboptimal	   capital/labor	   ratio,	   denoted	   k=K/L.	   In	   the	   simplest	   model,	   output	   per	  

worker	   y=Y/L	   is	   expressed	   as	   y	   =	   A	   ka,	   where	   A	   is	   productivity	   (total	   factor	  

productivity	   or	   TFP)	   and	   a	   capital	   share	   of	   a=1/3	   is	   the	   typical	   exponent	   used	   in	  

modern	  empirical	  work	  (Gollin	  2002).	  




	                                                                    10	                                                                        	  
            The	   steady	   state	   of	   the	   model,	   at	   a	   per	   worker	   capital	   level	   k*	   and	   output	  

level	   y*,	   can	   be	   solved	   by	   assumptions	   on	   capital	   accumulation,	   typically	   by	   either	  

using	   a	   Solow	   or	   Ramsey	   growth	   model.	   In	   either	   of	   these	   models	   k*	   and	   y*	   rise	  

endogenously	  in	  response	  to	  an	  increase	  in	  TFP,	  or	  A.	  Thus,	  in	   a	  “levels	  accounting”	  

exercise,	   a	   country’s	   income	   level	   (relative	   to	   some	   reference	   country,	   0)	   can	   be	  

broken	   down	   into	   (1)	   a	   shortfall	   in	   TFP,	   that	   is	   A	   below	   A0;	   and	   (2)	   a	   friction	  

preventing	   k	   from	   reaching	   it	   hypothetical	   optimal	   level	   k*,	   due	   to	   investment	   taxes	  

or	   other	   distortions	   that	   create	   a	   wedge	   and	   keep	   the	   marginal	   product	   of	   capital	  

MPK	   above	   its	   optimal	   level	   MPK*.	   Since	   the	   production	   function	   is	   Cobb-­‐Douglas,	  

MPK=a	   APK	   	   is	   proportional	   to	   APK=Y/K;	   hence	   these	   deviations	   can	   be	   written,	  

following	  Hall	  and	  Jones	  (1999)	  as:	  

	          y/y0	  =	  [A/A0]	  .	  (MPK0/MPK)[a/(1-­‐a)]	  

where,	   by	   proportionality,	   K/Y	   is	   replaced	   with	   a/MPK,	   additional	   human	   capital	  

terms	   are	   omitted	   for	   simplicity,	   and	   where	   the	   exponent	   in	   this	   equation	   is	   ½,	  

given	  that	  a=1/3.	  

	          As	  regards	  the	  Great	  Divergence	  in	  incomes	  between	  rich	  and	  poor	  countries,	  

the	   consensus	   since	   Hall	   and	   Jones,	   has	   been	   that	   the	   A/A0	   term	   above	   explains	  

much	   more	   of	   the	   divergence	   than	   the	   MPK/MPK0	   term	   (e.g.,	   see	   Easterly	   and	  

Levine	   2001;	   Gourinchas	   and	   Jeanne	   2006;	   Caselli	   and	   Feyrer	   2007,	   inter	   alia).	  

Indeed,	   for	   Argentina,	   Hall	   and	   Jones	   used	   1988	   data	   to	   compute	   that	   the	   MPK	   term	  

above	   explained	   about	   5%	   of	   the	   income	   difference	   between	   Argentina	  the	   United	  

States.	  Does	  this	  mean	  that	  the	  MPK	  explanation	  is	  dead?	  




	                                                                    11	                                                                        	  
	         Not	   quite.	   Ideas	   from	   recent	   empirical	   research	   can	   provide	   us	   with	   an	  

improved	   understanding	   of	   the	   evolution	   of	   the	   Argentine	   capital	   stock.	   Properly	  

computed,	   MPK	   distortions	   make	   a	   significant	   contribution	   to	   the	   income	   gap.	   For	  

example,	  Figure	  4	  plots	  the	  implied	  MPK	  for	  the	  United	  States	  and	  Argentina	  using	  

the	  Hall-­‐Jones	  method	  based	  on	  installed	  capital	  derived	  from	  a	  perpetual	  inventory	  

method	   (PIM).	   Their	   estimates	   stopped	   in	   1988,	   since	   that	   was	   the	   last	   year	   of	   PWT	  

5.6,	  their	  data	  source.	  But	  we	  now	  have	  PWT	  6.2,	  with	  coverage	  until	  2004,	  and	  we	  

can	  see	  that	  1988	  was	  quite	  an	  unusual	  year.	  

           Argentina	  had	  over-­‐borrowed	  and	  over-­‐invested	  prior	  to	  the	  debt	  crisis,	  and	  

then	  in	  1988–90	  output	  was	  depressed	  as	  the	  economy	  slumped	  into	  recession	  and	  

hyperinflation,	   with	   installed	   capital	   suffering	   heavy	   underutilization.	   If	   one	   wanted	  

to	  pick	  a	  moment	  to	  make	  Argentina’s	  APK,	  and	  hence	  MPK	  look	  as	  low	  as	  possible,	  

that	   would	   have	   been	   the	   year	   to	   choose,	   suggesting	   a	   small	   MPK	   distortion	   in	   total,	  

and	  none	   at	   all	   after	   a	   price	   adjustment,	   and	   hence	   minor	   capital	   scarcity	   problems.	  

Mismeasurement	  is	  therefore	  a	  potentially	  serious	  issue	  for	  this	  calculation.	  

           And	   as	   we	   can	   see,	   for	   most	   of	   the	   last	   three	   decades	   the	   story	   has	   been	   very	  

different.	  Using	  data	  back	  to	  1960	  and	  the	  Hall-­‐Jones	  PIM	  standardized	  depreciation	  

rate	  of	  6%,	  the	  Argentine	  MPK	  level	  appears	  to	  be	  on	  average	  50%	  higher	  than	  the	  

U.S.	   level,	   a	   considerable	   wedge.	   I	   would	   argue	   that	   the	   deviations	   from	   this	   pattern	  

in	   the	   1980s	   and	   in	   2000–03	   are	   easily	   understood	   and	   should	   be	   discounted:	   these	  

were	  periods	  of	  severe	  economic	  downturn	  when	  measured	  installed	  capital	  is	  not	  

the	  same	  as	  capital	  in	  use.	  Were	  it	  possible	  to	  further	  refine	  Argentina’s	  measured	  

capital	   input	   time	   series	   every	   year	   for	   capacity	   utilization	   levels—something	   no	  


	                                                                        12	                                                                             	  
statistician	   has	   yet	   done—we	   would	   probably	   discover	   similar	   gaps	   even	   in	   the	  

recession	  periods.	  

           Are	   these	   wedges	   entirely	   due	   to	   a	   factor	   we	   have	   already	   considered,	   the	  

relative	   price	   of	   capital?	   If	   so,	   we	   must	   not	   to	   double	   count,	   which	   necessitates	  

evaluating	   MPK	   at	   local	   rather	   than	   world	   prices.	   The	   chart	   shows	   that	   this	   does	  

make	  a	  small	  difference.	  Evaluated	  at	  local	  prices	  the	  gap	  is	  clearly	  not	  so	  large,	  but	  

it	   is	   still	   significant,	   and	   it	   matches	   up	   with	   other	   recent	   capital	   stock	   estimates	  

using	  different	  methodologies.	  For	  example,	  Coremberg	  (2003)	  pegs	  the	  Argentine	  

and	   U.S.	   capital	   output	   ratios	   in	   1998	   at	   2.85	   versus	   1.95	   respectively,	   translating	  

into	  APK	  levels	  of	  0.351	  versus	  0.513,	  and	  in	  turn	  (assuming	  a=1/3)	  MPK	  levels	  of	  

0.117	  and	  0.171.	  

           These	   independent	   country-­‐specific	   estimates	   very	   closely	   match	   the	   rough	  

estimates	  in	  Figure	  1	  after	  applying	  the	  domestic	  price	  correction	  (where	  the	  1998	  

MPK	  levels	  are	  0.129	  and	  0.180).	  These	  gaps	  have	  factored	  in	  the	  trade	  distortions	  

considered	  above:	  these	  are,	  in	  other	  words,	  evidence	  of	  additional	  capital	  wedges,	  

beyond	   barriers	   to	   trade	   in	   capital	   goods.	   And	   they	   still	   show	   MPK	   50%	   higher	   in	  

Argentina	  than	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  

	         These	   data	   push	   back	   a	   little	   against	   the	   “it’s	   A	   not	   k”	   line	   of	   argument	  

commonly	   applied	   to	   developing	   country	   underperformance.	   Even	   researchers	  

working	   in	   traditions	   traditionally	   sympathetic	   to	   TFP-­‐based	   explanations	   have	   had	  

to	   concede	   that	   the	   large	   MPK	   gaps	   in	   the	   1990s	   are	   clear	   evidence	   of	   “capital	  

shallowing”	   in	   Argentina.	   That	   is,	   even	   in	   the	   most	   dramatic	   period	   of	   economic	  

success	   in	   recent	   years,	   there	   was	   a	   pronounced	   failure	   of	   capital	   accumulation	   to	  


	                                                                  13	                                                                       	  
keep	  pace	  with	  the	  path	  one	  might	  expect	  during	  a	  productivity	  boom	  (Kydland	  and	  

Zarazaga	  2002).	  These	  findings	  suggest	  that	  Argentina	  does	  have	  some	  difficulty	  in	  

mobilizing	  adequate	  capital	  accumulation,	  even	  when	  profitable	  conditions	  appear.	  

Perhaps	   from	   the	   1960s	   to	   the	   1980s	   slow	   investment	   was	   the	   counterpart	   of	  

decelerating	   productivity,	   and	   Argentina	   could	   coast	   along	   with	   a	   depreciating	  

capital	   base	   and	   modest	   net	   capital	   stock	   additions;	   but	   then	   in	   the	   1990s	   the	   scope	  

for	  TFP	  led	  growth	  appeared	  and	  capital	  was	  apparently	  not	  adequately	  mobilized.	  

	           The	   income	   implications	   of	   these	   gaps	   are	   nontrivial.	   Suppose	   MPK	   in	  

Argentina	  is,	  on	  average,	  50%	  or	  0.500	  log	  points	  above	  the	  U.S.	  level	  as	  is	  suggested	  

in	  the	  above	  estimates	  from	  the	  1990s,	  from	  either	  the	  PWT	  or	  Coremberg.	  Then	  in	  

the	   above	   expression	   for	   income	   differences,	   applying	   the	   exponent	   of	   ½,	   this	  

capital	   accumulation	   friction	   or	   wedge	   explains	   25%	   or	   0.250	   log	   points	   of	   the	  

overall	   income	   difference	   between	   the	   two	   countries,	   and	   we	   have	   explained	  

another	  one	  quarter	  of	  the	  Argentine	  puzzle.	  

       If	  capital	  is	  low,	  and	  MPK	  is	  high,	  compared	  to	  the	  neoclassical	  benchmark,	  this	  

begs	   the	   question:	   why	   has	   Argentina	   under-­‐invested	   to	   such	   an	   extent	   that	   the	  

marginal	   product	   of	   capital	   has	   found	   itself,	   so	   often,	   stuck	   far	   above	   reference	  

levels?	  What	  is	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  investment	  wedge?	  What	  underlying	  factors	  cause	  

this	   distortion?	   I	   cannot	   quantify	   every	   possible	   channel,	   but	   I	   propose	   several	  

candidate	  explanations	  which	  center	  on	  factors	  that	  either	  raise	  the	  cost	  of	  capital	  

or	  the	  risk	  of	  investment,	  and	  all	  may	  warrant	  further	  scrutiny.	  

       First,	   there	   is	   the	   problem	   of	   risk	   due	   to	   macroeconomic	   rare	   events.	   As	   is	   well	  

known,	   returns	   to	   risky	   investments	   often	   appear	   excessive	   given	   what	   seem	   like	  


	                                                                     14	                                                                       	  
plausible	   models	   of	   risk	   aversion	   (Mehra	   and	   Prescott	   1985).	   However,	   the	  

possibility	   of	   rare	   “crash”	   states	   or	   valuation	   jumps,	   which	   wipe	   out	   significant	  

wealth	   through	   large	   capital	   losses,	   may	   well	   be	   sufficient	   to	   resolve	   this	   puzzle	  

(Rietz	   1988;	   Barro	   2005).	   And	   undoubtedly,	   Argentine	   history	   is	   filled	   with	   many	  

examples	   of	   crashes	   that	   severely	   damaged	   many	   kinds	   of	   investment	   returns.	   High	  

or	   hyperinflation	   events	   eroded	   nominal	   debts	   on	   several	   occasions.	   These	   and	  

other	   major	   economic	   crises	   have	   often	   left	   the	   banking	   sector	   in	   ruins,	   causing	  

credit	  crunches	  and	  broader	  losses	  on	  a	  wide	  range	  of	  financial	  instruments.	  If,	  as	  a	  

result,	   investment	   returns	   are	   more	   crash	   prone	   in	   Argentina	   then	   investors	   may	  

demand	   a	   higher	   return	   as	   compensation	   for	   volatility	   and/or	   skew,	   implying	   a	  

higher	   equilibrium	   MPK	   in	   aggregate.	   These	   risks	   may	   also	   be	   manifest	   in	   a	  

repressed	   financial	   system	   with	   lower	   money	   multipliers	   and	   leverage,	   further	  

tightening	  credit.	  

       Second,	   there	   is	   the	   problem	   of	   default	   risk	   and	   property	   rights.	   In	   addition	   to	  

rare	   events	   driven	   by	   market	   fluctuations,	   possibly	   in	   response	   to	   macroeconomic	  

policies,	   we	   also	   have	   to	   recognize	   that	   explicit	   confiscation	   or	   redistributions	   of	  

wealth,	  or	  other	  failures	  of	  property	  rights,	  have	  often	  figured	  in	  Argentina’s	  history.	  

Beyond	  the	  serial	  pattern	  of	  default	  (Reinhart	  and	  Rogoff	  2004),	  we	  would	  include	  

bank	  suspensions,	  forced	  debt	  conversions,	  pesifications,	  and	  other	  expropriations.	  

Although	  on	  occasion,	  ex	  post,	  these	  events	  were	  discriminatory	  as	  to	  locals	  versus	  

foreigners,	   on	   most	   occasions,	   and	   in	   general	   ex	   ante,	   such	   differential	   treatment	  

may	  not	  have	  been	  expected.	  




	                                                                   15	                                                                     	  
       If	  capital	  price	  distortions	  (e.g.,	  trade	  policy)	  explain	  0.250	  log	  points	  of	  income	  

difference,	  and	  capital	  accumulation	  frictions	  (high	  MPK)	  explain	  another	  0.250	  log	  

points,	  we	  have	  explained	  one	  half	  of	  the	  1.000	  log	  point	  income	  difference.	  This	  is	  

not	   trivial.	   A	   50%	   increase	   in	   income	   per	   person	   would	   lift	   Argentina	   from	   the	  

$8,000	   level	   to	   the	   $13,000	   level	   (roughly	   on	   a	   par	   with	   Greece,	   Portugal,	   and	  

approaching	   South	   Korea).	   And	   even	   in	   1913,	   at	   its	   relative	   peak,	   Argentina’s	  

income	  was	  at	  most	  70%–80%	  of	  U.S.	  or	  U.K.	  levels,	  so	  were	  even	  half	  of	  today’s	  gap	  

closed	  like	  this	  we	  would	  probably	  not	  speak	  so	  much	  of	  an	  Argentine	  puzzle.	  

            Still,	  can	  we	  explain	  any	  more	  of	  the	  OECD-­‐Argentina	  gap?	  There	  is	  reason	  to	  

think	   that	   we	   can,	   for	   various	   reasons,	   given	   several	   empirically	   important	   factors	  

we	  have	  not	  yet	  accounted	  for.	  Three	  such	  factors	  could	  be	  very	  important.	  

       First,	   there	   is	   the	   issue	   of	   investment	   quality.	   All	   calculations	   of	   MPK	   rely	   on	  

calculations	  of	  capital	  stocks	  based	  on	  PIM	  or	  HV	  methods	  and	  many	  standardized	  

assumptions.	   But	   capital	   “quality”	   may	   be	   generally	   lower	   in	   poorer	   countries.	  

Public	   investments	   are	   often	   more	   dilapidated	   in	   poor	   countries	   with	   low	   quality	   of	  

governance,	   and	   where	   large	   fractions	   of	   public	   investment	   spending	   are	   lost	   to	  

bribery	   and	   corruption	   (Tanzi	   and	   Davoodi	   1997).	   Firm	   data	   from	   some	   countries	  

suggests	   that	   the	   same	   may	   be	   true	   of	   private	   sector	   investments	   (Bu	   2006),	  

perhaps	   due	   to	   private	   sector	   corruption;	   or	   due	   to	   high	   costs	   or	   barriers	   to	  

technical	   maintenance;	   or	   due	   to	   capital	   complementarities	   with	   adversely	  

maintained	   public	   capital,	   leading	   to	   premature	   discard	   or	   undermaintenance.	  

Capital	   is	   thus	   less	   productive	   and	   of	   lower	   capacity	   than	   its	   vintage	   alone	   would	  

suggest	   and	   some	   correction	   for	   higher	   rates	   of	   depreciation	   is	   warranted.	   For	  


	                                                                   16	                                                                     	  
example,	  the	  Hall	  Jones	  method	  assumes	  a	  6%	  depreciation	  rate	  on	  all	  capital.	  But	  

these	  rates	  may	  be	  far	  too	  low	  for	  uniform	  application	  to	  rich	  and	  poor	  countries.	  Bu	  

(2006)	   estimates	   “low”	   median	   firm	   depreciation	   rates	   for	   all	   fixed	   assets	   as	   16%	  

(Philippines)	   or	   12%	   (South	   Korea)	   in	   the	   1990s.	   In	   Indonesia	   and	   some	   African	  

countries	   the	   reported	   median	   depreciation	   rates	   are	   higher	   still,	   between	   25%	   and	  

60%.	  This	  poses	  a	  profound	  problem	  for	  capital	  stock	  and	  MPK	  estimates,	  because	  

the	   results	   are	   highly	   sensitive	   to	   the	   depreciation	   parameter:	   increase	   this	  

parameter	   by	   1%	   and	   the	   implied	   PIM	   measure	   of	   the	   capital	   stock	   falls	   by	   1%,	   and	  

implied	  MPK	  rises	  by	  0.67%	  (if	  a=1/3).	  If	  capital	  quality	  is	  lower	  and	  depreciation	  

higher	  than	  typically	  assumed,	  Argentina	  could	  be	  even	  more	  capital	  scarce	  than	  has	  

been	  commonly	  thought.	  

       Second,	   there	   is	   the	   problem	   of	   investment	   misallocation.	   The	   MPK	   calculations	  

also	  rely	  on	  the	  assumption	  that	  capital	  is	  efficiently	  allocated	  within	  the	  economy,	  

or	   that	   MPK	   is	   equalized	   across	   sectors.	   But	   a	   contrary	   view	   with	   a	   log	   tradition	  

maintains	   that	   this	   is	   unlikely	   to	   be	   the	   case	   in	   developing	   countries.	   Instead,	  

investment	   may	   be	   misallocated	   for	   a	   variety	   of	   reasons—such	   as	   corruption	   and	  

inefficiency	   in	   the	   private	   financial	   sector	   or	   the	   role	   of	   the	   state	   in	   allocating	  

finance.	   Work	   by	   Hsieh	   and	   Klenow	   (2009)	   on	   China	   and	   India	   suggests	   that,	  

compared	  to	  the	  U.S.,	  an	  efficient	  re-­‐allocation	  of	  capital	  could	  be	  the	  equivalent	  of	  a	  

50%	   or	   larger	   increase	   in	   TFP.	   It	   is	   quite	   plausible	   that	   similar	   misallocation	  

problems,	  although	  perhaps	  not	  as	  grave,	  could	  affect	  Argentina	  and	  would	  go	  along	  

way	   to	   explaining	   any	   remaining	   income	   gaps,	   over	   and	   above	   what	   we	   have	  




	                                                                   17	                                                                       	  
measured	   so	   far.	   This	   is	   likely	   to	   be	   a	   productive	   area	   for	   future	   research,	   using	  

industrial	  census	  data	  and	  other	  measurements.	  

       Third,	  and	  finally,	  there	  is	  the	  role	  of	  investment	  variety.	  Input	  price	  distortions	  

were	  probably	  the	  main	  trade-­‐related	  drag	  on	  Argentina’s	  growth	  in	  the	  twentieth	  

century.	   After	   1914,	   and	   particularly	   from	   the	   1930s	   to	   the	   1950s,	   this	   scenario	  

could	   be	   ascribed	   in	   some	   large	   part	   to	   highly	   unfavorable	   global	   conditions	   for	  

open	   trade;	   but	   once	   global	   trade	   started	   to	   boom	   thereafter,	   self-­‐inflicted	   trade	  

policy	   distortions	   would	   remain	   as	   the	   principal	   cause	   of	   the	   problem.	   The	   estimate	  

presented	  above	  (0.200	  log	  income	  points)	  may	  also	  be	  an	  understatement	  since	  it	  

focuses	   only	   on	   the	   so-­‐called	   “intensive	   margin”—the	   quantity	   of	   a	   given	   set	   of	  

goods	  imported.	  But	  recent	  empirical	  research	  in	  the	  trade	  literature	  suggests	  that	  

comparable	   economic	   costs	   may	   be	   inflicted	   by	   input	   tariffs	   on	   the	   “extensive	  

margin”—by	  limiting	  the	  variety	  of	  inputs	  that	  are	  imported.	  If	  these	  results	  carry	  

over	   to	   intermediate	   and	   capital	   inputs,	   as	   they	   well	   might,	   then	   we	   would	   have	  

identified	   yet	   another	   trade	   related	   barrier	   to	   investment.	   Quantifying	   that	   impact	  

for	  a	  broad	  range	  of	  countries,	  as	  well	  as	  for	  Argentina	  itself,	  remains	  an	  important	  

goal	  of	  future	  research.	  

       These	   three	   additional	   factors—investment	   quality,	   allocation,	   and	   variety—

represent	  additional	  barriers	  to	  efficient	  investment	  which	  have	  also	  probably	  acted	  

as	   a	   drag	   on	   Argentine	   economic	   performance,	   even	   if	   the	   magnitudes	   in	   question	  

remain	  open	  frontiers	  for	  research.	  




	                                                                  18	                                                                     	  
5.	  Concluding	  Thoughts:	  Deep	  Determinants	  
The	   discussion	   so	   far	   of	   likely	   “microexplanations”	   suggests	   that	   we	   know,	   within	  

some	   approximate	   bounds,	   how	   various	   economic	   policies	   and	   institutional	  

deficiencies	   in	   the	   Argentine	   economic	   environment	   might	   have	   contributed	   to	  

economic	   underperformance.	   And	   indeed	   these	   contributions	   appear	   to	   be	  

empirically	   large,	   sufficient	   to	   explain	   much	   of	   the	   divergence	   witnessed.	   But	   this	  

only	  pushes	  the	  question	  deeper:	  why	  have	  such	  choices	  been	  made	  and	  what	  can	  

account	  for	  them?	  

           For	   all	   countries,	   not	   just	   Argentina,	   economists	   and	   historians	   have	  

grappled	  with	  this	  question	  in	  a	  bid	  to	  explain	  the	  deep	  and	  exogenous	  origins	  of	  the	  

Great	  Divergence.	  The	  problem,	  as	  I	  argue	  in	  this	  section	  of	  the	  paper,	  is	  that	  in	  the	  

particular	  case	  of	  Argentina	  the	  explanations	  that	  have	  been	  proposed—and	  which	  

may	  seem	  to	  work	  quite	  convincingly	  in	  many	  other	  countries—do	  not	  appear	  half	  

as	  persuasive	  when	  applied	  to	  Argentine	  economic	  history.	  



5.1	  Geography	  and	  Empire	  

To	   set	   the	   stage	   let	   us	   consider	   a	   now	   conventional	   casual	   ordering	   in	   the	   levels	  

accounting	   literature.	   As	   above	   we	   claim	   that	   policies	   causally	   affect	   outcomes,	  

which	   we	   might	   write	   as	   “policies	   !	   income	   per	   person”	   in	   simple	   notation.	   A	  

problem	   that	   concerns	   some	   scholars	   is	   the	   potential	   for	   reverse	   causality	   from	  

incomes	   to	   policies,	   suggesting	   we	   look	   for	   deeper	   determinants	   that	   explain	  

policies.	  For	  example:	  

                                                                      	  


	                                                                 19	                                                                     	  
                             X	  !	  institutions	  !	  policies	  !	  income	  per	  person	  

	  

If	   X	   is	   an	   exogenous	   deep	   determinant,	   it	   may	   then	   be	   brandished	   as	   an	  

instrumental	   variable	   to	   avert	   endogeneity	   problems	   when	   regressing	   incomes	   on	  

either	   policies	   or	   institutions	   (e.g,	   see	   Acemoglu,	   Johnson	   and	   Robinson	   2001;	  

Rodrik,	  Subramanian,	  and	  Trebbi	  2004).	  

	         Candidates	   for	   X	   are	   numerous	   in	   the	   literature.	   Geographic	   determinists	  

have	   focused	   on	   latitude,	   or	   climate/crops,	   or	   disease	   endowments.	   Disease	   may	  

have	  direct	  effects	  on	  labor	  productivity	  (Gallup,	  Sachs,	  and	  Mellinger	  1999).	  Crops	  

may	  affect	  production	  organization	  and	  subsequent	  institutions,	  such	  as	  slavery,	  and	  

hence	  the	  path	  to	  democracy	  and	  capitalism	  (Engerman	  and	  Sokoloff	  1997;	  Easterly	  

and	   Levine	   2003).	   Alternatively,	   the	   impact	   of	   disease	   and	   climate	   may	   have	   been	  

more	   indirect,	   with	   European	   colonists	   less	   (more)	   likely	   to	   settle	   in	   the	   tropical	  

(temperate)	   regions,	   and	   more	   (less)	   likely	   to	   construct	   “extractive”	   institutions	  

there	  (Acemoglu,	  Johnson	  and	  Robinson	  2001).	  

           In	   those	   accounts	   where	   historical	   institutional	   choices	   matter	   (Engerman	  

and	  Sokoloff	  1997;	  Acemoglu,	  Johnson	  and	  Robinson	  2001),	  the	  key	  to	  a	  present	  day	  

impact	   is	   via	   a	   political	   economy	   persistence	   mechanism,	   whereby	   even	   after	  

independence	   a	   high	   level	   of	   inequality	   preserves	   colonial	   extractive	   institutions,	  

favoring	   elites,	   and	   leading	   to	   high	   inequality	   in	   incomes	   and	   education,	   and	  

persistently	  low	  levels	  of	  economic	  development.	  

	         It	  now	  starts	  to	  become	  apparent	  why	  some	  of	  these	  theories	  may	  be	  poorly	  

equipped	   to	   explain	   the	   case	   of	   Argentina.	   Argentina	   is	   essentially	   in	   a	   temperate	  


	                                                               20	                                                                 	  
zone,	   not	   a	   tropical	   zone,	   and	   that	   is	   especially	   true	   of	   the	   economic	   heart	   of	   the	  

country—the	   pampas	   and	   littoral	   regions.	   Those	   regions	   are	   also	   populated	   by	   a	  

stock	  of	  people	  of	  European	  descent,	  and	  they	  are	  physically	  and	  culturally	  separate	  

from	   the	   country’s	   colonial	   centers	   in	   the	   altiplano.	   Slavery	   existed,	   but	   was	   brief	  

and	   localized.	   Most	   importantly,	   the	   country	   did	   not	   endure	   persistent	  

underdevelopment:	   whatever	   its	   physical	   and	   political	   legacy	   at	   independence,	   by	  

1900	   this	   was	   a	   rich	   country,	   a	   functioning	   democracy	   with	   expanding	   suffrage,	   and	  

most	  importantly	  an	  economy	  equipped	  with	  a	  decent	  schooling	  system	  and,	  for	  its	  

time,	   creditable	   levels	   of	   human	   capital	   (see	   the	   chapters	   by	   Llach	   and	   Campante	  

and	  Glaeser	  for	  more	  discussion	  on	  the	  role	  of	  education	  and	  human	  capital).	  

            Argentina	  resembled	  Canada	  more	  than	  Cameroon	  in	  1900.	  The	  problem	  to	  

be	  explained	  is	  not	  that	  the	  country	  never	  developed—but	  that	  it	  had	  the	  potential	  

for	   success,	   at	   one	   time	   it	   lived	   up	   to	   it,	   and	   then	   found	   ways	   to	   fall	   back	   into	  

underdevelopment.	   It	   is,	   by	   construction,	   very	   difficult	   for	   geographic	   and	   historical	  

“deep	  determinants”	  to	  explain	  this	  kind	  of	  reversal	  when	  they	  rely	  on	  persistence	  

of	   institutions,	   inequality,	   and	   economic	   backwardness	   over	   time.	   And,	   by	   way	   of	  

more	   direct	   refutation,	   a	   micro-­‐level	   study	   of	   the	   proposed	   inequality-­‐based	  

transmission	   mechanism	   raises	   further	   doubts:	   recent	   research	   has	   shown	   that	  

inequality	  was	  not	  purely	  a	  legacy	  of	  the	  colonial	  period	  (Arroyo	  Abad	  2008):	  in	  fact	  

from	  1820	  to	  1914,	  many	  countries	  saw	  inequality	  rise	  and	  fall	  more	  due	  to	  external	  

shocks	  (terms	  of	  trade,	  migration),	  and	  the	  inequality	  at	  independence	  thus	  turned	  

out	  to	  be	  a	  poor	  predictor	  of	  their	  inequality	  in	  1914.	  




	                                                                       21	                                                                           	  
	         One	  way	  out	  of	  this	  conundrum	  is	  to	  keep	  the	  focus	  on	  exogenous	  factors,	  but	  

to	  look	  either	  at	  alternative	  deep	  determinants	  (e.g.,	  law)	  or	  else	  at	  the	  interaction	  of	  

historical	   initial	   conditions	   with	   the	   powerful	   exogenous	   shocks	   coming	   from	   the	  

rest	  of	  the	  global	  economy	  at	  key	  moments.	  I	  end	  with	  some	  speculations	  on	  these	  

two	  themes.	  



5.2	  Legal	  Origins	  

Influential	   work	   by	   Glaeser	   and	   Shleifer	   (2002)	   argues	   that	   an	   alternative	   and	  

plausible	   “deep	   determinant”	   of	   economic	   success	   is	   “legal	   origin”—whether	   a	  

country	   has	   a	   common	   law	   or	   civil	   code	   legal	   system.	   Empirically,	   legal	   origin	   is	  

correlated	   with	   the	   colonizing	   power,	   and	   therefore	   forms	   part	   of	   a	   broader	  

argument	   that	   among	   all	   empires	   the	   British	   did	   more	   good	   than	   others	   by	  

transmitting	   better	   institutions	   to	   the	   lands	   they	   conquered	   (Ferguson	   2003).	  

Common	   law	   obtains	   in	   the	   Anglosphere	   of	   rich	   settler	   countries	   like	   the	   U.S.,	  

Canada,	  Australia,	  and	  New	  Zealand.	  The	  civil	  code	  prevails	  in	  continental	  European	  

countries	   and	   their	   typically	   much	   poorer	   former	   colonies.	   In	   other	   former	   British	  

colonies,	   say,	   the	   poorer	   regions	   of	   Africa	   and	   Asia,	   post-­‐independence	   legal	  

structures	   reflect	   a	   mixed	   system	   with	   common	   law	   elements	   and	   some	   civil	   code	  

structures.	  

	         Once	   again,	   for	   those	   seeking	   deep	   determinants,	   Argentina	   offers	   an	  

interesting,	   unique,	   and	   somewhat	   perverse	   case	   that	   is	   not	   easily	   classified.	   It	   is	  

commonly	   noted	   that	   either	   system,	   common	   or	   civil,	   has	   a	   tendency	   to	   become	  

somewhat	   mixed	   over	   time,	   as	   jurisprudence	   asserts	   its	   power	   in	   civil	   law,	   and	   as	  


	                                                               22	                                                                   	  
legislatures	   construct	   codes	   in	   common	   law	   systems.	   But	   Argentina	   was	   a	   very	  

unusual	  case	  in	  that	  it	  was	  a	  mixed	  system	  from	  the	  start.	  

           The	  early	  Argentine	  legal	  system	  was	  an	  outcome	  of	  a	  long	  political	  struggle	  

from	  the	  period	  of	  independence	  (the	  failed	  Assembly	  of	  1813	  which	  tried	  to	  unite	  

the	   provinces	   and	   establish	   government)	   until	   the	   country	   was	   finally	   unified	  

(1859).	  Early	  efforts	  to	  write	  a	  constitution	  failed,	  not	  least	  given	  tension	  between	  

centralists	   in	   Buenos	   Aires	   and	   opposing	   forces	   elsewhere.	   The	   other	   provinces,	  

minus	   Buenos	   Aires	   province,	   promulgated	   the	   first	   Constitution	   in	   1853,	   under	   the	  

intellectual	   influence	   of	   Alberdi,	   with	   clear	   inspiration	   from	   the	   U.S.,	   Swiss,	   and	  

other	   early	   constitutions.	   The	   Argentine	   civil	   code	   only	   came	   later,	   in	   1869,	   after	  

unification,	  and	  was	  written	  by	  Vélez	  Sársfield.	  

	         How	   did	   these	   systems	   co-­‐exist	   in	   practice	   and	   what	   economic	   effects	   did	  

they	   have?	   Did	   one	   or	   other	   form	   take	   the	   upper	   hand	   at	   different	   times?	  

Superficially,	  it	  appears	  that	  the	  common	  law	  features,	  especially	  judicial	  review	  and	  

other	   powers,	   were	   often	   exercised	   in	   the	   19th	   century.	   But	   in	   the	   twentieth	   century	  

the	   pendulum	   has	   swung	   more	   toward	   purely	   civil	   law	   operation,	   under	   both	  

democracy	  and	  dictatorship—to	  such	  an	  extent	  that	  in	  the	  last	  decade	  the	  country	  

has	  often	  called	  on	  foreign	  experts	  to	  assist	  in	  rebuilding	  some	  of	  the	  key	  functions	  

of	   jurisprudence	   that	   have	   long	   lain	   dormant.	   Most	   legal	   origin	   evidence	   is	   cross	  

sectional	   in	   nature,	   but	   here	   is	   an	   odd	   example	   of	   within-­‐country	   time	   series	  

variation.	   The	   coincidence	   of	   economic	   decline	   and	   the	   withering	   of	   Argentina’s	  

constitutional	   and	   common	   law	   traditions	   perhaps	   deserves	   further	   scrutiny	   for	  

those	  interested	  in	  the	  applicability	  of	  the	  legal	  origin	  theory.	  


	                                                                 23	                                                                    	  
5.3	  Potential	  for	  Trade	  

Lastly,	   one	   important	   exogenous	   factor	   that	   is	   likely	   to	   have	   affected	   the	   path	   of	  

institutions	   and	   policies	   in	   Argentina	   is	   the	   global	   economic	   environment,	   that	   is,	  

the	   potential	   for	   international	   trade	   and	   capital	   flows.	   Prior	   to	   1914	   a	   growth	  

strategy	   based	   on	   openness	   to	   capital	   inflows,	   frontier	   expansion,	   and	   the	   strong	  

pursuit	  of	  comparative	  advantage	  based	  on	  primary	  exports	  carried	  the	  country	  to	  

very	  high	  levels	  of	  income	  per	  capita	  income.	  

	         Was	   this	   strategy	   viable	   after	   1914?	   Given	   the	   advent	   of	   the	   worldwide	  

retreat	  to	  autarky	  that	  started	  then	  and	  last	  half	  a	  century,	  no.	  But	  what	  if	  the	  world	  

economy	   had	   remained	   integrated?	   What	   would	   Argentina’s	   counterfactual	  

economic	   history	   have	   looked	   like?	   Could	   it	   have	   maintained	   high	   living	   standard	  

and	   growth	   without	   being	   diverted	   onto	   the	   track	   of	   economic	   isolationism?	   No	  

doubt	  the	  inevitable	  closing	  of	  the	  frontier	  in	  early	  20th	  century	  Argentina,	  implied	  a	  

gradual	  structural	  shift	  from	  agriculture	  to	  manufacturing	  and	  services	  anyway	  (Di	  

Tella	   and	   Zymelman	   1967).	   But	   that	   shift	   would	   not	   have	   quickly	   overwhelmed	  

Argentina’s	   natural	   endowment	   based	   comparative	   advantage.	   Argentina’s	  

structural	   shift	   was	   therefore	   rapidly	   accelerated	   by	   an	   autarkic	   economic	  

environment—one	  that	  was	  at	  first	  imposed	  from	  abroad	  in	  the	  1920s	  and	  1930s,	  

against	   the	   grain	   of	   domestic	   policy;	   but	   which	   was	   then	   reinforced	   by	   autarkic	  

domestic	  policies	  which	  emerged	  in	  the	  1940s	  and	  1950s,	  and	  persisted	  over	  time	  

to	  the	  present,	  long	  after	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  core	  economies	  of	  the	  world	  had	  dismantled	  

barriers	  in	  trade	  and	  finance.	  




	                                                                24	                                                                    	  
	         What	  explains	  this	  shift?	  And	  why	  might	  it	  have	  mattered	  more	  in	  the	  case	  of	  

Argentina	   than	   in	   other	   developing	   countries	   of	   the	   time	   that	   followed	   the	   import	  

substitution	   doctrine?	   Taking	   the	   second	   question	   first,	   I	   think	   the	   answer	   has	  

something	  to	  do	  with	  the	  fact	  that	  Argentina	  had	  more	  to	  lose,	  on	  two	  levels.	  First,	  it	  

had	   developed	   something	   like	   a	   modern	   economy,	   with	   adequately	   functioning	  

market	  institutions,	  a	  hope	  of	  monetary	  stability	  (after	  1891),	  and	  some	  semblance	  

of	  democratic	  politics	  and	  rule	  of	  law	  as	  a	  foundation.	  Comparing	  Argentina	  to	  other	  

recently-­‐industrialized	   emerging	   economies,	   we	   can	   say	   that	   none	   had	   advanced	  

this	  far	  in	  1914.	  Second,	  unlike	  many	  other	  such	  countries	  at	  the	  time,	  Argentina	  had	  

more	   scope	   to	   achieve	   gains	   from	   trade—in	   both	   goods	   and	   capital	   markets.	   And	  

these	  gains	  were	  at	  risk	  if	  the	  open	  trading	  environment	  broke	  down.	  Argentina	  had	  

very	  high	  trade	  openness	  and	  relied	  on	  foreigners	  for	  almost	  half	  of	  the	  local	  capital	  

stock	   and	   labor	   supply.	   For	   other	   countries	   with	   smaller	   trade	   shares	   and	   smaller	  

financial	   inflows,	   the	   end	   of	   the	   first	   age	   of	   globalization	   entailed	   a	   fairly	  

bothersome	  adjustment;	  for	  Argentina	  it	  entailed	  a	  radical	  and	  painful	  reorientation,	  

one	  delayed	  in	  the	  1920s	  and	  1930s	  by	  the	  unfulfilled	  hope	  that	  the	  pre-­‐1914	  liberal	  

order	  might	  magically	  be	  restored.	  

	         As	  to	  the	  second	  question—why	  the	  shift?—we	  should	  perhaps	  consider	  the	  

important	   interaction	   between	   economic	   openness,	   vested	   interests,	   and	   internal	  

political	  economy	  dynamics.	  For	  example,	  in	  a	  different	  era,	  it	  has	  been	  argued	  that	  

the	  “shock”	  of	  Atlantic	  trade	  expansion	  empowered	  mercantile/capitalist	  interests	  in	  

the	   Anglo-­‐Saxon	   Northwest	   corner	   of	   Europe,	   allowing	   this	   region	   to	   embrace	  

economic	   and	   political	   reforms	   that	   enhanced	   openness	   and	   competition	   in	   the	  


	                                                                25	                                                                    	  
Early	   Modern	   period	   (Acemoglu,	   Johnson,	   and	   Robinson	   2005).	   In	   Argentina,	   we	  

may	  have	  seen	  something	  of	  the	  same	  path	  dependence	  driven	  by	  trade	  shocks,	  only	  

in	   reverse:	   the	   shock	   of	   global	   trade	   contraction	   discrediting	   and	   weakening	   the	   old	  

outward-­‐looking	   order,	   and	   allowing	   new	   interests	   to	   arise	   with	   more	   autarkic	  

goals.	   Significantly,	   again,	   Argentina’s	   extreme	   comparative	   advantage	   would	   also	  

play	  into	  this	  dynamic.	  Just	  as	  gains	  from	  trade	  would	  be	  larger	  in	  Argentina	  than	  in	  

other	   countries,	   given	   the	   peculiar	   factor	   endowment,	   so	   for	   the	   same	   reasons	   the	  

redistributive	  effects	  of	  autarky	  would	  be	  great	  too	  (for	  any	  trade	  distortion,	  when	  

Harberger	  triangles	  are	  large,	  so	  too	  are	  the	  rectangles	  that	  measure	  redistribution	  

of	  income,	  and	  thus	  power—see	  Rogowski	  1989).	  

           These	   observations	   fit	   with	   a	   broader	   theme	   in	   economic	   history	   which	  

argues	  that	  economic	  and	  political	  competition	  are	  key	  complements	  via	  the	  forces	  

unleashed	   in	   “open	   access”	   orders	   (North,	   Weingast,	   and	   Wallis	   2009).	   Framed	  

another	  way,	  one	  might	  say	  globalization	  and	  democracy	  go	  hand	  in	  hand,	  and,	  with	  

empirical	  tests	  based	  on	  plausible	  instruments,	  this	  proposition	  holds	  up	  reasonably	  

well	  (López	  Córdova	  and	  Meissner	  2008).	  

           Adverse	   external	   shocks	   therefore	   pose	   a	   danger	   to	   political	   institutions	   and,	  

via	   path	   dependence,	   these	   events	   may	   have	   far	   reaching	   consequences	   for	  

economic	   policies.	   The	   case	   of	   Argentina	   is	   perhaps	   an	   extreme	   example:	   with	   the	  

most	  to	  lose,	  the	  adverse	  global	  shocks	  in	  the	  mid-­‐20th	  century	  were	  almost	  bound	  

to	  cause	  the	  most	  damage	  here—a	  sobering	  thought	  since,	  as	  I	  write,	  the	  world	  tries	  

to	  navigate	  its	  way	  out	  of	  another	  Great	  Depression.	  




	                                                               26	                                                                  	  
References	  
Acemoglu,	  Daron,	  Simon	  Johnson,	  and	  James	  A.	  Robinson.	  2001.	  The	  Colonial	  Origins	  
     of	   Comparative	   Development:	   An	   Empirical	   Investigation.	   American	  
     Economic	  Review	  91(5):	  1369–1401.	  

Acemoglu,	   Daron,	   Simon	   Johnson,	   and	   James	   A.	   Robinson.	   2005.	   The	   Rise	   of	   Europe:	  
     Atlantic	   Trade,	   Institutional	   Change,	   and	   Economic	   Growth.	   American	  
     Economic	  Review	  95(3):	  546–579.	  

Acharya,	   Ram	   C.,	   and	   Wolfgang	   Keller.	   2008.	   Estimating	   the	   Productivity	   Selection	  
      and	  Technology	  Spillover	  Effects	  of	  Imports.	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  14079.	  

Arroyo	   Abad,	   A.	   Leticia.	   2008.	   Inequality	   in	   Republican	   Latin	   America.	   Assessing	   the	  
      Impact	   of	   Factor	   Endowments	   and	   Trade.	   GPIH	   Working	   Papers	   No.	   12.	  
      University	  of	  California,	  Davis.	  

Barro,	  Robert	  J.	  2005.	  Rare	  Events	  and	  the	  Equity	  Premium.	  NBER	  Working	  Papers	  
          11310.	  

Berlinski,	   Julio.	   2003.	   International	   Trade	   and	   Commercial	   Policy.	   In	   A	   New	  
       Economic	   History	   of	   Argentina,	   edited	   by	   G.	   della	   Paolera	   and	   A.	   M.	   Taylor.	  
       Cambridge:	  Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  

Bu,	  Yisheng,	  2006.	  Fixed	  Capital	  Stock	  Depreciation	  in	  Developing	  Countries:	  Some	  
          Evidence	   from	   Firm	   Level	   Data.	   Journal	   of	   Development	   Studies	   42(5):	   881–
          901.	  

Caselli,	   Francesco,	   and	   James	   D.	   Feyrer.	   2007.	   The	   Marginal	   Product	   of	   Capital.	  
        Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  122(2):	  535–568.	  

Coremberg,	   Ariel	   Alberto.	   2003.	   Capital	   Stock	   Contribution	   To	   The	   Productivity	   Of	  
     The	  Argentine	  Economy	  During	  The	  1990’s:	  A	  Hedonic	  Valuation	  Approach.	  
     Unpublished.	  

Davoodi,	   Hamid	   Reza,	   and	   Vito	   Tanzi,	   1997.	   Corruption,	   Public	   Investment,	   and	  
      Growth.	  IMF	  Working	  Papers	  97/139,	  International	  Monetary	  Fund.	  

Di	   Tella,	   Guido,	   and	   Manuel	   Zymelman.	   1967.	   Las	   etapas	   del	   desarrollo	   económico	  
           argentino.	  Buenos	  Aires:	  Editorial	  Universitaria	  de	  Buenos	  Aires.	  	  

Díaz	   Alejandro,	   Carlos	   F.	   1970.	   Essays	   on	   the	   Economic	   History	   of	   the	   Argentine	  
          Republic.	  New	  Haven,	  Conn.:	  Yale	  University	  Press.	  

Easterly,	  William,	  and	  Ross	  Levine.	  2001.	  What	  Have	  We	  Learned	  from	  a	  Decade	  of	  
       Empirical	  Research	  on	  Growth?	  It’s	  Not	  Factor	  Accumulation:	  Stylized	  Facts	  
       and	  Growth	  Models.	  World	  Bank	  Economic	  Review	  15:2	  177–219.	  




	                                                              27	                                                                 	  
Easterly,	   William,	   and	   Ross	   Levine.	   2003.	   Tropics,	   Germs,	   and	   Crops:	   How	  
       Endowments	   Influence	   Economic	   Development.	   Journal	   of	   Monetary	  
       Economics	  50:	  3–39.	  

Engerman,	   Stanley	   L.,	   and	   Kenneth	   L.	   Sokoloff.	   1997.	   Factor	   Endowments,	  
      Institutions,	   and	   Differential	   Paths	   of	   Growth	   Among	   New	   World	   Economies:	  
      A	  View	  from	  Economic	  Historians	  of	  the	  United	  States.	  In	  How	  Latin	  America	  
      Fell	   Behind	   edited	   by	   Stephen	   Haber.	   Stanford,	   Calif.:	   Stanford	   University	  
      Press.	  

Estevadeordal,	   Antoni,	   and	   Alan	   M.	   Taylor,	   2013.	   Is	   the	   Washington	   Consensus	  
      Dead?	  Growth,	  Openness,	  and	  the	  Great	  Liberalization,	  1970s-­‐2000s.	  Review	  
      of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics	  95(5):	  1669–1690.	  

Ferguson,	  Niall.	  2003.	  Empire:	  The	  Rise	  and	  Demise	  of	  the	  British	  World	  Order	  and	  the	  
      Lessons	  for	  Global	  Power.	  New	  York:	  Basic	  Books.	  

Gallup,	  John	  Luke,	  Jeffrey	  D.	  Sachs,	  and	  Andrew	  D.	  Mellinger.	  1999.	  Geography	  and	  
        Economic	   Development.	   International	   Regional	   Science	   Review	   22(2):	   179–
        232.	  

Glaeser,	   Edward	   L.,	   and	   Andrei	   Shleifer.	   2002.	   Legal	   Origins.	   Quarterly	   Journal	   of	  
       Economics	  117(4):	  1193–1229.	  	  

Gollin,	   Douglas.	   2002.	   Getting	   Income	   Shares	   Right.	   Journal	   of	   Political	   Economy	  
           110(2):	  458–474.	  

Gourinchas,	   Pierre-­‐Olivier,	   and	   Olivier	   Jeanne.	   2006.	   The	   Elusive	   Gains	   from	  
      International	   Financial	   Integration.	   Review	   of	   Economic	   Studies	   73(3):	   715–
      741.	  

Hall,	  Robert	  E.,	  and	  Charles	  I.	  Jones.	  1999.	  Why	  Do	  Some	  Countries	  Produce	  So	  Much	  
          More	   Output	   Per	   Worker	   Than	   Others?	   Quarterly	   Journal	   of	   Economics	  
          114(1):	  83–116.	  

Hsieh,	   Chang-­‐Tai,	   and	   Peter	   J.	   Klenow.	   2009.	   Misallocation	   and	   Manufacturing	   TFP	  
           in	  China	  and	  India.	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  124(4):	  1403–1448.	  

Kydland,	   Finn,	   and	   Carlos	   E.J.M.Zarazaga.	   2002.	   Argentina's	   Recovery	   and	   Excess	  
      Capital	  Shallowing	  of	  the	  1990s.	  Estudios	  de	  Economia	  29:	  35–45.	  

López-­‐Córdova,	   Jose	   E.,	   and	   Christopher	   M.	   Meissner.	   2008.	   The	   Impact	   of	  
        International	   Trade	   on	   Democracy:	   A	   Long-­‐run	   Perspective.	   World	   Politics	  
        60(4):	  539–575.	  	  

Maddison,	   Angus.	   2007.	   Historical	   Statistics	   for	   the	   World	   Economy,	   1–2003	   AD.	  
      www.ggdc.net.	  




	                                                             28	                                                               	  
Mehra,	   Rajnish,	   and	   Prescott,	   Edward	   C.	   1985.	   The	   Equity	   Premium:	   A	   Puzzle.	  
       Journal	  of	  Monetary	  Economics	  15(2):	  145–161.	  

North,	  Douglass	  C.,	  John	  Joseph	  Wallis,	  Barry	  R.	  Weingast.	  2009.	  Violence	  and	  Social	  
          Orders:	   A	   Conceptual	   Framework	   For	   Interpreting	   Recorded	   Human	   History.	  
          New	  York:	  Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  

Rietz,	   Thomas	   A.,	   1988.	   The	   Equity	   Risk	   Premium:	   A	   Solution.	   Journal	   of	   Monetary	  
           Economics	  22(1):	  117–131.	  

Rodrik,	   Dani,	   Arvind	   Subramanian,	   and	   Francesco	   Trebbi.	   2004.	   Institutions	   Rule:	  
      The	   Primacy	   of	   Institutions	   Over	   Geography	   and	   Integration	   in	   Economic	  
      Development.	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Growth	  9(2):	  131–165.	  

Reinhart,	  Carmen	  M.	  and	  Kenneth	  S.	  Rogoff.	  2004.	  Serial	  Default	  And	  The	  “Paradox”	  
      Of	  Rich-­‐To-­‐Poor	  Capital	  Flows.	  American	  Economic	  Review	  94(2):	  53–58.	  

Rogowski,	   Ronald.	   1989.	   Commerce	   and	   Coalitions:	   How	   Trade	   Affects	   Domestic	  
     Political	  Alignments.	  Princeton,	  N.J.:	  Princeton	  University	  Press.	  




	                                                             29	                                                                	  
Figure	  1	  
The	  Great	  Divergence	  and	  Argentina	  
	  
       $100,000$                                     GDP$per$person$(Maddison)$
                                                         United$States$$
                                                         Canada$
                                                         United$Kingdom$$
                                                         Total$12$Western$Europe$$
        $10,000$                                         Japan$$
                                                         Taiwan$
                                                         South$Korea$$
                                                         Total$LaGn$America$
                                                         Total$Asia$$
         $1,000$                                         Total$Africa$$
                                                         ArgenGna$$




          $100$
                   1820$
                   1830$
                   1840$
                   1850$
                   1860$
                   1870$
                   1880$
                   1890$
                   1900$
                   1910$
                   1920$
                   1930$
                   1940$
                   1950$
                   1960$
                   1970$
                   1980$
                   1990$
                   2000$


                                                                                     	  
	  
Source:	  Maddison	  (2007).	  




	                                          30	                                     	  
Figure	  2	  
Trade	  volumes	  
	  

       120"


       100"
                                (Exports+Imports)/GDP,"percent"

        80"


        60"


        40"


        20"


         0"
          1913"      1923"       1933"    1943"    1953"      1963"   1973"   1983"   1993"
                                                                                              	  
	  
Source:	  Berlinski	  (2003).	  	  




	                                                   31	                                     	  
Figure	  3	  
Trade	  taxes	  
	  

       35"
                                                     Export"Taxes/"Value"of"exports,"percent"
       30"                                           Tariﬀ"revenue/Value"of"imports,"percent"

       25"

       20"

       15"

       10"

        5"

        0"
         1910"     1920"       1930"      1940"   1950"       1960"   1970"   1980"   1990"     2000" 	  
	  
Source:	  Berlinski	  (2003).	  	  
	  




	                                                   32	                                                	  
Figure	  4	  
The	  marginal	  product	  of	  capital	  
	  
       0.3"



                                                                                              Argen1na"with"“high”"deprecia1on"
                                                                                              assump1on"(δ=10%,"local"prices)"



                                                                                              Argen1na"(HallGJones"δ=6%,"world"prices)"
       0.2"
                                                                                                     Price*barrier*


                                                                                              Argen1na"(HallGJones"δ=6%,"local"prices)"

                                                                                                     Other*barriers*

                                                                                                  USA"(δ=6%,"world"prices)"
       0.1"

                                                  Hall$Jones*(T=1988)*




         0"
          1960"   1965"   1970"   1975"   1980"    1985"     1990"        1995"   2000"   2005"
                                                                                                                      	  
	  
Source:	   Author’s	   calculations	   based	   on	   the	   method	   in	   Hall	   and	   Jones	   (1999)	  
extended	  from	  1960	  to	  2005	  using	  Penn	  World	  Table	  6.2	  data.	  
	  




	                                                               33	                                                                     	  
