                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE ECONOMICS OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL MOBILITY

                                         James J. Heckman
                                           Stefano Mosso

                                        Working Paper 19925
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19925


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




This research was supported in part by the American Bar Foundation, the Pritzker Children's Initiative,
the Buffett Early Childhood Fund, NICHD R37HD065072, R01HD054702, the Human Capital and
Economic Opportunity Global Working Group - an initiative of the Becker Friedman Institute for
Research in Economics - funded by the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET), and an anonymous
funder. We also acknowledge the support of an European Research Council grant hosted by the University
College Dublin, DEVHEALTH 269874. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the funders or commentators mentioned here. We thank Hideo Akabayashi,
Gary Becker, Alberto Bisin, Marco Cosconati, Flavio Cunha, Steve Durlauf, Chris Flinn, Lance Lochner,
Magne Mogstad, Derek Neal, Ananth Seshadri, and Robert Pollak for helpful comments. We thank
Linor Kiknadze for exceptional research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by James J. Heckman and Stefano Mosso. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Human Development and Social Mobility
James J. Heckman and Stefano Mosso
NBER Working Paper No. 19925
February 2014
JEL No. I20,I24,I28,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper distills and extends recent research on the economics of human development and social
mobility. It summarizes the evidence from diverse literatures on the importance of early life conditions
in shaping multiple life skills and the evidence on critical and sensitive investment periods for shaping
different skills. It presents economic models that rationalize the evidence and unify the treatment effect
and family influence literatures. The evidence on the empirical and policy importance of credit constraints
in forming skills is examined. There is little support for the claim that untargeted income transfer policies
to poor families significantly boost child outcomes. Mentoring, parenting, and attachment are essential
features of successful families and interventions to shape skills at all stages of childhood. The next
wave of family studies will better capture the active role of the emerging autonomous child in learning
and responding to the actions of parents, mentors and teachers.


James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Stefano Mosso
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
smosso@uchicago.edu
      1      Introduction1
            A growing literature in economics, epidemiology, and psychology establishes the

      importance of attributes shaped in childhood in determining adult outcomes. At least

      50% of the variability of lifetime earnings across persons is due to attributes of persons

      determined by age 18.2 Childhood is the province of the family. Any investigation of

      how conditions in childhood affect life outcomes is a study of family influence.

            This essay summarizes the recent economic literature on human development

      through adolescence and early adulthood, focusing on simple models that convey

      the essential ideas in the literature on family influence. A large literature surveyed in

      Heckman et al. (2006) and Rubinstein and Weiss (2006) models schooling choices and

      post-school on-the-job investment. The output of the models we discuss are the initial

      conditions of those models.

            We draw from multiple sources of information: observational studies of fam-

      ily influence including structural models and the literature on social experiments.

      The early literature on family influence and the determinants of social mobility pi-

      oneered by Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986) presents multiple generation models with

      one period of childhood, one period of adulthood, one-child families (with no fertil-

      ity choices), and a single parent. These models are precursors to the models reviewed

      in this paper. They do not analyze marital sorting and family formation decisions.

      Parental engagement with the child is in the form of investments in educational goods

      analogous to firm investments in capital equipment. In the early literature on child

      development, the role of the child is passive and the information available to the par-

      ents is assumed to be perfect. Parental time investments in children are ignored. In-

      vestments at any stage of childhood are assumed to be equally effective in producing

      adult skills. The output of child quality from family investment is a scalar measure




   1 This  paper draws on, updates, and substantially extends two previous papers by Cunha et al. (2006)
and Cunha and Heckman (2007).
   2 See, for example, Cunha et al. (2005), Huggett et al. (2011), and Keane and Wolpin (1997).



                                                   3
       of cognition (IQ or an achievement test) or “human capital.” These notions are often

       used synonymously.

          Recent research in the economics of human development and social mobility re-

       tains its focus on skills and the technology of skill formation. It establishes the impor-

       tance of accounting for: (1) multiple periods in the life cycle of childhood and adult-

       hood and the existence of critical and sensitive periods of childhood in the formation

       of skills, (2) multiple skills for both parents and children which extend traditional

       notions about the skills required for success in life, and (3) multiple forms of invest-

       ment. Some of the most exciting recent research models parent-child, mentor-child,

       and parent-teacher-child relationships as interactive systems, involving attachment

       and scaffolding3 as major determinants of child learning. The recent literature also

       takes a more nuanced view of child investment and accounts for parental time and

       lack of parental knowledge about the capacities of children and effective parenting

       practices. It creates and implements an econometric framework that unifies the study

       of family influence and the consequences of external interventions in child outcomes.

          There is a well established empirical relationship between family income and child

       achievement. Many interpret this relationship as evidence of market restrictions in-

       cluding credit constraints. While it is conceptually attractive to do so, and amenable

       to analysis using standard methods, the empirical evidence that credit constraints

       substantially impede child skill formation is not strong. Family income proxies many

       aspects of the family environment—parental education, ability, altruism, personality,

       and peers. The empirical literature suggests that unrestricted income transfers are a

       weak reed for promoting child skills.

          This paper proceeds in the following way. Section 2 reviews recent empirical evi-

       dence on the expression and formation of capacities over the life cycle. Section 3 lays

       out basic concepts developed in the recent literature. Section 4 presents bare bones


    3 Scaffoldingis an adaptive interactive strategy that recognizes the current capacities of the child
(trainee) and guides him/her to further learning without frustrating the child. Activities are tailored to
the individual child’s ability to do the activities so they are neither too hard or too easy in order to keep in
the “zone of proximal development” which is the level of difficulty at which the child can learn the most.


                                                       4
models of human development that capture the central features of the literature as

well as some recent extensions. It also discusses evidence on the importance of fam-

ily income and credit constraints in shaping child development. Section 5 amplifies

the discussion of Sections 3 and 4 to demonstrate the fundamental role of dynamic

complementarity in shaping life cycle skills. It justifies policies that redistribute re-

sources toward disadvantaged children in the early years on the grounds of efficiency

without any appeal to fairness or social justice, although those too might be invoked

to strengthen the argument for early intervention. Section 6 presents a dynamic state-

space framework that operationalizes the theory and unifies the interpretation of the

intervention literature and the literature on family influence. Section 7 presents evi-

dence on the effectiveness of interventions over the life cycle and interprets its find-

ings using the framework developed in this paper. Section 8 summarizes recent mod-

els of the development and expression of capacities as the outcomes of parent-child,

mentor-child interactions that have common features across the life cycle. A web ap-

pendix (heckman.uchicago.edu/hum-dev) presents more formal arguments and ex-

tensive empirical evidence on each topic covered in this paper.




                                           5
      2     Some Facts about Skills Over the Life Cycle
          Skills are multiple in nature and encompass cognition, personality, preference pa-

      rameters, as well as health. Skills are capacities to act. They include some of the

      capabilities defined by Sen (1985) and Nussbaum (2011) but focus on individual at-

      tributes and not aspects of society such as political freedoms. They shape expecta-

      tions, constraints, and information. More capacities enlarge agent choice sets.4 The

      recent empirical literature has established eight important facts about the process of

      human development and skill formation. Each fact is extensively documented in our

      Web Appendix.


      1. Multiple Skills Multiple skills vitally affect performance in life across a variety
      of dimensions. A large body of evidence shows that cognitive and noncognitive skills

      affect labor market outcomes, the likelihood of marrying and divorcing, receiving

      welfare, voting, and health.5 Comprehensive surveys are presented in Borghans et al.

      (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011).


      2. Gaps in Skills Gaps in skills between individuals and across socioeconomic
      groups open up at early ages for both cognitive and noncognitive skills. Carneiro

      and Heckman (2003), Cunha et al. (2006), and Cunha and Heckman (2007) present

      evidence of early divergence in cognitive and noncognitive skills before schooling

      begins. Many measures show near-parallelism during the school years across children

      of parents from different socioeconomic backgrounds even though schooling quality

      is very unequal.6




   4 Capacities  may also shape preferences but in this case the interpretation placed on the benefit of en-
larged choice sets is quite different.
    5 See Section E in the Web Appendix.
    6 Cunha et al. (2006) and Cunha and Heckman (2007) present evidence on gaps from numerous data

sources. The pattern of these gaps is evident using both raw and age-adjusted scores. See Section A of our
Web Appendix for an extensive analysis of gaps in cognitive and noncognitive skills.


                                                     6
      3. Genes The early emergence of skill gaps might be interpreted as the manifesta-
      tion of genetics: smart parents earn more, achieve more, and have smarter children.7

      There is, however, a strong body of experimental evidence on the powerful role of par-

      enting and parenting supplements including mentors and teachers in shaping skills,

      which we document in this essay.

          Genes are important, but skills are not solely genetically determined. The role of

      heritability is exaggerated in many studies and in popular discussions. Nisbett et al.

      (2012), Tucker-Drob et al. (2009), and Turkheimer et al. (2003) show that estimated

      heritabilities are higher in families of higher socioeconomic status. Genes need suf-

      ficiently rich environments to fully express themselves. There is mounting evidence

      that gene expression is itself mediated by environments.8 Epigenetics9 informs us that

      environmental influences are partly heritable10 .


      4. Critical and Sensitive Periods in the Technology of Skill Formation There
      is compelling evidence for critical and sensitive periods in the development of a child.

      Different capacities are malleable at different stages of the life cycle (see Thompson

      and Nelson, 2001, Knudsen et al., 2006, and the body of evidence summarized in

      Cunha et al., 2006). For example, IQ is rank stable after age 10, while personality skills

      are malleable through adolescence and into early adulthood. A substantial body of

      evidence from numerous disciplines shows the persistence of early life disadvantage

      in shaping later life outcomes. Early life environments are important for explaining

      a variety of diverse outcomes such as crime, health, education, occupation, social en-

      gagement, trust, and voting. See Cunha et al. (2006) and Almond and Currie (2011)




   7 See Section M of the Web Appendix.      Estimates using the standard ACE model widely used to estimate
heritability (see Kohler et al. (2011), for its limitations) show that, on average, 50% of child attributes are
heritable. See, for example, Krueger and Johnson (2008) who show that parenting style affects heritability
of personality.
    8 See the evidence in Web Appendix M.
    9 The study of heritability not related with DNA sequencing.
   10 See Cole et al. (2012); Gluckman and Hanson (2005, 2006); Jablonka and Raz (2009); Kuzawa and Quinn

(2009); Rutter (2006).


                                                      7
      for reviews of numerous studies on the importance of prenatal and early childhood

      environments on adolescent and adult health11 and socioeconomic outcomes.


      5. Family Investments Gaps in skills by age across different socioeconomic groups
      have counterparts in gaps in family investments and environments. Hart and Risley

      (1995), Fernald et al. (2013), and many other scholars show how children from dis-

      advantaged environments are exposed to a substantially less rich vocabulary than

      children from more advantaged families. At age three, children from professional

      families speak 50% more words than children from working-class families and more

      than twice as many compared to children from welfare families.12 There is a substan-

      tial literature summarized in Cunha et al. (2006), Lareau (2011), Kalil (2013), and Moon

      (2014) showing that disadvantaged children have compromised early environments

      as measured on a variety of dimensions.13 Recent evidence from Cunha et al. (2013)

      documents the lack of parenting knowledge among disadvantaged parents. Parent-

      ing styles are much less supportive of learning and encouraging child exploration (see

      Hart and Risley, 1995; Kalil, 2013; Lareau, 2011).14


      6. Resilience and Targeted Investment While early life conditions are impor-
      tant, there is considerable evidence of resilience and subsequent partial recovery.

      To our knowledge there is no evidence of full recovery from initial disadvantage.

      The most effective adolescent interventions target formation of personality, socioe-

      motional, and character skills through mentoring and guidance, including providing

      information. This evidence is consistent with the greater malleability of personality

      and character skills into adolescence and young adulthood. The body of evidence

      to date shows that, as currently implemented, many later life remediation efforts are

      not effective in improving capacities and life outcomes of children from disadvan-

  11 For   example, Barker (1990) and Hales and Barker (1992) propose a “thrifty phenotype” hypothesis,
now widely accepted, that reduced fetal growth is associated with a number of chronic conditions later in
life (Gluckman and Hanson, 2005, 2006).
    12 See Table A.1 in the Web Appendix.
    13 A large body of evidence on this question is summarized in Section B of the Web Appendix.
    14 See the evidence in Web Appendix B.



                                                   8
      taged environments.15,16 As a general rule, the economic returns to these programs

      are smaller compared to those policies aimed at closing gaps earlier (see Cunha et al.,

      2006; Heckman and Kautz, 2014; Heckman et al., 1999). However, workplace-based

      adolescent intervention programs and apprenticeship programs with mentoring, sur-

      rogate parenting, and guidance show promising results. They appear to foster char-

      acter skills such as increasing self-confidence, teamwork ability, autonomy, and disci-

      pline which are often lacking in disadvantaged youth. In recent programs with only

      short-term follow-ups, mentoring programs in school that provide students with in-

      formation that improves their use of capacities has been shown to be effective. (See,

      e.g., Bettinger et al., 2012; Carrell and Sacerdote, 2013; Cook et al., 2014).


      7. Parent-child/Mentor-child Interactions Play Key Roles in Promoting Child
      Learning A recurrent finding from the family influence and intervention literatures
      is the crucial role of child-parent/child-mentor relationships that "scaffold" the child,

      i.e. track the child closely, encourage the child to take feasible next steps forward in

      his or her “proximal zone of development,” and do not bore or discourage the child.

      Successful interventions across the life cycle share this feature.


      8. High Returns to Early Investment Despite the generally low returns to inter-
      ventions targeted toward the cognitive skills of disadvantaged adolescents, the empir-

      ical literature shows high economic returns for investments in young disadvantaged

      children.17 There is compelling evidence that high-quality interventions targeted at

      the early years are effective in promoting skills (Heckman and Kautz, 2014).18 The
  15 See  Table I.1 in the Web Appendix.
  16 Rutter  et al. (2010) show that Romanian orphans reared in severely disadvantaged environments but
adopted out to more advantaged environments partially recover, with recovery being the greatest among
those adopted out the earliest.
   17 Recent interventions with short term follow ups appear to show remarkable effects on cognitive

achievement as measured by achievement tests (See Cook et al., 2014). These findings may appear to con-
tradict the claim in the text. However, as noted by Borghans et al. (2008), Almlund et al. (2011), Heckman
and Kautz (2012, 2014) and Borghans et al. (2011b) the scores on achievement tests are heavily weighted
by personality skills. Achievement tests are designed to measure “general knowledge”—acquired skills.
This evidence is consistent with the evidence from the Perry Preschool Program that showed boosts in
achievement test scores without raising IQ. Perry boosted noncognitive skills.
   18 See Section I.1 of the Web Appendix.



                                                    9
evidence is explained by dynamic complementarity which is discussed in the next

section.




                                      10
   3        Skills, the Technology of Skill Formation, and the

   Essential Ingredients of a Life Cycle Model of Hu-

   man Development
          Skills, the technology of producing skills, and parental preferences and constraints

   play key roles in explaining the dynamics of family influence.



   3.1       Skills

          We represent the vector of skills at age t by θt over lifetime T. Decompose θt into

   three subvectors:



                                       θt = (θC,t , θ N,t , θ H,t ),    t = 1, . . . , T,                     (1)


   where θC,t is a vector of cognitive skills (e.g. IQ) at age t, θN,t is a vector of noncognitive

   skills (e.g. patience, self control, temperament, risk aversion, discipline, and neuroti-

   cism) at age t and θ H,t is a vector of health stocks for mental and physical health at age

   t.

          Skills can evolve with age and experience t. The dimensionality of θt may also

   change with t. As people mature, they acquire new skills previously missing in their

   personas and sometimes shed old attributes. Skills determine in part (a) resource

   constraints, (b) agent information sets, and (c) expectations.19

          A key idea in the recent literature is that a core low-dimensional set of skills joined

   with incentives and constraints, generates a variety of diverse outcomes, although

   both the skills and their relationship with outcomes may change with the stage of the

   life cycle.

          Age-specific outcome Yj,t for action (task) j at age t is:


                   Yj,t = ψj,t (θt , e j,t , X j,t ),   j ∈ {1, . . . , Jt }   and     t ∈ {1, . . . , T },   (2)
19 They   may also shape preferences.


                                                               11
       X j,t is a vector of purchased inputs that affect outcomes. Effort e j,t is characterized by

       the supply function:

                                    e j,t = δj (θ t , A t , X j,t , R aj,t (It−1 ) | u ),          (3)


       where It−1 is the information set, on the basis of which the agent evaluates outcomes,

       R aj,t (It−1 ) is the anticipated reward per unit effort in activity j in period t, At repre-

       sents other determinants of effort and u represents a vector of parameters characteriz-

       ing the preference function.20

            An active body of research investigates the role of skills in producing outcomes

       (see Almlund et al., 2011; Borghans et al., 2008; Bowles et al., 2001; Dohmen et al.,

       2010). In general, each outcome is differentially affected by components of the (possi-

       bly age-dependent) capacity vector θt . Schooling, for example, depends more strongly

       on cognitive abilities, while earnings are equally affected by cognitive capacities and

       noncognitive capacities such as conscientiousness.21 Scores on achievement tests de-

       pend on both cognitive and noncognitive capacities.22 Evidence that achievement

       tests predict outcomes better than measures of personality or IQ alone miss the point

       that achievement tests capture both.23 As the mapping of capacities to outputs dif-

       fers among tasks, people with different levels of capacities will also have comparative

       advantages in performing different tasks.24

            Equation (2) emphasizes that there are many ways to achieve a level of perfor-

       mance in any given activity. One can compensate for a shortfall in one dimension

       through greater strength in the other. For example, for some tasks deficiencies in cog-

       nitive ability can be compensated by greater motivation, determination, and effort.

       Grades in school depend more on personality traits than pure cognition.25



   20 Inmodels of parent-child interactions, the utility functions of the parent and the child govern effort.
   21 See Appendix E, Table E.1 for the definition of the Big Five attributes used in personality psychology.
They have been called the “latitude and longitude of personality.”
   22 See Borghans et al. (2008) and Heckman and Kautz (2012, 2014). This point is confused in a literature

that equates cognition with achievement tests.
   23 For a recent example of this confusion, see Duckworth et al. (2012).
   24 One version of this is the Roy Model of occupational choice. See e.g. Heckman and Sedlacek (1985).
   25 See Borghans et al. (2011a).



                                                            12
            Equation (2) informs a recurrent debate about the relative importance of the “per-

         son” vs. “the situation” that is alive and well in modern behavioral economics: are

                                                                             At ) or the effort evoked
         outcomes due to attributes of the individual (θθt ), the situation (A

                                                                                           Raj,t )?
         by the interaction between θt , At , and the incentives to attain a given result (R

         Thaler (2008) and many behavioral economists (e.g., Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013)

         treat actions of agents as largely the outcomes of situations and incentives in situa-

         tions. Extreme views claim that there is no stable construct associated with personal-

         ity or preferences.

            Almlund et al. (2011) review a large body of empirical evidence that refutes this

         claim. Stable personality and other capacities play empirically important roles in

         shaping performance in a variety of tasks apart from the effects of incentives in situa-

         tions.

            Equation (2) has important implications for the use of psychological constructs in

         the economics of human development and social mobility. Economists routinely use

         test scores developed by psychologists to capture IQ, achievement, and personality.

            Psychologists offer their measures as independent indicators of attributes that can

         be used to predict behaviors. As discussed in Almlund et al. (2011), and Heckman

         and Kautz (2012, 2014), all tests are just measures of performance on some tasks, i.e.

         some other behaviors. The tasks usually differ across tests. A large body of evidence

         shows that effort on test-taking tasks can be incentivized and the response to incen-

         tives varies depending on other capabilities.26 Scores on IQ tests can be substantially

         boosted by directly rewarding successful answers. The elasticity of response to re-

         wards depends on levels of conscientiousness. The less conscientious are more sensi-

         tive to rewards (see Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel, 2008, Borghans,

         Meijers, and ter Weel, 2008). Incentivized boosts in achievement have not been shown

         to persist when the incentives are removed.27



  26 See Borghans et al. (2008).
  27 A literature in psychology by (Deci and Ryan, 1985; Ryan and Deci, 2000) suggests the performance is
actually lower in the baseline after incentives are removed.


                                                      13
          Taking a test is just one of many tasks in life. Behaviors are also as informative

    about skills as tests. This insight is the basis for the empirical strategy employed in the

    recent literature using early behaviors as measures of child attributes (see Heckman

    et al., 2011; Jackson, 2013; Piatek and Pinger, 2010). Any distinction between tests (or

    “assessments”) and behaviors is intrinsically arbitrary even though it is enshrined in

    the literature in psychology and often uncritically adopted by economists.

          Equation (2) reveals an important identification problem. In order to use any set of

    measurements of outcomes to identify capacities, one needs to control for incentives

    and the situations that generate performance on a task (see Almlund et al., 2011; Heck-

    man and Kautz, 2012, 2014). The system of equations (2) does not isolate θt unless

    outcomes are standardized for incentives and environments. Even then, equations in

    the system (2), which are in the form of nonlinear factor models, are not identified

    even in the linear case unless certain normalizations are imposed that associate a fac-

    tor with a specific set of measurements.28 At best we can identify factors normalized

    relative to each other (see Almlund et al., 2011; Borghans et al., 2008; Cunha et al.,

    2010; Heckman and Kautz, 2012, 2014).

          A proper understanding of the relevant skills and how they can be modified allows

    for a unification of the findings from the treatment effect literature for interventions

    and the more economically motivated family economics literature. Using the empir-

    ically specified system of equations in (2), and the technology of skill formation (4)

    exposited below, one can characterize how different interventions or different family

                                                      Yt ) and make comparisons across
    influence variables affect θt and hence outcomes (Y

    those literatures (see Cunha and Heckman, 2007).

          Outcomes studied include earnings, crime, health, education, trust, and health

    behaviors. By accounting for multiple skills, their mutual interactions and evolution

    over time, the recent literature goes well beyond saying that schooling is the principal

    determinant of individual productivity, that measures of cognition are the principal

    predictors of child outcomes, or that only early health affects adult health.

28 See   Anderson and Rubin (1956) and Williams (2012).


                                                 14
           Using these notions, analysts of human development can draw on frontier produc-

       tion theory (Fried et al., 2008) and define the set of possible actions for people—their

       action spaces. This is closely related to the space of ”functionings” in Sen’s capability

       theory. A fundamental notion in that literature is that of maximum possible flexibility.

       As noted by Foster (2011), this conceptualization is, in turn, closely related to Kreps’s

       (1979) notion of flexibility in choice sets that give agents options to act whatever their

       preferences may turn out to be. One goal of many parents is to allow children to be

       able to be the best that they want to be.29



       3.2     Technology

           An important ingredient in the recent literature is the technology of skill formation

       (Cunha, 2007; Cunha and Heckman, 2007), where the vector θt evolves according to a

       law of motion affected by investments broadly defined as actions specifically taken to

       promote learning, and parental skills (environmental variables):


                               θ t +1 = f ( t ) (         θt         ,    It        , θ P,t ).          (4)
                                                         |{z}            |{z}         |{z}
                                                    self productivity investments    parental
                                                    and cross effects                 skills


       f (t) is assumed to be twice continuously differentiable, increasing in all arguments

       and concave in It . As previously noted, the dimension of θt and f (t) likely increases

       with stage of the life cycle t, as does the dimension of It . New skills emerge along with

       new investment strategies. The technology is stage-specific, allowing for critical and

       sensitive periods in the formation of capabilities and the effectiveness of investment.30

       This technology accommodates family formation of child preferences as in Becker


   29 However,    as noted in Doepke and Zilibotti (2012) and the large literature they cite, parenting styles
differ, and some parents are paternalistic, seeking to shape child preferences and choices (see, e.g., Chan
and Koo, 2011).
   30 The technology is a counterpart to the models of adult investment associated with Ben-Porath (1967)

and its extensions (see, e.g., Browning et al., 1999 and Rubinstein and Weiss, 2006). It is more general
than the Ben-Porath model and its extensions, because it allows for multiple skill outputs (θθt ) and multiple
inputs (IIt ), where inputs at one stage of the life cycle can be qualitatively different from investments at other
stages of the life cycle. Cunha et al. (2006) compare technology (4) with the Ben-Porath model.


                                                                15
      and Mulligan (1997), Becker et al. (2012), Bisin and Verdier (2001), and Doepke and

      Zilibotti (2012).

          The first term in (4) captures two distinct ideas: (a) that investments in skills do

      not fully depreciate within a period and (b) that stocks of skills can act synergistically

      (cross partials may be positive). For example, higher levels of noncognitive skills pro-

      mote higher levels of cognitive skills, as shown in the econometric studies of Cunha

      and Heckman (2008) and Cunha et al. (2010).

          A crucial concept emphasized in the recent literature is complementarity between

      skills and investments at later stages (t > t∗ ) of childhood:


                                            ∂ 2 θ t +1
                                                       > 0,     t > t∗ .31
                                            ∂θθt ∂IIt0

       The empirical literature reviewed below is consistent with the notion that invest-

      ments and endowments are direct substitutes (or at least weak complements) at early

      ages:
                       ∂ 2 θ t +1                       ∂ 2 θ t +1
                                                                                       
                                              ∗
                                  ≤ 0,   t < t , or e >            > 0, for e “small”
                       ∂θθt ∂IIt0                       ∂θθt ∂IIt0

      but that complementarity increases with age:


                                                  ∂ 2 θ t +1
                                                             ↑ t ↑ .32
                                                  ∂θθt ∂IIt0




          Growing complementarity with stage of the life cycle captures two key ideas. The

      first is that investments in adolescents and adults with higher levels of capacity θt

      tend to be more productive. This is a force for social disequalization of investment.

      It is consistent with evidence reported in Cameron and Heckman (2001), Cunha et al.

      (2006), Carneiro et al. (2013) and Eisenhauer et al. (2013) that returns to college are

      higher for more able and motivated students.33 The second idea is that complemen-

   31 There  are other notions of complementarity. For a discussion with reference to the technology of skill
formation, see Cunha et al. (2006).
   32 See Cunha (2007), Cunha and Heckman (2008), and Cunha et al. (2010).
   33 See, e.g., Table G.1 Web Appendix.



                                                          16
           tarity tends to increase over the life cycle. This implies that compensatory investments

           tend to be less effective the later the stage in the life cycle. This feature is consistent

           with a large body of evidence reviewed below that later life remediation is generally

           less effective than early life prevention and investment (Cunha et al., 2006; Heckman

           and Kautz, 2014; Knudsen et al., 2006; Sroufe et al., 2005).34 The dual face of later life

           complementarity is that early investment is most productive if it is followed up with

           later life investment.

              Complementarity coupled with self-productivity leads to the important concept of

           dynamic complementarity introduced in Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2009). Because in-

           vestment produces greater stocks of skills, It ↑⇒ θt+1 ↑, and because of self-productivity,

           θt+1 ↑ ⇒ θt+s ↑, s ≥ 1, it follows that:


                                                  ∂ 2 θ t + s +1
                                                                 > 0,     s ≥ 1.
                                                  ∂IIt ∂IIt0+s


              Investments in period t + s and investments in any previous period t are always

           complements as long as θ t+s and I t+s are complements, irrespective of whether I t

           and θ t are complements or substitutes in some earlier period t.35 Early investment



   34 Itis not inconsistent with the notion that later life investments may have substantial effects and may
be cost effective. It is also consistent with the notion that later life information and guidance can enhance
the effectiveness of a given stock of skills.
    35 Dynamic complementarity is a consequence of static complementarity in later life periods. Because

future capacities are increasing in current investments and future investments are complements with future
capacities, current and future investments tend to be complements the stronger the static complementarity
in future periods. Consider the following specification for the technology with scalar θt and It :

                                                      θt+1 = f (t) (θt , It ).

Denoting by f 1t and f 2t the derivatives with respect to the first and second arguments, respectively,
                                        (                           )
                                          ∂2 f (t+s) (θt+s , It+s )             (t+s)
                                   sign                               = sign{ f 21 }
                                                 ∂It+s ∂It

                               t , for s ≥ 1. To prove the claim, note that
independently of the sign of f 21
                                                                                            !
                                                                           s −1
                                    ∂2 f (t+s) (θt+s , It+s )
                                                                           ∏
                                                                  (t+s)            (t+ j)        (t)
                                                              = f 21              f1            f2     .
                                           ∂It+s ∂It                       j =1
                                                                           |      {z   }        |{z}
                                                                                  >0            >0


                                                                17
      enhances later life investment even if early investment substitutes for early stage ca-

      pabilities.

          These properties of the technology of skill formation show why investment in

      disadvantaged young children can be both socially fair and economically efficient,

      whereas later stage investments in disadvantaged (low θt ) persons, while fair, may

      not be economically efficient. Building the skill base of disadvantaged young children

      makes them more productive at later ages. Dynamic complementarity also shows

      why investments in disadvantaged adolescents and young adults who lack a suitable

      skill base are often less effective.

          These properties of the technology explain, in part, why more advantaged children

      were the first to respond in terms of college attendance to the rising returns to educa-

      tion (see Cunha et al., 2006). They had the necessary skill base to benefit from more

      advanced levels of schooling as the returns increased. They also explain the failure

      of tuition subsidy policies in promoting educational participation of disadvantaged

      adolescents (see Heckman, 2008). Dynamic complementarity also suggests that lim-

      ited access to parenting resources at early ages can have lasting lifetime consequences

      that are difficult to remediate at later ages.

          Parental skills also play a disequalizing role as they enhance the productivity of in-
                     2θ
      vestments ( ∂θ∂θ θt+∂I1I0 > 0). There is evidence (Lareau, 2011) that more educated parents,
                      P,t    t

      by engaging their children more, increase the formative value of investments such as

      sports or cultural activities.

          Public investment are usually thought to promote equality. Whether they do so de-

      pends on the patterns of substitutability with private investments and parental skills.

      If more skilled parents are able to increase the productivity of public investments as

      they are estimated to do with private ones, or if public investments crowd out private

The extension to the vector case is straightforward. See Section L of the Web Appendix. (We keep the
arguments of the right-hand side expressions implicit to simplify the notation.)
  Empirical evidence (Cunha, 2007; Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha et al., 2010) shows that in multi-
                            (3)   (2)   (1)
period models, · · · > f 12 > f 12 > f 12 . Moreover, the elasticity of substitution in the first stage between
capabilities and investments is greater than 1 making these gross substitutes, while they are gross com-
plements in later stages as the elasticity of substitution becomes lower than 1. For further discussion see
Cunha et al. (2006).


                                                      18
       investments relatively more among disadvantaged families, then public investments

       will also play a role towards disequalization.36



       3.3      Other Ingredients

             In addition to the functions linking outcomes to skills and the technology of capa-

       bility formation, a fully specified model of family influence considers family preferences

       for child outcomes. Parents have different beliefs about “proper” child rearing, and can

       act altruistically or paternalistically (see, e.g., Baumrind, 1968, Bisin and Verdier, 2001,

       and Doepke and Zilibotti, 2012).37 A fully specified model also includes family re-

       sources broadly defined, including parental and child interactions with financial mar-

       kets and external institutions. This includes restrictions (if any) on transfers across

       generations, restrictions on transfers within generations (parental lifetime liquidity

       constraints), and public provision of investment in children.

             Such constraints are traditional. Less traditional, but central to the recent literature

       are other constraints on parents: (a) information on parenting practices and parental

       guidance, (b) genes, and (c) the structure of households, including assortative match-

       ing patterns.



       3.4      The Empirical Challenge

             There is a substantial empirical challenge facing the analyst of family influence.

       Influences at different stages of the life cycle build on each other. Evidence of early

       family influence on adult outcomes is consistent with strong initial effects that are

       attenuated at subsequent stages of the life cycle or weak initial effects that are ampli-

       fied at later stages of the life cycle. The empirical challenge is to sort out the relative
   36 This  is an argument against universal provision of policies to promote equality of outcomes. The
evidence supporting the complementarity hypothesis is mixed. See Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2013) and
Gelber and Isen (2013). See Web Appendix J.
    37 Altruistic parents care about the utility of their child and therefore evaluate their child’s actions using

the child’s utility function. Paternalistic parents, on the other hand, potentially disapprove of their child’s
actions, as these are evaluated through the lenses of the parents’ utility function. As discussed below, the
literature divides in terms of its specification of parental preferences and the evidence on the precise form
of parental preferences for child outcomes is scant.


                                                       19
importance of the different causal influences on adult outcomes and stages of the life

cycle where they are most influential. This paper reviews the evidence on these links.




                                         20
      4      A Bare-Bones Model of Parenting as Investment
            To focus ideas we present a simple model of family investment and skill devel-

      opment based on Cunha (2007) and Cunha and Heckman (2007). Section D of the

      Web Appendix provides much greater detail on these and more general models. This

      model extends the traditional literature on human capital accumulation and parental

      investments (Aiyagari et al., 2002; Becker and Tomes, 1986; Loury, 1981). It has mul-

      tiple periods of productive investments, dynamic complementarity in the process of

      skill accumulation, and incorporates family transactions with financial markets. We

      show how intergenerational links between parental and child skills emerge even in

      the absence of life cycle credit constraints.

            The deliberately simplified model with a scalar skill and scalar investment pre-

      sented in this section misses key implications of richer models with multiple skills

      and multiple investments which we discuss after presenting the basic model. They

      also fail to capture the change in the dimensionality of θt with t and the associated

      change in the dimensions of f (t) (·) and It .



      4.1      The Problem of the Parent

            Life is assumed to last four periods: two periods as a passive child who makes

      no economic decisions (and whose consumption is ignored), but who receives invest-

      ment in the form of goods and two periods as a parent. When the parent dies she is

      replaced by the generation of her grandchild. Denote by θ1 the initial capability level

      of a child drawn from the distribution J (θ1 )38 . The evolution of child skills depends

      on parental investments in the first and second period I1 and I2 . (For notational sim-

      plicity, we set θ P,t = θ P .) The productivity of parental investment depends on parental

      human capital θ P . We follow conventions in the literature and equate scalar human

      capital with skill for both parents and children. Denoting by θ3 the human capital of

      the child when he/she reaches adulthood, recursive substitution of the technology of
  38 This may depend on parental skills θ P,t and parental care in utero. See, e.g., Gluckman and Hanson
(2005, 2004).


                                                  21
skill formation gives the following representation:

                                                                                      φρ 
                                                         φ                         φ
                        θ3 = δ2 θ1 , θ P , γ ( I1 ) + (1 − γ) ( I2 )                            ,          (5)


for 0 < ρ ≤ 1, φ ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1, γ is a skill multiplier.

   To develop intuition about representation (5), consider the following parameteri-

zation of the stage-specific production functions:

                                       n                                           o φρt
                                                 φ             φ              φ          t
                           θt+1 = δt       γ1,t θt t   + γ2,t It t   + γ3,t θ Pt


with 0 < γ1,t , γ2,t , γ3,t , ρt ≤ 1, φt ≤ 1, ∑k γk,nt = 1. Substitute recursively. If T = 2,

ρ1 = ρ2 = 1, δ1 = 1, and φ1 = φ2 = φ ≤ 1, skills at adulthood, θ3 = θ T +1 can be

expressed as

                                                                                                    φ1
                                φ                φ          φ                          φ
           θ3 = δ2  γ1,2 γ1,1 θ 1  + γ1,2 γ2,1 I   + γ2,2 I2  + ( γ3,2 + γ1,2 γ3,1 ) θ P .
                                                                                         
                                     | {z } 1
                                   “Multiplier”

   The multiplier is γ = γ1,2 γ2,1 . It arises from the conjunction of self-productivity

(γ2,1 6= 0) and productivity of investment (γ1,2 6= 0). Self-productivity joined with

productivity of investment generates dynamic complementarity. γ2,1 characterizes

how much of the investment in period t = 1 propagates into skills at adulthood,

θ3 . The parameter φ captures the substitutability/complementarity of investments.

If φ = 1, investments at different periods are (almost) perfect substitutes. They are

perfect substitutes if γ12 γ21 = γ22 , in which case the timing of investment in skills

does not matter for the developmental process. This is the only circumstance in which

collapsing childhood into one period as in Becker–Tomes is without loss of generality.

The polar opposite case is θ3 = δ2 (θ1 , θ P , min ( I1 , I2 ) ) which is closer to the empirical

truth than perfect substitution. In that case, complementarity has a dual face. Early

investment is essential but ineffective unless later investments are also made. In this

extreme case there is no possibility of remediation. If parents are poor and unable to


                                                       22
      borrow against the future earnings of their children, and, as a result, I1 is low, there is

      no amount of investment at later age, I2 , that can compensate for early neglect.

           The parameters of the technology determine whether early and later investments

      are complements or substitutes.39 Given ρ, the smaller φ, the harder it is to remediate

      low levels of early investment I1 by increasing later investments. At the same time,

      the stronger the complementarity (the lower φ), the more important it is to follow

      high volumes of early investments with high volumes of late investments to achieve

      high levels of production of adult human capital.

           The parent decides how to allocate resources across household consumption in

      both periods of the child’s life, c1 and c2 , early and late investments, I1 and I2 , and

      bequests b0 . Assets at the end of the first period, period a may be constrained to be

      non-negative. Bequests are received when entering adulthood and may be positive

      or negative. The state variables for the parent are her initial wealth b, her human

      capital level θ P , and the initial skill level of the child θ1 . Human capital is rewarded in

      the labor market according to the wage rate w. The economy is characterized by one

      risk-free asset with return r.

           Denoting parental financial assets by a and allowing parental labor market pro-

      ductivity to grow at exogenous rate g, the stage-of-childhood-specific budget con-

      straints can be represented by:


                                                      a
                                       c1 + I1 +            = wθ P + b                             (6)
                                                   (1 + r )

      and
                                                 b0
                                  c2 + I2 +            = w (1 + g ) θ P + a                        (7)
                                              (1 + r )

           We allow for the possibility of borrowing constraints a ≥ a (intragenerational)

      and b0 ≥ 0 (intergenerational). When g is high (high income in the second stage of the


   39 “Direct” complementarity for (5) holds if ρ > φ, while substitutability holds otherwise. Another
definition of complementarity in the literature distinguishes (in the case ρ = 1) whether φ > 0 (gross
substitutes, the elasticity of substitution is greater than 1) or φ < 0 (gross complements, the elasticity of
substitution is less than 1) so that Cobb-Douglas (φ = 0) is the boundary case.


                                                      23
      child’s life), parents might hit the constraint a ≥ a. In the absence of these constraints,

      one simple lifetime budget constraint governs the parental choices of investment in

      children.

            Let u(·) denote the parental utility function, β the discount factor, and υ the parental

      altruism given by the weight assigned to the utility of future generations. Letting θ10

      be the uncertain initial endowment of the child’s child, the goal of the parent is to

      optimize:


                                                         u (c1 ) + βu (c2 ) + β2 υE V θ3 , b0 , θ10
                                                                                                  
                    V (θ P , b, θ1 ) = max                                                               (8)
                                    c1 ,c2 ,I1 ,I2



      subject to (5), (6) and (7).40 In models of paternalism, parental preferences are defined

      over specific outcomes and not necessarily the adult utility of children.41



      4.2      Implications of the Model

            A model with multiple periods of childhood is essential for understanding in-

      vestment dynamics and rationalizing the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of

      programs targeted toward promoting human capital at different ages. The earlier

      literature (Becker and Tomes, 1986), as well as some recent work (Lee and Seshadri,

      2014), limits itself to a one-period model of childhood. Inputs at any age are implicitly

      assumed to be perfect substitutes, contrary to the evidence discussed below. Appli-

      cation of the one-period model supports the widely held, but empirically unfounded,

      intuition that diminishing returns make investment in less advantaged adolescents

      more productive. The assumed magnitudes of the substitution (φ), multiplier (γ), and

      scale (ρ) parameters play key roles in shaping policy.

            If no intra- and intergenerational credit constraints are assumed, a key property

      of the Becker and Tomes (1986) model persists in this framework. There is no role

      for initial financial wealth b, parental income, parental utility, or the magnitude of

   40 One  can interpret this specification of preferences as excluding any utility from child consumption or
else as assuming that c1 and c2 are pure public goods, and parent and child utilities are identical.
   41 See, for example, Del Boca et al. (2012).



                                                                24
      parental altruism υ (above zero) in determining the optimal level of investment, be-

      cause parents can borrow freely in the market to finance the wealth maximizing level

      of investment.42 However, even in this setup, returns to parental investments depend

      on parental skills θ P , as they affect the productivity of investments. The returns to

      investments are higher for children of parents with higher θ P . These children will re-

      ceive higher levels of investment. This is a type of market failure due to the “accident

      of birth” that induces a correlation of human capital and earnings across generations

      even in the absence of financial market imperfections. The initial condition θ1 also

      affects investments. It creates a second channel of intergenerational dependence due

      to the “accident of birth” if it is genetically related to parental endowments, as con-

      siderable evidence suggests.43

             Imperfect credit markets create another channel of intergenerational dependence.

      One possible constraint is the impossibility of borrowing against the child’s future

      earnings (Becker and Tomes, 1986). This constraint likely emerges because children

      cannot credibly commit to repay the loans parents would take out on their behalf. Be-

      cause b0 ≥ 0, parental wealth matters in this model when this constraint binds. Chil-

      dren coming from constrained families will have lower early and late investments.

      Carneiro and Heckman (2003) show that permanent income has a strong effect on

      child outcomes. However, even with b0 ≥ 0, the ratio of early to late investment is not

      affected.44

             A second type of constraint arises when parents are prevented from borrowing

      against their own future labor income (a ≥ q > −∞). In this case, when parents can-

      not borrow against their own future income, investments are not perfect substitutes

      (−∞ < φ < 1), ρ = 1 and parental utility is given by u (c) = cλ − 1 /λ,45 the ratio
                                                                         




   42 Even if the altruism parameter is zero (υ = 0), if the parents can make binding commitments selfish
parents (υ = 0) will still invest in the child as long as the economic return in doing so is positive.
   43 Becker and Tomes (1986) discuss the importance of children’s initial endowments. A third channel is

parental paternalism. If parents value the child’s θ3 for itself, they may subsidize child education even if
the investment is economically inefficient.
   44 The constraint binds uniformly across periods within generations.
   45 λ = 1 corresponds to perfect intertemporal substitutability.



                                                    25
       of early to late investment is

                                                         1−1 φ                                 11−−λφ
                         I1              γ                                        1         c1
                            =                                       [ β(1 + r )] 1− φ                       .
                         I2       (1 − γ ) (1 + r )                                         c2
                                |          {z                  }    |            {z                    }        (9)
                                    unconstrained ratio                 =1 if unconstrained,
                                    I1
                                                                    <1 if constrained( a≥ a binds)
                                    I ↑ as γ ↑, φ ↑, and r ↓
                                    2



                                          I1
           In the constrained case,       I2   is less than it is in the unconstrained case and I1 is less

       than optimal.46 The ratio of early to late investments depends on parental preferences

       and endowments. If early parental income is low compared to later life income or if

       λ is low, the level and timing of family resources will influence the parental invest-

       ment.47 This constraint could be very harmful to a child if it binds in a critical period

       of development and complementarity parameter φ is low so that later life remediation

       is ineffective.

           The presence of such credit constraints affects investment levels. They induce a

       suboptimal level of investment (and consumption) in each period in which the con-

       straint is binding. If the constraint is binding during the early periods, because of the

       dynamic links induced by the technology of skill formation, late investments will be

       lower even if the parent is not constrained in later periods.48

           However, the presence of constraints is not necessarily synonymous with a low

       level of investment. For a given family, a binding constraint implies that the invest-

       ments are lower than the unconstrained optimum. Whether a family is constrained or

       not, however, is uninformative on how that family compares with others in terms of

       the effective level of investments provided. Families might be constrained, for exam-

       ple, when they have an extremely high productivity of investments in children or give


   46 In the extreme case of a Leontief technology, this ratio goes to 1. In the case of a linear technology, the
solution is a corner solution: invest only in the early years if γ > (1 − γ)(1 + r ).
    47 Estimates from Cunha et al. (2010) suggest that 1/ (1 − φ ) = .3̄ which, combined with an estimate of

λ ∈ [−3, −1.5] (Attanasio and Browning, 1995), imply (1 − λ)/(1 − φ) ∈ [0.83̄, 1.3̄]. Notice that even if λ =
1, parents may hit constraints on the level of investment if future resources are of insufficient magnitude.
    48 The case of low initial income and high growth rate corresponds to the earnings profiles of educated

parents. The relevance of the model just discussed critically relies on exogeneity of fertility. If more ed-
ucated families postpone fertility (as in Almlund 2013), the relevance of this constraint is lessened. The
greater the altruism of the parent, and the lower λ in equation 9, the more likely it is that families will
postpone fertility to match their life cycle income growth profiles.


                                                               26
    birth to a gifted child. This induces a high optimal level of investment which might

    not be affordable to the family at its current resource level. Thus, while constrained,

    the family might still be investing more than others.

           More educated parents might face such situations. The steeper the expected in-

    come growth, the higher the probability of being constrained. Relaxing this constraint

    likely impedes intergenerational mobility as measured by the intergenerational elas-

    ticity (IGE).49 Low skill parents, on the other hand, have a low θ P which makes in-

    vestments less productive. In this case, it is the “accident of birth” that harms a gifted

    child rather than the intertemporal credit constraints of the parents. We assess the

    quantitative importance of credit constraints in section 4.4.

           If early investments matter a lot and parents are credit market-constrained in the

    early years of their children, investments are suboptimal (see equation (9)). Caucutt

    and Lochner (2012) use a variant of the model of Cunha (2007) to investigate the role

    of income transfers and credit constraints in the early years. They find that a large

    proportion of young parents are credit constrained (up to 68% among college gradu-

    ates) but that reducing borrowing constraints is effective in promoting skills only for

    the children in the generation where they are relaxed.50 As previously noted, the fam-

    ilies constrained by their criteria may be quite affluent. Indeed, they report evidence

    showing that families that benefit from a reduction in the credit constraints are the

    ones with college educated parents. These families are usually well off. Even if some

    of these families receive “bad shocks”, it is hard to think that 68% of college graduates

    can be considered “poor.”


    Introducing income uncertainty. Cunha (2007) presents an overlapping genera-
    tions model with stochastic innovations to parental income. If g is stochastic on the

    interval [−1, ∞), so parents face uncertain income growth, constraints play a dual

    role. First, as before, if they bind they reduce investments in the constrained periods.

    Second, because future income is uncertain so is the likelihood of binding future con-

49 See   Black and Devereux (2011) for a definition and discussion of the IGE.
50 After   credit constraints are relaxed, future generations move back to a constrained position.


                                                    27
    straints. Absent full insurance markets, consumption and investments in children are

    less than optimal even if the parent is not currently constrained, but expects to be con-

    strained in the future with probability greater than zero.51 Under this scenario, young

    parents who just entered the labor force accumulate more assets than they would in

    the absence of possible future constraints to ensure against bad future shocks. This

    implies a reduction in household consumption and investments in child human capi-

    tal.



    4.3       Recent Extensions of the Basic Model

           By and large, the recent literature has moved beyond the simple models just dis-

    cussed.52 Table K.1 in the Web Appendix summarizes a recent literature in rapid flux.

           Most of the models in the literature are multiple generation frameworks. Most

    assume parental altruism, but a few are explicitly paternalistic. They all feature in-

    vestment in goods. Only recently has parental time been analyzed as an explicit input

    to child quality. Most models analyze how child investment depends on parental

    skills.

           Surprisingly, some of the recent models omit parental skills as arguments in the

    technology of capability formation despite the evidence in a large literature that parental

    skills (apart from explicit parental investments) are important factors in producing

    child skills.53 Until recently, most studies consider self-productivity of skills. Some

    recent papers ignore this feature despite the empirical evidence that supports it.

           Most analyses assume that parents know the technology of skill formation as well

    as the skills of their children in making investment decisions. Cunha et al. (2013) is

    an exception. The recent literature also ignores intergenerational transfers. Some of

    the papers consider extreme credit constraints that do not permit any borrowing (or

    lending) even within a lifetime of a generation, much less inter-generational transfers.

    Virtually the entire literature focuses on single child models, exogenous fertility, and
51 See Subsection D.6 of the Web Appendix for a mathematical proof of this statement.
52 Tables  K.1-K.3 in Subsection K.1 of the Web Appendix discuss each model in detail.
53 See, e.g., Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Cunha et al. (2010).



                                                 28
    exogenous mating decisions. Most models are for single parent families, where the

    match characteristics of the parents are irrelevant.

          These models do not capture the richness of the framework sketched in Section 3.

    First, with the exception of Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Cunha et al. (2010), hu-

    man capital is treated as a scalar. This is inconsistent with fact one. It is a practice

    inherited from the early literature of Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986), and Solon (2004).

    Skills are multidimensional. Borghans et al. (2008), Almlund et al. (2011), and Heck-

    man and Kautz (2012, 2014) present evidence showing that a single skill such as cogni-

    tive ability or IQ is insufficient to summarize the determinants of life achievements54 .

          In some of the recent models, investments are also treated as scalars. In truth,

    parents and schools have access to and use multiple methods of investment, and the

    nature of the investments changes over the life cycle of the child. The most relevant

    omissions in the first stage models are time investments. Quality parenting is a time-

    intensive process. The recent literature shows that parental time is a prime factor in-

    fluencing child skill formation (Bernal, 2008; Bernal and Keane, 2010, 2011; Del Boca

    et al., 2014; Gayle et al., 2013; Lee and Seshadri, 2014). Families differ in their produc-

    tivity and availability of time, and face different opportunity costs. Time investments

    may complement or substitute for goods investments. In addition, spending time

    with children allows parents to more accurately assess the capacities of their children

    and to make more precisely targeted investment decisions. As discussed in Section 8,

    parent-child/child-mentor interactions operate in real time and parents/mentors ac-

    tively engage the child to stimulate learning.

          Third, families usually have more than one child. Parents make decisions on how

    to allocate investments across different siblings, compensating for or reinforcing ini-

    tial differences among them (Behrman et al., 1982). Parental preferences might con-

    flict with what is socially optimal. Del Boca et al. (2014) and Gayle et al. (2013) present

    models with multiple children. Firstborn children receive relatively more early invest-



54 See   the analysis in Web Appendix E.


                                                29
      ment and appear to do better as adults (Hotz and Pantano, 2013). This is consistent

      with dynamic complementarity.

          Fourth, the models in the literature ignore the interaction of parents and children

      in the process of development. They treat the child as a passive being whose skills are

      known to the parent. They often assume that the parent fully internalizes the child’s

      utility as her own and the child’s utility function is that of the parents. We discuss

      models that account for parent-child interaction in Section 8.

          Fifth, fertility is taken as exogenous. Forward-looking parents might attempt to

      time their fertility to balance the benefit from the presence of a child with the need

      and desire to provide a certain amount of monetary and time investments. The mo-

      tive to avoid credit constraints, for example, may induce a greater delay in fertility for

      the parents with a high preference for child quality. The greater the desired level of

      investment, the costlier it is to hit an early constraint. To avoid this risk, parents may

      delay fertility until a sufficient level of precautionary assets has been accumulated.

      This observation seems to be consistent with the fertility decisions of more educated

      parents (Almlund, 2013).55 This consideration suggests caution in taking too liter-

      ally the models of credit constraints interacting with dynamic complementarity that

      take fertility as exogenously determined. The parents who hit the constraints may be

      less farsighted, have less information, and a variety of other traits that might be con-

      founded with any effect of the levels of income or the constraint itself. In the empirical

      work on the importance of credit constraints, these factors are rarely accounted for.

          Finally, the child’s development is influenced by the environment outside his fam-

      ily: day care, kindergarten, school, and neighborhood. In addition, the effectiveness

      of policies is determined in part by parental responses to them. Policies that com-

      plement rather than substitute for family investments will have greater impacts and

      lower costs. We discuss the evidence on parental responses to interventions in Sec-

      tion 8.


  55 Gayle   et al. (2013) is the only paper of which we are aware that analyzes the impact of endogenous
fertility choices on child outcomes.


                                                   30
    4.4       Empirical Estimates of Credit Constraints and the Effects

    of Family Income

          Economists have a comparative advantage in analyzing the effects of constraints

    on behavior. There is an active literature analyzing the effects of various constraints

    on child outcomes. One strand summarized in Table 1a focuses on testing the effects

    of parental income on child outcomes, while another (summarized in Table 1b) tests

    for the presence of credit constraints directly. The two are not synonymous although

    they are often confused in the literature.


    4.4.1     The Effects of Family Income

          The literature is unanimous in establishing that families with higher levels of long-

    run (or permanent) income on average invest more in their children and have children

    with greater skills. The literature is much less clear in distinguishing the effect of

    income by source or in distinguishing pure income effects from substitution effects

    induced by changing wages and prices (including child care subsidies). If some part

    of a family income change is due to changes in labor supply, this will have implica-

    tions for child development (see, e.g., Bernal, 2008; Bernal and Keane, 2010, 2011; Del

    Boca et al., 2012; Gayle et al., 2013). Higher levels of parental permanent income are

    associated with higher levels of parental education, better schools, more capable par-

    ents, better peers, more engaged parenting, etc. All of these factors likely affect child

    development.

          Carneiro and Heckman (2003) and Cunha et al. (2006) present evidence that child

    cognitive and noncognitive skills diverge at early ages across families with different

    levels of permanent income during childhood.56 Levels of permanent income are

    highly correlated with family background factors like parental education and mater-

    nal ability, which, when statistically controlled for, largely eliminate the gaps across

    income classes.57 The literature sometimes interprets this conditioning as reflecting

56 This   evidence is reviewed in Section A of the Web Appendix.
57 See   Figure A.2 and A.3 in the Web Appendix.


                                                  31
parenting and parental investments, but it could arise from any or all of the panoply

of correlates of permanent income associated with parental preferences and skills.

This poses a major empirical challenge.




                                          32
                                                                     Table 1a: Studies of the Role of Income on Child Outcomes
                                             Dataset              Outcome           Timing of Income         Separate the Effect   Distinguishes the      Sources of Income       Instrument Used                          Effect of Income on
                                                                Studied: Test    (Developmental Stage of      of Income from           Effects of         Whose Effects are                                                  Human Capital
                                                                 Scores (T),       the Child at Which        Changes in Labor      Contempora-neous            Studied                                                         Investments
                                                                Schooling (S)       Income Effects are       Supply or Family        vs Permanent
                                                                                        Studied)               Environment              Income
     Carneiro and Heckman (2002)            NLSY79∗                   S                  E and L                      X                      X            Total family income           None          (1) Conditioning on ability and family background factors,
                                                                                    College Enrollment                                                                                                the role of income in determining schooling decisions is min-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      imal. The strongest evidence is in the low ability group.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      The test is not robust to accounting for parental preferences
                                                                                                                                                                                                      and paternalism. Observed differences in attendance might
                                                                                                                                                                                                      be due to a consumption value of child’s schooling for par-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ents. Percentage of people constrained = weighted gap in
                                                                                                                                                                                                      educational outcome to highest income group: 5.1% are con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      strained in college enrollment (1.2% among low income, low
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ability, 0.2% low income high ability), 9% in completion of 2-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      year college (5.3% among low income, low ability, 0.3% low
                                                                                                                                                                                                      income high ability).
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (2) There is no evidence of a independent effect on college
                                                                                                                                                                                                      enrollment of early or late income once permanent income is
                                                                                                                                                                                                      accounted for.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (3) The claim that higher IV than OLS estimates of the Min-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      cer coefficient implies credit constraints are incorrect: instru-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ments used are invalid, the quality margin is ignored and
                                                                                                                                                                                                      self selection and comparative advantage can produce the
                                                                                                                                                                                                      result also in absence of financial constraints.
      Belley and Lochner (2007)        NLSY79∗ , NLSY97∗              S                      L                        X                      X            Total family income           None          High school completion: +8.4% for highest income quartile
                                                                                       High school                                                                                                    compared to lowest in 79, +6.7 in 97 cannot reject equal ef-
                                                                                     completion and                                                                                                   fect of income; college enrollment: +9.3% for highest income
                                                                                    College Enrollment                                                                                                quartile compared to lowest in 79, +16 in 97, cannot reject
                                                                                                                                                                                                      equal effect of income.

       Dahl and Lochner (2012)       NLSY79∗ , C-NLSY79∗              T                      E                        Xa                    Xb            Total family income    Policy variation in $1,000 extra per year for 2 years: +6% of a standard deviation
                                                                                      Preadolescence                                                                              EITC eligibility   in math and reading combined PIAT score.
                                                                                       (ages 8 to 14)

         Duncan et al. (1998)                PSID∗                    Sd                  E and L                     X                      X            Total family income           None          $10,000 increase in average (age 0-15) family income: +1.3
                                                                                      Childhood and                                                                                                   years of schooling in low income (<$20,000) families, +0.13
                                                                                      Preadolescence                                                                                                  in high income ones. Relevance of income is stronger in the
                                                                                       (ages 0 to 15)                                                                                                 early years (age 0-5): $10,000 increase in average (age 0-5)




33
                                                                                                                                                                                                      family income leads to extra 0.8 years of schooling in low
                                                                                                                                                                                                      income families, 0.1 in high income ones. Income at age 6-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                      and 11-15: no significant effect. Similar results in a sibling
                                                                                                                                                                                                      differences model.
         Duncan et al. (2011)       Randomized Interventions          T                     E                         X                      X            Total family income Random assignment $1,000 extra per year for 2 to 5 years: +6% of a standard de-
                                       on Welfare Support                            Early Childhood                                                                          to programs offering viation in child’s achievement score.
                                                                                       (ages 2 to 5)                                                                            welfare transfers
                                                                                                                                                                                  conditional on
                                                                                                                                                                                 employment or
                                                                                                                                                                                education related
                                                                                                                                                                              activities, or full time
                                                                                                                                                                                       work
             Loken (2010)                Norwegian                    S                      E                       Xc                      X            Total family income       Oil discovery   OLS: positive relationship of average (age 1-13) family in-
                                      Administrative Data                               Childhood                                                                                (inducing regional come on children’s education, IV: no causal effect. Results
                                                                                       (ages 1 to 11)                                                                            increase in wages) are robust to different specification and splitting the sample
                                                                                                                                                                                                    by parental education.

          Loken et al. (2012)            Norwegian                    S                      E                        X                      X            Total family income       Oil discovery   Non-linear IV (quadratic model): increase of $17,414, +0.74
                                      Administrative Data                               Childhood                                                                                (inducing regional years of education for children in poor families, +0.05 for
                                                                                       (ages 1 to 11)                                                                            increase in wages) children in rich families.†

      Milligan and Stabile (2011)      CCTB∗∗ , NCBS∗∗∗               T                      E                        X                      X             Child related tax  Variation in benefits Low education mothers: positive effects of child benefits
                                                                                        Childhood                                                         benefits and income      eligibility      on cognitive outcomes for boys, on emotional outcomes for
                                                                                       (ages 0 to 10)                                                          transfers                            girls, weak on health. Results are non robust to the exclusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                    of Quebec.
         Carneiro et al. (2013)       Norwegian Registry              Se                  E and L                     X                      X            Total family income           None          All outcomes: monotone and concave relationship with per-
                                                                                       Childhood to                                                                                                   manent income. £100,000 increase in permanent father’s
                                                                                       Adolescence                                                                                                    earnings: +0.5 years of schooling. Timing of income: a bal-
                                                                                       (ages 0 to 17)                                                                                                 anced profile between early (age 0-5) and late childhood (age
                                                                                                                                                                                                      6-11) is associated with the best outcomes; shifting income to
                                                                                                                                                                                                      adolescence is associated with better outcomes in dropping
                                                                                                                                                                                                      out of school, college attendance, earnings, IQ and teen preg-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      nancy. Early and late childhood income are complements in
                                                                                                                                                                                                      determining schooling attainment, early and adolescent in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      come are substitutes.
           E refers to “early” years (childhood), L refers to “late” years (adolescence).
           a Control for labor supply, but endogeneity is not considered, b Only analysis of past versus contemporaneous income, c Labor supply is not modeled, but the effects of the instrument on it are studied and found insignificant, d Hazard of non
           marital birth is also studied, e Other outcomes (health, teenage pregnancy, IQ) are studied as well.
           ∗ NLSY79: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, NLSY97: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997, C-NLSY79: Children on the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, PSID: Panel Study of Income Dynamics; ∗∗ Canada Child

           Tax Benefit; ∗∗∗ National Child Benefit Supplement. † Unfortunately, this study is flawed by using an IV procedure for ordered choice models of schooling that counts outcomes for certain subsets of the population multiple times and is difficult
           to interpret economically (see Heckman et al. (2006)) for a critical discussion of the method used.
                                                                                    Table 1b: Studies of Credit Constraints
                                       Dataset        Outcome         Timing of Income           Explicit      Who is Affected by     Method to Test for      Find Presence of              Effect of Income or Constraints on Human
                                                       Studied:        (Developmental            Dynamic       Constraints: Parent    Credit Constraints     Credit Constraints                         Capital Investments
                                                         Test        Stage of the Child at        Model         of the Agent (P),
                                                      Scores (T),     Which Constraints                         Agent / Child (C)
                                                      Schooling          are Studied)
                                                          (S)
      Keane and Wolpin (2001)         NLSY79∗              S                  L                     X                   C            Structural estimation           YES            Increase borrowing limit to $3,000 (3× max estimated): no
                                                                           College                                                    of the lower bound      But irrelevant for    change in mean highest grade completed; +0.2% in college
                                                                          Enrollment                                                     on asset level      schooling decisions    enrollment; -0.2$ on mean hourly wage rate; increase in con-
                                                                                                                                                                                    sumption and reduction in market hours; moderate reduc-
                                                                                                                                                                                    tion in parental transfers especially for the least educated
                                                                                                                                                                                    parents.

     Cameron and Taber (2004)         NLSY79∗              S                  L                      X                  C              IV estimation of              NO             Theoretical prediction: if borrowing constraints, IV esti-
                                                                         Adolescence                                                     “returns” to                               mates using direct costs of schooling higher than using op-




34
                                                                            and                                                      schooling using costs                          portunity costs. Data: IV estimates using the presence of a
                                                                           College                                                      of schooling or                             local college are smaller than the ones using foregone earn-
                                                                         Enrollment                                                  foregone earnings as                           ings. Regressions which interact college costs and character-
                                                                                                                                         instruments                                istics potentially related to credit availability: no evidence
                                                                                                                                                                                    of excess sensitivity to costs for potentially constrained sam-
                                                                                                                                                                                    ple. Structural model: almost 0%of the population is found
                                                                                                                                                                                    to borrow at a rate higher than the market one.

     Caucutt and Lochner (2012) NLSY79∗ , C-NLSY79∗       Ta               E and L                  X                   P            Structural estimation           YES            50% of young parents are constrained: high school dropouts
                                                                        Childhood and                                                 of the lower bound      Stronger effect on    (50%), high school graduates (38%), college dropouts (60%),
                                                                         Adolescence                                                     on asset level      high skilled parents   college graduates (68%); and 12% of old parents are con-
                                                                                                                                                                                    strained. Families with college graduate parents benefit the
                                                                                                                                                                                    most from a reduction in credit constraints.
          E refers to “early” years (childhood), L refers to “late” years (adolescence).
          a The consequences on child’s schooling outcomes are studied as well.
          ∗ NLSY79: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, NLSY97: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997, C-NLSY79: Children on the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979.
   4.4.2      Effects of Borrowing Constraints

        The literature also analyzes the effect of borrowing constraints on child outcomes.

   It considers whether there are Pareto-optimal interventions in borrowing markets that

   can improve the welfare of children and parents, given initial distributions of income

   (see, e.g., the survey by Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2012). If markets are perfect, al-

   truistic parents or selfish parents who can write binding contracts with their children

   will ensure that marginal returns to investments in skills will equal the market oppor-

   tunity costs of funds. However, the presence of the parent environmental input θ P in

   the technology of skill formation affects the level of investment in children and the

   initial condition θ1 (which may be genetically determined) and hence a child’s skills

   and the welfare of the child even with perfect lending and borrowing markets. Allo-

   cations are Pareto-optimal given initial parental conditions. From other perspectives,

   however, these market-efficient outcomes may be suboptimal because they depend

   on the “accident of birth”. If, for example, parenting is deficient for whatever reason,

   choice outcomes might be improved by supplementing family resources (apart from

   income). A whole host of endowments of the child at the college-going age might be

   enhanced if the parental environment does not provide the information, the mentor-

   ing, and the encouragement (summarized in θ P and I) children cannot insure against

   these aspects of the environment.58

       The recent literature that considers multiperiod childhoods builds on the analysis

   surrounding equation (9) and investigates the role of the timing of the receipt of income

   as it interacts with restrictions on credit markets and dynamic complementarity. We

   consider evidence from these strands of the literature.


   4.4.3      Restrictions in Lending Markets for College Education



       Using a variety of empirical approaches, Carneiro and Heckman (2002), Keane and

   Wolpin (2001), and Cameron and Taber (2004) find little evidence of an important role
58 Aiyagari   et al. (2002) present an analysis of full insurances against the accident of birth.


                                                      35
      for credit constraints in access to college education.59 Carneiro and Heckman (2002)

      show that while income is a determinant of enrollment in college, its effect disappears

      once ability in the adolescent years is controlled for.60 Cameron and Taber (2004)

      develop and test the novel theoretical prediction that in the presence of borrowing

      constraints, instrumental variable (IV) estimates of the Mincer coefficient using direct

      costs of schooling should be higher than IV estimates using opportunity costs. They

      reject the hypothesis that there are binding credit constraints.

          Belley and Lochner (2007), Bailey and Dynarski (2011), and Lochner and Monge-

      Naranjo (2012) claim that in later cohorts (in the NLSY97) there is stronger evidence

      of credit constraints as captured by the estimated effects of quantiles of family income

      (from whatever source) on college participation.

          The Belley and Lochner test of credit constraints is different from the one used

      in Keane and Wolpin (2001) or Cameron and Taber (2004). They update the NLSY79

      analysis of Carneiro and Heckman (2002) using NLSY97 data and claim that credit

      constraints seem to bind predominantly among less able poor children. However, the

      Belley and Lochner analysis shows that, across all ability groups, college enrollment

      increased in 1997 compared to 1979. The increases are more substantial for the more

      affluent low-ability children.61

          They estimate the changing effects of affluence by comparing enrollments of chil-

      dren at the same quantiles of family income over time. Their analysis ignores the evo-

      lution of the shape of the income distribution over this period. Inequality increases

      arise mostly from outward shifts of the right tail of the income distribution. Their

      documented increase in college enrollment of more affluent children might simply be

      a consequence of paternalism. If the education of children is a normal or supernormal

      good for families, and higher quantile families receive a disproportionate share of the

      increase in family income, their results are readily explained.

  59 Keane and Wolpin (2001) provide evidence for constraints affecting other dimensions of behavior such

as labor supply.
   60 They also show flaws in the argument proposed by Card (1999, 2001) that evidence of higher IV esti-

mates than OLS estimates of the ‘returns’ to schooling is evidence of credit constraints.
   61 See Figures H.1 through H.3 of the Web Appendix.



                                                   36
          Individuals with low ability, but affluent parents are more likely to enroll in col-

      lege. The estimates of Keane and Wolpin (2001) suggest that the source of the inter-

      generational correlation of school attainment is due to more educated parents making

      larger tied financial transfers to their children, conditional on their college attendance.

      The higher the educational level of the parents, the greater are the tied transfers to

      their children. Under this scenario, the education of their children is valued by parents

      as a consumption good (paternalism) even in the absence of a greater return from it.62

      The fact that low income parents with low ability children cannot provide the same

      tied transfers is a constraint due to the “accident of birth”. According to the Keane-

      Wolpin estimates, if credit constraints are relieved, educational attainment does not

      increase, while consumption increases and work in school declines. Their evidence

      suggests that distortions may operate differently at different margins of choice. Inter-

      ventions may be (conditionally) Pareto-optimal for financing life cycle consumption,

      but not for schooling. Empirical evidence by Carneiro et al. (2011) and Eisenhauer

      et al. (2013) using NSLY79 data suggests that for low ability individuals the returns

      to college enrollment are close to 0 if not negative. If schooling investments are ineffi-

      cient, there is no clear cost-benefit case for investing in the children of poorer families

      given parental endowments θ P .

          Despite disagreements on the importance of credit constraints, this strand of the

      literature agrees that ability is a first order determinant not only of schooling attain-

      ment, but also of the returns to schooling. Ability is the outcome of a process that

      starts early in life.


      4.4.4    The Timing of Income, Dynamic Complementarity, and Credit Con-
      straints




  62 Alternatively,
                 parents may prefer in-kind transfers to cash transfers to avoid the “Samaritan’s
dilemma” (Buchanan, 1975).


                                                  37
         The interaction of dynamic complementarity and lifetime liquidity constraints mo-

      tivates a recent literature. Dahl and Lochner (2012) investigate how credit constraints

      affect test scores of children in early adolescence. They exploit the policy variation

      in the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) as an exogenous instrument for the effect of

      income on child outcomes. The EITC does not have a uniform effect across income or

      education classes.63 The magnitude of their reported estimated effect of a $1,000 in-

      crease in pure transfer is 6% of a standard deviation in test scores. If families take their

      decisions under the assumption that the policy will persist forever, the cost of the im-

      provements would be large (given by $1,000 times the expected amount of years the

      average family expect to benefit from the EITC), diminishing further their estimated

      effect.

         The “income effect” that they estimate is not a pure income effect. EITC induces

      greater employment but may reduce hours of work for workers, depending on where

      the family is located on the EITC budget set (see Heckman et al., 2003). The evidence

      from Gayle et al. (2013), Bernal (2008), and Bernal and Keane (2010) suggests that

      maternal working time has substantial effects on child test scores. Dahl and Lochner

      (2012) attempt to control for the time allocation effects of EITC (which may reduce

      parental time with children) but do not control for the endogeneity of the labor supply

      decisions of the families, or for parental investments.

         Duncan et al. (2011) analyze a series of randomized interventions on welfare sup-

      port. Their estimate of the role of income on test scores is surprisingly similar to the

      estimate obtained by Dahl and Lochner (2012) for income received and children’s test

      scores at later ages. They do not control for the source of income, any effects on la-

      bor supply, or for any subsidy elements for child education. Many of the programs

      they study subsidize child education. Although they pool evidence from many dif-

      ferent programs, their estimates are driven by the results of one particular program in



  63 Some parents might have advance information on expected policy changes.
                                                                           This makes policy changes
in the EITC an invalid instrument. Parents who have more information will adjust their investments in
advance of receipt of payment. This likely biases downward their estimate.


                                                  38
   Canada.64 An average effect obtained across diverse programs is not an informative

   guide for policy. It would be more interesting to investigate why apparently simi-

   lar programs produce such different results and what features make some programs

   more effective.

          Milligan and Stabile (2011) find positive effects of child benefit programs in Canada,

   but their results are driven by strong positive effects in Quebec, a province where as-

   sistance programs consist of more than just income transfers, such as subsidized child

   care (Almond and Currie, 2011). Evidence of a role of income from whatever source

   on child outcomes in a reduced form regression that does not separate effects from

   subsidy and relative price effects is not convincing evidence that credit constraints

   matter.

          Carneiro and Heckman (2002) respond to an analysis by Duncan et al. (1998) that

   early receipt of family income has more substantial effects on educational attainment

   than later receipt of income. Expressing income in terms of present value units, and

   conditioning on an early measure of child ability, they find no effect of the timing

   of income on child educational attainment. Their analysis has been faulted by Cau-

   cutt and Lochner (2012), who argue that the early measure of child ability may be a

   consequence of receipt of family income in the early years of childhood, and hence

   understates the importance of early receipt of income.


   4.4.5      Lessons from the Literature on Family Income and Credit Constraints



          The literature on credit constraints and family income shows that higher levels of

   parental resources, broadly defined, promote child outcomes. However, a clear sepa-

   ration of parental resources into pure income flows, parental environmental variables,

   and parental investment has not yet been done. It is premature to advocate income

   transfer policies as effective policies for promoting child development.



64 The   Canadian Self-Sufficiency Project which does not have a child care component.


                                                  39
   The literature establishes the first order importance of child ability for college go-

ing, irrespective of family income levels. More advantaged families with less able

children send their children to college at greater rates than less advantaged families,

but the literature does not establish the existence of market imperfections or any basis

for intervention in credit markets. The observed empirical regularity may be due to

the exercise of parental preferences. Recent work shows that the returns to college for

less able children are low, if not negative.

   The literature that presents formal econometric analyses of the importance of credit

market restrictions on educational attainment shows little evidence for them. The

analysis of Caucutt and Lochner (2012) is an exception. They calibrate that a substan-

tial fraction of the population is constrained due to the interaction of dynamic com-

plementarity, the receipt of income, and the imperfection of lending markets. Much

further research is required before definitive policy conclusions can be drawn on the

empirical importance of the timing of receipt of income over the life cycle for child

outcomes.



4.5    Structural Estimates of Behavioral Responses to Public Poli-

cies

   Most of the studies of the role of income transfer programs discussed in Section 4.4

do not investigate the interactions of public policy interventions and family invest-

ments. In order to do so, some authors have employed fully specified structural mod-

els and use them to study the effect of various types of policy experiments. Table K.4

in the Web Appendix reports the outcomes of these policy experiments.

   Few clean conclusions emerge and many that do are obvious. The authors esti-

mate different models under different assumptions about their financing. Four main

facts emerge from the literature. First, subsidies to parental investments are more

cost effective in improving adult outcomes of children such as schooling attainment

or earnings, when provided in the early stages of life (Caucutt and Lochner, 2012;



                                               40
    Cunha, 2007; Cunha and Heckman, 2007). Second, financial investment subsidies

    have stronger effects for families who are already engaging in complementary in-

    vestments. Targeted public investments and targeted transfers restricted to child re-

    lated goods that guarantee minimum investment amounts to every child increase the

    level of investments received by the children of the least active parents (Caucutt and

    Lochner, 2012; Del Boca et al., 2014). Lee and Seshadri (2014) provide evidence on

    the importance of targeted education subsidies for increasing the educational expen-

    ditures of poor families. Third, time allocation decisions are affected by transfers.

    Del Boca et al. (2014) show that unrestricted transfers increase the time parents spend

    with their children through a wealth effect. The increase in child quality is minimal.

    Lee and Seshadri (2014) show how this effect is especially strong for parents without

    college education, while, in their model, public transfers negatively affect time spent

    with children for college educated parents. Fourth, targeted conditional transfers (on

    child’s ability improvements) are more cost effective than pure transfers to achieve

    any objective.



    5        The Implications of Dynamic Complementarity

    for Investments across Children with Different Ini-

    tial Endowments
           Few models in the literature consider the allocation of investments across multiple

    children.65 The average family usually has more than one child, and society allocates

    public investments across multiple children.

           The problem of intra-child allocations is sometimes formulated as a problem in

    fairness. A CES representation of parental utility V is often used:

                                                              ! σ1
                                                    N
                                           V=      ∑ ωk Vkσ          .                        (10)
                                                   k =1
65 See,   however Becker and Barro (1988), Gayle et al. (2013), and Del Boca et al. (2014).

                                                     41
    Vk represents the adult outcome for child k which is valued by parents.66 The ωk are

    weights assigned to each child and σ is a measure of inequality aversion. A Ben-

    thamite model sets σ = 1 so child utilities are perfect substitutes. A Rawlsian ver-

    sion of maximal inequality aversion is obtained when σ → −∞, so utilities are perfect

    complements, and parents are concerned only with the maximization of the minimum

    outcome across children.

          In a two child version of the one-period-of-childhood model analyzed by Becker

    and Tomes (1979, 1986), under complementarity between initial endowment and in-

    vestment, the optimal policy when σ = 1 is to invest less in the initially disadvantaged

    child. Under substitutability it is optimal to invest more in that child.

          The story is richer when we consider a multiperiod model with dynamic comple-

    mentarity. Investing relatively more in initially disadvantaged young children can be efficient

    even when the ωk are equal and σ = 1 even if there is complementarity in each period

    of the life cycle. Dynamic complementarity is a force promoting compensating early

    stage investments even in the absence of family inequality aversion. Thus, in a multi-

    period model, where at stage t


                                                θt+1 = f (t) (θt , It ),                      (11)


                                                                           (t)
    even if there is complementarity at all stages so f 12 (·) > 0 (where (·) denotes the

    argument of the function), output maximizing investments can be compensating.
                                                                                            (1)
          In the two period–two child model developed in Web Appendix D.7, if f 12 (·)
                  (2)
    < 0, but f 12 (·) > 0, it is always efficient to invest relatively more in the initially disad-
    vantaged child in the first period.67 But it can also be productively efficient to invest
                                          (1)
    in the disadvantaged child if f 12 (·) > 0, when initial endowments and investments

    are complements.

          The intuition for this result comes from increasing complementarity over the life

    cycle. In this case, the stock of skills in the second period has a greater effect on the

66 Behrman    et al. (1982) introduced this formulation into the literature.
67 For   a proof, see Section D.7 of the Web Appendix.


                                                          42
                                                                                     
                                                                     (2)        (1)
productivity of investments than it does in the first period       f 12 (·) > f 12 (·) . First

period investments bolster the stock of second period skills and prepare disadvan-

taged children to make productive use of them in the second period. This effect is
                 (2)
stronger when f 12 (·) is larger. Another force promoting greater initial investment in

the disadvantaged child is diminishing self productivity of skills in the first period
             
    (1)
  f 11 (·) < 0 . The greater are the diminishing returns to investment for the better

endowed child the lower the benefits of early advantage. Diminishing productiv-
                                                    
                                           (2)
ity of the stock of second period skills f 11 (·) < 0 operates in the same fashion

to limit the effects of initial advantage. The smaller the effect of the initial stock of
                                                                    
                                                               (1)
skills on the productivity of investment in the first period f 12 (·) , the weaker is the

disequalizing force of complementarity toward promoting investment in the initially

advantaged child.

   Roughly speaking, the more concave are the technologies in terms of stocks of

skills (the more they exhibit decreasing returns in the stocks of skills), the more favor-

able is the case for investing in more disadvantaged children. The stronger second
                                 
                             (2)
period complementarity f 12 (·) , the stronger the case for investing more in the ini-

tially advantaged child to build skill stocks to take advantage of this opportunity. The
                                                   
                                               (1)
weaker the first period complementarity f 12 (·) , the less offsetting is the disequal-

izing effect of complementarity coupled with initial advantage.

   In general, even when investment is greater in the first period for the disadvan-

taged child, second period investment is greater for the initially advantaged child. It

is generally not efficient to make the disadvantaged child whole as it enters the second

period. Greater second period complementarity then kicks in to promote disequaliz-

ing second period investments.

   Web Appendix D.8 illustrates these general features for CES technologies with dif-

ferent patterns of concavity and complementarity. We review the literature on multi-

child investment in Web Appendix D.9.




                                           43
      6      Operationalizing the Theory
            A dynamic state space model with constraints and family investment decisions is

      the natural econometric framework for operationalizing the model of equation (2) and

      the evolution of capacities, as presented in equation (4). Many studies in the literature

      focus attention on estimating the technology of skill formation without formulating

      or estimating models with explicit representation of parental preferences or budget

      constraints. They account for the endogeneity of input choice through a variety of

      strategies. This approach is more robust in that it focuses only on one ingredient of a

      model of family influence. It is, however, clearly limited in the information obtained

      about the process of human development.



      6.1      Skills as Determinants of Outcomes

            Cunha et al. (2010) present conditions under which the outcome equations (2) and

      technology equations (4) are non-parametrically identified. They develop methods

      for accounting for measurement error of inputs, anchoring estimated skills on adult

      outcomes (so that scales are defined in meaningful units), and accounting for endo-

      geneity of investments.68 Heckman et al. (2013) develop and apply simple and easily

      implemented least-squares estimators of linear factor models to estimate equations

      for outcomes.



      6.2      Multiple Skills Shape Human Achievement Across a Va-

      riety of Dimensions

            The relationship between the skills estimated in the recent literature that links

      economics and personality psychology and traditional preference parameters (time

  68 They  show that accounting for measurement error substantially affects estimates of the technology of
skill formation. Caution should be adopted in interpreting the burgeoning literature regressing wages
or other outcomes on psychological measurements. The share of error variance for proxies of cogni-
tion, personality, and investments ranges from 30% to 70%. Not accounting for measurement error pro-
duces downward-biased estimates of self-productivity effects and perverse estimates of investment effects
(Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha et al., 2010).


                                                   44
        preference, leisure, risk aversion, etc.) is weak (see Dohmen et al., 2011). This evi-

        dence suggests that richer descriptions of preferences and constraints than the ones

        traditionally used characterize choice behavior. The two literatures complement each

        other. Figure 1 from (Eisenhauer et al., 2013) plot the probability and the return69 of

        enrolling in college immediately after having graduated high school as a function of

        the deciles of scalar summaries of cognitive and noncognitive skills.70

   Figure 1: The Probability and Returns of College Enrollment by Endowments Levels


         Figure: Choice Probability, College Enrollment                         Figure: Net Return, College Enrollment




Source: Eisenhauer et al. (2013)
Note: College enrollment refers to the individuals who enroll in college immediately after having finished high school. Returns are
expressed in units of millions of dollars. Higher deciles correspond to higher levels. See Eisenhauer et al. (2013) for greater details.




        6.3      Estimates of the Technology of Skill Formation in the Lit-

        erature

             The main features of the empirical models of the technology of skill formation are

        summarized in Table F.1. Most of the literature estimates models only for cognitive




   69 The  return is calculated over a 65 years-long working life. Lifecycle earning profiles are simulated
using the estimated parameters. See Eisenhauer et al. (2013) for a precise description of model, data and
computations.
   70 Section E of the Web Appendix gives a variety of other plots based on the same low-dimensional

measures of capability.


                                                                  45
       skills.71 Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Cunha et al. (2010) estimate models for both

       cognitive and noncognitive skills. They report evidence of cross-productivity (that

       noncognitive skills foster cognitive skills) and that failure to account for noncognitive

       skills substantially distorts estimates of the cognitive technology. The literature has

       not yet estimated dynamic models of health.72

            We briefly summarize the findings of the most general specification estimated to

       date, that of Cunha et al. (2010). They estimate a model with two stages of child-

       hood (birth through age 4) and later childhood (age 5 through age 14) and two skills

       (cognitive and noncognitive skill) with skill measures anchored in outcomes.73

            Their model explains 34% of the variance of educational attainment by the mea-

       sures of cognitive and noncognitive skills.74 They find that self-productivity becomes

       stronger as children become older, for both cognitive and noncognitive skills (i.e.,
       ∂θθt+1
         ∂θθt   ↑ t).75 They report asymmetric cross effects. Noncognitive skills foster cognitive
       investment but not vice versa. There is static complementarity at each stage of the life

       cycle. Estimated complementarity between cognitive skills and investment becomes

       stronger at later stages of the life cycle. The elasticity of substitution for cognitive

       skill production is smaller in second stage production. This evidence is consistent

       with emerging dynamic complementarity.76 However, estimated complementarity

       between noncognitive skills and investments is roughly constant over the life cycle of

       childhood. It is slightly easier at later stages of childhood to remediate early disadvan-

       tage using investments in noncognitive skills. This econometric evidence is consistent

       with a broad array of evidence from intervention studies across the life cycle which

       we discuss in Section 7. It is also consistent with a large literature showing the emer-
    71 Section F of the Web Appendix presents a detailed summary of the specifications and estimates of

the technology of skill formation listed in Table F.1. There we compare the estimates of self- and cross-
productivity and the productivity of investment (of each type).
    72 Shakotko et al. (1981) is an early example of a dynamic model of health. There is no investment, per

se, but he models the effect of parental environmental variables on child health.
    73 Since any monotonic function of a test score is still a valid test score, anchoring scores in outcomes is

essential for producing interpretable estimates of the technology (see Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha
et al., 2010).
    74 They find substantial evidence of measurement error and show the importance of accounting for it.
    75 This is consistent with earlier findings by Cunha (2007) and Cunha and Heckman (2008).
    76 This is also found in Cunha (2007) and Cunha and Heckman (2008).



                                                      46
    gence of self-control and other regulatory functions associated with the developing

    prefrontal cortex (see, e.g., Steinberg, 2007, 2008).

          Simulations from their estimated model show that in spite of complementarity

    between investment and skills at each stage of the life cycle, and emerging dynamic

    complementarity, a socially efficient policy designed to maximize aggregate education

    or to minimize crime targets relatively more investment in the early years of children

    with poor initial endowments, in agreement with the analysis of section 5.77




77 For   a more extensive discussion of these results see Cunha and Heckman (2009) and Web Appendix F.


                                                  47
7    Interpreting the Intervention Literature
    The models developed in the recent literature in the economics of the family can

be used to interpret the intervention literature. Heckman and Kautz (2014) summa-

rize the empirical evidence from a variety of interventions targeting disadvantaged

children that range in their target populations from infants to adults. They analyze

programs that have been well studied (usually by randomized trials), have long-term

follow-ups, and have been widely advocated. Comparisons among programs are

problematic as the various programs often differ in the baseline characteristics for

the targeted population, in the measurements available to evaluate their effects, and

in the packages of interventions offered.

    Table I.1 in the Web Appendix summarizes the estimated effects for the most im-

portant interventions. Three striking patterns emerge. First, many early childhood in-

terventions have longer follow-ups (10 or 20 years) then adolescent interventions. Sec-

ond, evaluations of early childhood programs tend to measure cognitive and noncog-

nitive skills in addition to a variety of later-life outcomes. Many evaluations of pro-

grams for adolescents focus solely on labor market outcomes. Examination of the

curriculum of these programs is necessary to understand their primary program fo-

cus (e.g. cognitive or noncognitive stimulation). Third, selection of children into early

interventions is often dependent on parental choices, while adolescents participants

decide themselves whether to opt in.

    Three main findings emerge. First, only very early interventions (before age 3)

improve IQ in a lasting ways consistent with the evidence that early childhood is

a critical period for cognitive development. Second, programs targeting disadvan-

taged adolescents are less effective than early intervention programs. This evidence is

broadly consistent with dynamic complementarity. The few successful programs are a

consequence of the direct effect of incentives put in place in these programs (versions

of incapacitation effects), but they fail to have lasting effects. Third, the most promis-

ing adolescent interventions feature mentoring and scaffolding. They often integrate



                                            48
      work with traditional education and attenuate the rigid separation between school

      and work that characterizes the American high school. Mentoring involves teach-

      ing valuable character (noncognitive) skills (showing up for work, cooperating with

      others, and persevering on tasks). The effectiveness of mentoring programs is con-

      sistent with the evidence on the importance of attachment parenting and interaction

      discussed below. Some form of mentoring and parenting is present in all successful

      intervention programs at all stages of childhood.



      7.1      The Mechanisms Producing the Treatment Effects

            The literature on program evaluation usually focuses on estimating treatment ef-

      fects and not the mechanisms producing the treatment effects. The model of skill

      formation presented in this paper facilitates understanding of the mechanisms pro-

      ducing treatment effects by distinguishing the effect of interventions on the vector of

      skills θ t (equation (4)) from the effects the skills themselves have on outcomes (equa-

      tion (2)). It facilitates unification of the family influence literature with the literature

      on treatment effects.

            Heckman et al. (2013) use the dynamic factor approach discussed in Section 6 to

      study a major intervention with a long-term (age 40) follow-up of the Perry preschool

      program.78,79 They decompose the experimentally determined treatment effects for

      adult outcomes into components due to treatment-induced changes in cognitive and

      noncognitive capacities. They show how the effects of the program primarily operate

      through enhancement of noncognitive skills.80 The program boosted adult health,

      education, wages, and reduced crime and social isolation for males and females.




   78 The  program provided disadvantaged 3 and 4 year old children the social and emotional stimulation
available to most children from more advantaged families (see Griffin et al., 2013). The program is discussed
in detail in Subsection I.1.2 of the Web Appendix.
   79 It has a rate of return of 7–10% per annum for boys and girls, analyzed separately (Heckman et al.,

2010a,b).
   80 The program and the decomposition are presented in Section I.1.2 of the Web Appendix. See Table I.2

and Figures I.1–I.5.


                                                     49
   The core ingredients of the Perry program are similar to those of the ABC program

(see Griffin et al., 2013). Both promote cognitive and noncognitive skills through scaf-

folding the child. A long-term evaluation of the ABC program shows striking effects

on adult health and other child outcomes (see Campbell et al., 2013). The program

boosted the cognitive and noncognitive skills of participants which led to healthier

lifestyle choices. This emerging body of research demonstrates the value of the skill

formation approach for interpreting and guiding the analysis of interventions.




                                          50
    8       Attachment, Engagement, and Interaction: Toward

    a Deeper Understanding of Parenting, Mentoring, and

    Learning
          A major lesson from the intervention literature is that successful early childhood

    interventions scaffold children and supplement parenting. They generate positive

    and sustained parent-child interactions that last after the interventions end. When

    programs strengthen home environments in lasting ways, the effects of any interven-

    tion are more durable. The early investment administered by an effective program

    stimulates parental investment contemporaneously, which, through complementar-

    ity between parental skills and investment, enhances the impact of any intervention.

          This section reports evidence of the impacts of interventions on parent-child in-

    teractions. Successful interventions are more than just subsidies to disadvantaged

    families. They scaffold children by interacting closely with them, encouraging and

    mentoring them, mimicking what successful parents do.81 Recent evidence shows

    that they are also effective in increasing the parental capacities to provide mentoring

    and scaffolding after the interventions are over.82



    8.1      Parental Responses to Intervention

          Altering the course of parental investment and engagement with the child dur-

    ing and after the preschool years extends the reach of any intervention as parents

    nurture their children through childhood. In the presence of dynamic complementar-

    ities in the production function for capacities, the most effective remediation strategy

    for disadvantaged children is to couple increased early investments with increased

    later ones. Improving parenting is a complementary investment. Section J of the Web

    Appendix presents evidence for some major early childhood programs on parental re-


81 This   is consistent with the wisdom of John Dewey summarized in Appendix N.
82 See   the evidence in Web Appendix J.


                                                51
      sponses to interventions in terms of interactions with the child and in terms of boost-

      ing the quality of home environments. On a variety of dimensions, these programs

      increase the parental investments of treated group members during the course of their

      intervention. Parents held more positive views about parenting and their role in shap-

      ing the character and abilities of their children. Parental attitudes and the home envi-

      ronment also improved. Follow-up measurements provide evidence of the capacity

      to permanently alter the parents’ investment strategy. If after a few years of formal

      intervention it is possible to boost parental investment for all child-rearing years, the

      potential for improvement grows substantially. The mechanisms through which these

      programs are effective are enhanced information (as in the Nurse Family Partnership

      program)83 , changing the preferences of the response of a parents to the enhanced

      curiosity and engagement of the child induced by participation of the program.84



      8.2      What Parents Know and How They Parent

            There are two main explanations for the changes in parental behavior induced by

      successful interventions. First, intervention increases the child’s skills and this in turn

      induces a change in parental behavior. This is consistent with the complementarity

      central to the models presented in Section 4. Second, the interventions may convey in-

      formation to the parents about their child’s skills, on successful investment strategies

      and on their returns, and thereby increase parental knowledge. The evidence on the

      effectiveness of the Nurse Family Partnership Program shows that giving beneficial

      information to parents improves child outcomes and changes parenting behavior.85

            The research of Cunha et al. (2013) directly investigates beliefs and information

      mothers have about parenting. They find considerable heterogeneity among less edu-

  83 See Web Appendix I.1.
  84 Cole et al. (2012) and Conti et al. (2012) experimentally examine the role of parenting and attachment
on the health and genetic expression of rhesus monkeys. They establish that when infant monkeys are
deprived of early stimulation and interaction with their mothers, their gene expression is altered in ways
that make them more susceptible to disease in adulthood. See Suomi (1999) for discussion of a systematic
body of evidence on withdrawal of attachment and stimulation on monkey development.
   85 Heckman and Kautz (2014) discuss the evidence on the effectiveness of the NFP program and provide

detailed references to numerous evaluation studies.


                                                    52
cated mothers. Compared with a benchmark estimated technology, socio-economically

disadvantaged mothers underestimate the responsiveness of child development with

respect to investments.

   National samples also provide evidence that maternal knowledge is a main factor

in explaining differences in the amount of activities children are involved in. Through

in-depth interviews of dozens of middle class, working class, and poor families, Lareau

(2011) shows that professional parents often engage children after an activity to de-

termine what they have learned, while in working-class homes those activities are

mostly viewed as finalized at children’s amusement doing them. Middle class fami-

lies have a better understanding of the educational institutions their children are in-

volved with and hope to attend. They also intervene far more frequently on their

child’s behalf, whereas working class and poor families generally allow the school to

guide their child’s educational decisions. Additionally, for middle-class families, so-

cial ties tend to be woven through children’s lives, especially through the organized

activities they participate in, as well as through informal contacts with educators and

other professionals. In contrast, the social networks of working-class and poor fam-

ilies tend to be rooted in and around kinship groups. Ties to other parents and to

professionals are considerably less common (Lareau and Cox, 2011).



8.3    Towards a More General Model of Parent-Child Interac-

tions

   The productivity of any investment or parental stimulus is influenced by the child’s

response to it. Parents and children can have different goals. For example, the child

can be more shortsighted than the parent (Akabayashi, 2006) or have different values

for leisure and future human capital (Cosconati, 2013). The parent may act as a princi-

pal whose goal is to maximize the effort from an agent—their child. The child’s ability

and effort are not observed by the parent and this creates a moral hazard problem. As

the interaction is repeated over time, parents can learn about the child’s ability by us-



                                           53
   ing responses to stimuli as signals of it. The greater the knowledge about the child’s

   ability, the easier it is for the parent to induce the desired effort via better-targeted

   stimuli.

         The models discussed thus far do not consider the role of a child’s own actions on

   his human capital accumulation, nor do they consider parental learning about child

   ability and about the most effective parenting strategies. In most of the literature,

   parental investments are assumed to be made under perfect knowledge of the child’s

   current skills as well as the technology that determines their law of motion. In truth,

   parent-child interactions are an emergent system shaped by mutual interactions and

   learning (Gottlieb, 1999; Sroufe et al., 2005). Parents learn about a child’s character-

   istics and about the effectiveness of their investments by observing their child’s be-

   havior and directly interacting with the child. A child’s accumulation of skills is a

   process of learning guided by the mentoring role of parents and educators. Parental

   guidance often involves conflicts with the child’s own desires. Paternalistic parents

   evaluate the child’s future outcomes differently than the child does, and the capaci-

   ties, knowledge, and autonomy of the child evolve with experience. A richer model of

   child learning investigates the formation of agency of the child—his ability to shape

   his own environment including his learning environment. As children mature they

   generally make wiser choices.86

         Akabayashi (2006) is one of few examples of a model of parent-child interactions

   and parental learning in the literature.87 He considers a framework in which a my-

   opic child does not take into account the value of future human capital. As the child’s

   effort is productive, but unobservable to the parent, an altruistic parent forms beliefs

   on the child’s human capital and effort from observations of his performances and

   incentivize effort by choosing the quality of interactions (praise or punishment) to en-

   gage the child. This process of interaction determines the evolution of a child’s skills

   and parental beliefs. Substantial uncertainty about a child’s human capital might pro-


86 Even ardent libertarians like Mill (1859) grant a role for informal paternalism on the part of the parents.
87 We   summarize this literature in Table K.5 in the Web Appendix.


                                                   54
      duce divergence between parental expectations about it and its actual level leading to

      pathological interactions such as maltreatment.

           Cosconati (2013) relaxes Akabayashi’s myopic child assumptions and develops a

      related model of parent-child interactions where parents are also more patient than

      their child and cannot directly observe his effort. To incentivize effort and human

      capital accumulation, parents limit the child’s leisure. The stricter the limits set by the

      parents, the higher is their monitoring cost. Cosconati shows how an authoritative

      parenting style (Baumrind, 1968) emerges in equilibrium as the optimal strategy for

      parents. He presents preliminary estimates of his model.

           The preceding models are built around “arms-length” parent-child interactions

      where parents respond to child behavior and children reciprocate. The model of

      Lizzeri and Lizzeri and Siniscalchi (2008) involves a deeper type of interaction where

      parents can help the child in performing a task (e.g., getting good grades in school).

      Failure to properly perform the task has negative consequences for the child’s util-

      ity. For this reason, the parents may help the child in order to make them happier.

      If the child fails, however, he learns about his ability and this has long-term benefits.

      If the child is helped to avoid failure due to deficiencies in his own ability, learning

      is diminished. This creates a tradeoff in parental preferences. They prove that partial

      sheltering from failure (limited parental intervention) is optimal. The model generates

      correlations patterns between parents’ and children’s performance that are consistent

      with what is found in the literature on behavioral genetics. Contrary to the interpre-

      tation in a literature that claims a limited role for parental influence (Harris, 2009), the

      observed correlations are the result of successful active parenting.88

           These studies go behind the technology of skill formation to understand the in-

      teractions that transform time and goods investments to shape children’s capacities.

      They are the first step toward formalizing notions such as attachment, mentoring, and

      scaffolding that have long been associated with the successful process in human de-

      velopment (see Sroufe et al., 2005; Vygotskii, 1978). They help to explain the observed
  88 Themodel of multiple children presented in Section 5 can rationalize the evidence on limited impacts
of common family influences. Child investment is individuated for reasons of both equity and efficiency.


                                                   55
heterogeneity in parental behavior and help interpret why interventions promoting

parental engagement with the child show stronger beneficial long term results. A

greater knowledge of the mechanisms behind learning are crucial for the design of

more effective policies and interventions. Successful interventions alter parental be-

havior. Understanding why this happens, how parenting can be incentivized and

through which channels parenting influences child development are crucial tasks for

the next generation of studies of child development.




                                         56
9    Summary
    This paper reviews a vibrant recent literature that investigates the determinants

and consequences of parental actions and environments on child outcomes. It doc-

uments differences in investments received by children of different socioeconomic

status.

    The recent literature is based on multiple generation models with multiple periods

of childhood and adulthood. It emphasizes the dynamics of skill formation. Central to

the literature are the concepts of complementarity, dynamic complementarity, multiplicity

of skills and critical and sensitive periods for different skills. These concepts account for

a variety of empirical regularities that describe the process of human development.

    Family environments during the early years and parenting are critical determi-

nants of human development because they shape the lifetime skill base. Through dy-

namic complementarity they enhance the productivity of downstream investments.

We establish conditions under which it is socially productive to invest in the early

years of disadvantaged children. These conditions are supported by evidence from

the literature. Later stage remedial interventions are generally less effective, espe-

cially if they target IQ. Interventions aimed at disadvantaged adolescents can be ef-

fective if they target enhancement of noncognitive capabilities.

    The evidence summarized here demonstrates the value of a perspective with mul-

tiple skills. An approach based on the dynamic evolution of skills unifies the literature

on family economics with the intervention literature.

    The role of the timing of the receipt of income and the role of credit constraints

in shaping child development is closely examined. We find that the importance of

these factors in shaping child outcomes has been exaggerated in the recent literature

compared to the importance of parenting and mentoring. Untargeted cash transfers

are unlikely to be effective in promoting child skills.

    Mentoring, parenting and human interaction are the unifying themes of success-

ful skill development strategies across the entire life cycle. The study of parent-child

interactions as an emergent system is a promising approach to human development.

                                             57
Effective early life interventions promote beneficial changes in parenting. The analy-

sis of parent-child interactions and parental learning, the formalization of the notions

of attachment, mentoring and scaffolding and their integration into life-cycle over-

lapping generational models with dynamic skill accumulation constitute the research

frontier in the field.




                                          58
References
Aiyagari, S. R., J. Greenwood, and A. Seshadri (2002, February). Efficient investment

  in children. J. Econ. Theory 102(2), 290–321.

Akabayashi, H. (2006). An equilibrium model of child maltreatment. J. Econ. Dynam.

  Control 30(6), 993–1025.

Almlund, M. (2013). Essays on Credit Constraints, Education, and the Family. Ph. D.

  thesis, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Almlund, M., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011). Personality psy-

  chology and economics. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Wößmann (Eds.),

  Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 4, pp. 1–181. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011). Human capital development before age five. In

  O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, Chap-

  ter 15, pp. 1315–1486. North Holland: Elsevier.

Anderson, T. W. and H. Rubin (1956). Statistical inference in factor analysis. In J. Ney-

  man (Ed.), Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and

  Probability, 5, Volume V: Econometrics, Industrial Research, and Psychometry, pp.

  111–150. Berkeley: University of California Press. Held at the Statistical Laboratory,

  University of California, December 1954- and July-August 1955.

Attanasio, O. P. and M. Browning (1995, December). Consumption over the life cycle

  and over the business cycle. Amer. Econ. Rev. 85(5), 1118–1137.

Bailey, M. J. and S. M. Dynarski (2011, December). Gains and gaps: Changing inequal-

  ity in U.S. college entry and completion. Working Paper 17633, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Barker, D. J. P. (1990, November). The fetal and infant origins of adult disease. Brit.

  Med. J. 301(6761), 1111.


                                           1
Baumrind, D. (1968).       Authoritarian vs. authoritative parental control.     Adoles-

  cence 3(11), 255–272.

Becker, G. S. and R. J. Barro (1988, February). A reformulation of the economic theory

  of fertility. Quarterly Journal of Economics 103(1), 1–25.

Becker, G. S. and C. B. Mulligan (1997, August). The endogenous determination of

  time preference. Quart. J. Econ. 112(3), 729–758.

Becker, G. S., K. M. Murphy, and J. L. Spenkuch (2012). The manipulation of chil-

  dren’s preferences, old age support, and investment in children’s human capital.

  Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1979, December). An equilibrium theory of the distribu-

  tion of income and intergenerational mobility. J. Polit. Econ. 87(6), 1153–1189.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1986, July). Human capital and the rise and fall of families.

  J. Lab. Econ. 4(3, Part 2), S1–S39.

Behrman, J. R., R. A. Pollak, and P. J. Taubman (1982). Parental preferences and pro-

  vision of progeny. J. Polit. Econ. 90(1), 52–73.

Belley, P. and L. Lochner (2007, December). The changing role of family income and

  ability in determining educational achievement. J. Hum. Cap. 1(1), 37–89.

Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings.

  J. Polit. Econ. 75(4), 352–365.

Bernal, R. (2008, November). The effect of maternal employment and child care on

  children’s cognitive development. Int. Econ. Rev. 49(4), 1173–1209.

Bernal, R. and M. P. Keane (2010, May). Quasi-structural estimation of a model of

  childcare choices and child cognitive ability production. J. Econometrics 156(1), 164–

  189.



                                             2
Bernal, R. and M. P. Keane (2011, July). Child care choices and children’s cognitive

  achievement: The case of single mothers. J. Lab. Econ. 29(3), 459–512.

Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012). The role of

  application assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R

  Block FAFSA experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1205–1242.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001, April). The economics of cultural transmission and the

  dynamics of preferences. J. Econ. Theory 97(2), 298–319.

Black, S. E. and P. J. Devereux (2011). Recent developments in intergenerational mo-

  bility. In D. Card and O. Ashenfelter (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4,

  Part B, Chapter 16, pp. 1487–1541. Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier.

Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2008, Fall). The eco-

  nomics and psychology of personality traits. J. Human Res. 43(4), 972–1059.

Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011a). Identifica-

  tion problems in personality psychology. Personality and Individual Differences 51(3:

  Special Issue on Personality and Economics), 315–320.

Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011b). IQ,

  achievement, and personality. Unpublished manuscript, University of Maastricht

  and University of Chicago (revised from the 2009 version).

Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel (2008, January). The role of noncognitive

  skills in explaining cognitive test scores. Econ. Inquiry 46(1), 2–12.

Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne (2001, December). The determinants of earn-

  ings: A behavioral approach. J. Econ. Lit. 39(4), 1137–1176.

Browning, M., L. P. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (1999, December). Micro data and

  general equilibrium models. In J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of

  Macroeconomics, Volume 1A, Chapter 8, pp. 543–633. Elsevier.


                                            3
Buchanan, J. M. (1975). The Samaritan’s dilemma. In E. Phelps (Ed.), Altruism, morality

  and economic theory, pp. 71–85. New York: Russel Sage foundation.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (2001, June). The dynamics of educational attain-

  ment for black, hispanic, and white males. Journal of Political Economy 109(3), 455–

  499.

Cameron, S. V. and C. Taber (2004, February). Estimation of educational borrowing

  constraints using returns to schooling. J. Polit. Econ. 112(1), 132–182.

Campbell, F., G. Conti, J. Heckman, S. Moon, and R. Pinto (2013). The long-term

  health effects of early childhood interventions. Under revision, Economic Journal.

Card, D. (1999, December). The causal effect of education on earnings. In O. C. Ashen-

  felter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, Chapter 30, pp.

  1801–1863. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Card, D. (2001). Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent

  econometric problems. Econometrica 69(5), 1127–1160.

Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2002, October). The evidence on credit constraints in

  post-secondary schooling. Econ. J. 112(482), 705–734.

Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2003). Human capital policy. In J. J. Heckman, A. B.

  Krueger, and B. M. Friedman (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human

  Capital Policies?, pp. 77–239. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2011, September). Estimating marginal

  returns to education. Amer. Econ. Rev. 101(6), 2754–2781.

Carneiro, P., I. Lopez Garcia, K. G. Salvanes, and E. Tominey (2013). Intergenerational

  mobility and the timing of parental income. In CES Ifo Conference on Economics of

  Education, September 6–7, 2013, CES Ifo Area Conferences. CES Ifo.




                                           4
Carrell, S. E. and B. Sacerdote (2013, May). Late interventions matter too: The case

  of college coaching in new hampshire. Working Paper 19031, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Caucutt, E. M. and L. Lochner (2012). Early and late human capital investments,

  borrowing constraints, and the family. Working Paper 18493, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Chan, T. W. and A. Koo (2011). Parenting style and youth outcomes in the UK. Eur.

  Sociol. Rev. 27(3), 385–399.

Cole, S. W., G. Conti, J. M. G. Arevalo, A. M. Ruggiero, J. J. Heckman, and S. J. Suomi

  (2012). Transcriptional modulation of the developing immune system by early life

  social adversity. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109(50), 20578–20583.

Conti, G., C. Hansman, J. J. Heckman, M. F. Novak, A. Ruggiero, and S. J. Suomi

  (2012). Primate evidence on the late health effects of early-life adversity. P. Natl.

  Acad. Sci. USA 109(23), 8866–8871.

Cook, P. J., K. Dodge, G. Farkas, R. G. J. Fryer, J. Guryan, J. Ludwig, S. Mayer, H. Pol-

  lack, and L. Steinberg (2014, January). The (surprising) efficacy of academic and

  behavioral intervention with disadvantaged youth: Results from a randomized ex-

  periment in chicago. Working Paper 19862, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cosconati, M. (2013). Optimal parenting styles: Evidence from a dynamic model with

  multiple equilibria. Technical report, Bank of Italy.

Cunha, F. (2007). An Essay on Skill Formation. Ph. D. thesis, University of Chicago.

Cunha, F., I. Elo, and J. Culhane (2013). Eliciting maternal expectations about the

  technology of cognitive skill formation. Working Paper 19144, National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. Amer.

  Econ. Rev. 97(2), 31–47.

                                           5
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008). Formulating, identifying and estimating the tech-

  nology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. J. Human Res. 43(4), 738–782.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2009, April). The economics and psychology of inequal-

  ity and human development. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 7(2–3), 320–364. Presented as the

  Marshall Lecture, European Economics Association, Milan, Italy, August 29, 2008.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the evi-

  dence on life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook

  of the Economics of Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005, April). Separating uncertainty from

  heterogeneity in life cycle earnings, The 2004 Hicks Lecture. Oxford Econ. Pap. 57(2),

  191–261.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010, May). Estimating the technology

  of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78(3), 883–931.

Dahl, G. B. and L. Lochner (2012, September). The impact of family income on child

  achievement: Evidence from the earned income tax credit. Amer. Econ. Rev. 102(5),

  1927–1956.

Deci, E. L. and R. M. Ryan (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human

  Behavior. New York, NY: Plenum Press.

Del Boca, D., C. Flinn, and M. Wiswall (2012). Transfers to households with children

  and child development. Carlo Alberto Notebooks 273, Collegio Carlo Alberto.

Del Boca, D., C. Flinn, and M. Wiswall (2014). Household choices and child develop-

  ment. The Review of Economic Studies 81(1), 137–185.

Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti (2012). Parenting with style: Altruism and paternalism in

  intergenerational preference transmission. IZA Discussion Paper 7108, Institute for

  the Study of Labor.


                                           6
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2010). Are risk aversion and impa-

  tience related to cognitive ability? Amer. Econ. Rev. 100(3), 1238–1260.

Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, U. Sunde, J. Schupp, and G. G. Wagner (2011). In-

  dividual risk attitudes: measurement, determinants and behavioral consequences.

  J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 9(3), 522–550.

Duckworth, K., G. J. Duncan, K. Kokko, A.-L. Lyyra, M. Metzger, and S. Simonton

  (2012). The relative importance of adolescent skills and behaviors for adult earn-

  ings: A cross-national study. Department of Quantitative Social Science Working

  Paper 12-03, University of London.

Duncan, G. J., P. A. Morris, and C. Rodrigues (2011). Does money really matter?

  Estimating impacts of family income on young children’s achievement with data

  from random-assignment experiments. Dev. Psychol. 47(5), 1263–1279.

Duncan, G. J., W. J. Yeung, J. Brooks-Gunn, and J. R. Smith (1998). How much does

  childhood poverty affect the life chances of children? Am. Sociol. Rev. 63(3), 406–423.

Eisenhauer, P., J. Heckman, and S. Mosso (2013). Estimation of dynamic discrete

  choice models by maximum likelihood and the simulated method of moments. In-

  ternational Economic Review. Under review.

Fernald, A., V. A. Marchman, and A. Weisler (2013). SES differences in language pro-

  cessing skill and vocabulary are evident at 18 months. Developmental Science 16(2),

  234–248.

Foster, J. E. (2011). Freedom, opportunity, and well-being. In K. J. Arrow, A. K. Sen,

  and K. Suzumura (Eds.), Handbook of Social Choice and Welfare, Volume 2, Chapter 24,

  pp. 687–728. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Fried, H. O., C. A. K. Lovell, and S. S. Schmidt (2008). The Measurements of Productive

  Efficiency and Productivity Growth. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.



                                           7
Gayle, G.-L., L. Golan, and M. A. Soytas (2013). What accounts for the racial gap in

  time allocation and intergenerational transmission of human capital? Unpublished

  manuscript, Department of Economics, Washington University.

Gelber, A. M. and A. Isen (2013). Children’s schooling and parents’ behavior: Evi-

  dence from the head start impact study. Journal of Public Economics 101, 25–38.

Gluckman, P. D. and M. Hanson (2005). The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development, and

  Disease. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Gluckman, P. D. and M. A. Hanson (2004).             Developmental origins of disease

  paradigm: a mechanistic and evolutionary perspective. Pediatric Research 56(3),

  311–317.

Gluckman, P. D. and M. A. Hanson (2006). Developmental Origins of Health and Disease.

  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Gottlieb, G. (1999). Probabilistic Epigenesis and Evolution. Worcester, MA: Clark Uni-

  versity.

Griffin, M., J. J. Heckman, and S. H. Moon (2013). Preschool curricula. Unpublished

  manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Hales, C. N. and D. J. P. Barker (1992). Type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mel-

  litus: The thrifty phenotype hypothesis. Diabetologia 35(7), 595–601.

Harris, J. R. (2009). The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn Out the Way They Do.

  New York, NY: Free Press.

Hart, B. and T. R. Risley (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young

  American children. Baltimore, MD: P.H. Brookes.

Heckman, J. J. (2008, July). Schools, skills and synapses. Econ. Inquiry 46(3), 289–324.

  Presidential Address, Western Economics Association.



                                             8
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, S. Urzúa, and G. Veramendi (2011). The effects of

  educational choices on labor market, health, and social outcomes. Unpublished

  manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2012, August). Hard evidence on soft skills. Lab.

  Econ. 19(4), 451–464. Adam Smith Lecture.

Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014). Fostering and measuring skills interventions that

  improve character and cognition. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz

  (Eds.), The GED Myth: Education, Achievement Tests, and the Role of Character in Amer-

  ican Life, Chapter 9. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Heckman, J. J., R. J. LaLonde, and J. A. Smith (1999). The economics and econometrics

  of active labor market programs. In O. C. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Hand-

  book of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, Chapter 31, pp. 1865–2097. New York: North-

  Holland.

Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and R. Cossa (2003). Learning-by-doing versus on-the-

  job training: Using variation induced by the EITC to distinguish between models

  of skill formation. In E. S. Phelps (Ed.), Designing Social Inclusion: Tools to Raise Low-

  End Pay and Employment in Private Enterprise, pp. 74–130. Cambridge, UK: Cam-

  bridge University Press.

Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006). Earnings equations, rates of return

  and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond. In E. A. Hanushek and

  F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 1, Chapter 7, pp.

  307–458. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Yavitz (2010a, February).

  The rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. J. Publ. Econ. 94(1–2),

  114–128.




                                            9
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010b, August).

  Analyzing social experiments as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence

  from the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Quant. Econ. 1(1), 1–46.

Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2013). Understanding the mechanisms

  through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes.

  Amer. Econ. Rev. 103(6), 2052–86.

Heckman, J. J. and G. Sedlacek (1985, December). Heterogeneity, aggregation and

  market wage functions: An empirical model of self-selection in the labor market.

  Journal of Political Economy 93(6), 1077–1125.

Heckman, J. J., S. Urzúa, and E. J. Vytlacil (2006). Understanding instrumental vari-

  ables in models with essential heterogeneity. Rev. Econ. Statist. 88(3), 389–432.

Hotz, V. J. and J. Pantano (2013, October). Strategic parenting, birth order and school

  performance. Working Paper 19542, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Huggett, M., G. Ventura, and A. Yaron (2011). Sources of lifetime inequality. Amer.

  Econ. Rev. 101(7), 2923–2954.

Jablonka, E. and G. Raz (2009). Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: prevalence,

  mechanisms, and implications for the study of heredity and evolution. The Quar-

  terly review of biology 84(2), 131–176.

Jackson, C. K. (2013). Non-cognitive ability, test scores, and teacher quality: Evidence

  from 9th grade teachers in North Carolina. Working Paper 18624, National Bureau

  of Economic Research.

Kalil, A. (2013). Inequality begins at home: The role of parenting in the diverging des-

  tinies of rich and poor children. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago,

  Harris School of Public Policy. Presented at Penn State’s 21st annual Symposium

  on Family Issues “Diverging destinies: Families in an era of increasing inequality,”

  October 2013.

                                            10
Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997, June). The career decisions of young men. J. Polit.

  Econ. 105(3), 473–522.

Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (2001, November). The effect of parental transfers and

  borrowing constraints on educational attainment. Int. Econ. Rev. 42(4), 1051–1103.

Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. L. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff (2006, July). Eco-

  nomic, neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future

  workforce. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103(27), 10155–10162.

Kohler, H.-P., J. R. Behrman, and J. Schnittker (2011). Social science methods for twins

  data: Integrating causality, endowments, and heritability. Biodemography and Social

  Biology 57(1), 88–141.

Kreps, D. M. (1979). A representation theorem for “preference for flexibility”. Econo-

  metrica 47(3), pp. 565–577.

Krueger, R. F. and W. Johnson (2008). Behavioral genetics and personality: A new

  look at the integration of nature and nurture. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, and L. A.

  Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research (3rd ed.)., pp. 287–310.

  New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Kuzawa, C. W. and E. A. Quinn (2009). Developmental origins of adult function and

  health: Evolutionary hypotheses. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 38, 131–147.

Lareau, A. (2011). Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life (2 ed.). Berkeley, CA:

  University of California Press.

Lareau, A. and A. Cox (2011). Social class and the transition to adulthood: Differences

  in parents’ interactions with institutions. In M. J. Carlson and P. England (Eds.),

  Social Class and Changing Families in an Unequal America, pp. 134–164. Stanford, CA:

  Stanford University Press.




                                           11
Lee, S. Y. and A. Seshadri (2014). On the intergenerational transmission of economic

  status. Unpublished manuscript, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Department

  of Economics.

Lizzeri, A. and M. Siniscalchi (2008, August). Parental guidance and supervised learn-

  ing. Quart. J. Econ. 123(3), 1161–1195.

Lochner, L. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2012). Credit constraints in education. Ann. Rev.

  Econ. 4, 225–256.

Loken, K. V. (2010). Family income and children’s education: Using the Norwegian

  oil boom as a natural experiment. Lab. Econ. 17(1), 118–129.

Loken, K. V., M. Mogstad, and M. Wiswall (2012). What linear estimators miss: The

  effects of family income on child outcomes. Am. Econ. J.: Appl. Econ. 4(2), 1–35.

Loury, G. C. (1981, July). Intergenerational transfers and the distribution of earnings.

  Econometrica 49(4), 843–867.

Mill, J. S. (1859). On liberty. London: J. W. Parker and Son.

Milligan, K. and M. Stabile (2011). Do child tax benefits affect the well-being of

  children? Evidence from Canadian child benefit expansions. Am. Econ. J.: Econ.

  Pol. 3(3), 175–205.

Moon, S. H. (2014). Multi-dimensional human skill formation with multi-dimensional

  parental investment. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department

  of Economics.

Mullainathan, S. and E. Shafir (2013). Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means So Much.

  New York, NY: Times Books.

Nisbett, R. E., J. Aronson, C. Blair, W. Dickens, J. Flynn, D. F. Halpern, and

  E. Turkheimer (2012). Intelligence: New findings and theoretical developments.

  Am. Psychol. 67(2), 130–159.

                                            12
Nussbaum, M. C. (2011). Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach. Cam-

  bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Piatek, R. and P. Pinger (2010, October). Maintaining (locus of) control? Assessing the

  impact of locus of control on education decisions and wages. IZA Discussion Paper

  5289, Institute for the Study of Labor.

Pop-Eleches, C. and M. Urquiola (2013). Going to a better school: Effects and behav-

  ioral responses. American Economic Review 103(4), 1289–1324.

Rubinstein, Y. and Y. Weiss (2006). Post schooling wage growth: Investment, search

  and learning. In E. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of

  Education, Volume 1 of Handbooks in Economics, Chapter 1, pp. 1–67. Amsterdam:

  North-Holland.

Rutter, M. (2006). Genes and Behavior: Nature–Nurture Interplay Explained. Malden, MA:

  Blackwell Publishing.

Rutter, M., E. J. Sonuga-Barke, C. Beckett, J. Castle, J. Kreppner, R. Kumsta, W. Scholtz,

  S. Stevens, and C. A. Bell (2010). Deprivation-Specific Psychological Patterns: Effects of

  Institutional Deprivation, Volume 75 of Monographs of the Society for Research in Child

  Development. Malden, MA: Wiley.

Ryan, R. M. and E. L. Deci (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic defini-

  tions and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology 25(1), 54–67.

Sen, A. (1985). Commodities and Capabilities. New York: North-Holland.

Shakotko, R. A., L. N. Edwards, and M. Grossman (1981). An exploration of the dy-

  namic relationship between health and cognitive development in adolescence. In

  J. van der Gaag and M. Perlman (Eds.), Contributions to economic analysis, volume

  137, Health, Economics, and Health Economics: proceedings of the World Congress on

  Health Economics, Leiden, The Netherlands, September 1980, pp. 305–328. Amsterdam:

  North-Holland.

                                            13
Solon, G. (2004). A model of intergenerational mobility variation over time and place.

  In M. Corak (Ed.), Generational income mobility in North America and Europe, Chap-

  ter 2, pp. 38–47. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Sroufe, L. A., B. Egeland, E. A. Carlson, and W. A. Collins (2005). The development of

  the person: The Minnesota study of risk and adaptation from birth to adulthood (1st ed.).

  New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Steinberg, L. (2007). Risk taking in adolesence - New perspectives from brain and

  behavioral science. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 16(2), 55–59.

Steinberg, L. (2008). A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking. Dev.

  Rev. 28(1), 78–106.

Suomi, S. J. (1999). Attachment in rhesus monkeys. In J. Cassidy and P. R. Shaver

  (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications, pp. 181–197.

  New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Thaler, R. H. (2008, July). A short course in behavioral economics. Edge Master Class,

  Sonoma, CA, July 25–27, 2008.

Thompson, R. A. and C. A. Nelson (2001, January). Developmental science and the

  media: Early brain development. Am. Psychol. 56(1), 5–15.

Tucker-Drob, E. M., K. Paige Harden, and E. Turkheimer (2009). Combining nonlinear

  biometric and psychometric models of cognitive abilities. Behav. Genet. 39(5), 461–

  471.

Turkheimer, E., A. Haley, M. Waldron, B. D’Onofrio, and I. I. Gottesman (2003,

  November). Socioeconomic status modifies heritability of IQ in young children.

  Psychol. Sci. 14(6), 623–628.

Vygotskii, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Pro-

  cesses. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


                                           14
Williams, B. (2012). Latent Variable Models. Ph. D. thesis, University of Chicago, De-

  partment of Economics.




                                         15
