                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DRIVING TO OPPORTUNITY:
LOCAL RENTS, WAGES, COMMUTING COSTS AND SUB-METROPOLITAN QUALITY OF LIFE

                                            David Albouy
                                              Bert Lue

                                         Working Paper 19922
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19922


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2014




  We would like to thank Jessie Handbury, Stephen Ross, Kenneth Small and participants at the NARSC
  meetings in San Francisco and the AREUEA meetings in Philadelphia for helpful comments. Walter
  Graf provided excellent and diligent research assistance. Please e-mail any questions or comments
  to albouy@illinois.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2014 by David Albouy and Bert Lue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
  paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
  is given to the source.
Driving to Opportunity: Local Rents, Wages, Commuting Costs and Sub-Metropolitan Quality
of Life
David Albouy and Bert Lue
NBER Working Paper No. 19922
February 2014, Revised March 2015
JEL No. H73,Q51,R21,R23,R41

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine variation in local wage levels, housing costs, and commuting costs for 2071 areas covering
the United States within and across metropolitan areas. In an equilibrium model of residential and
workplace choice, we use these measures to construct a willingness-to-pay index for a typical household.
When households are sufficiently homogeneous and mobile, this index indicates the perceived value
of local household amenities, or “quality of life.” Wage levels vary little within metropolitan areas
relative to across them, while individual characteristics that predict wages vary more within, suggesting
patterns about sorting. Quality of life varies as much within metros as across them, and is typically
high in areas that are dense, suburban, mild, safe, entertaining, and have higher school-funding.


David Albouy
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801-3606
and NBER
albouy@illinois.edu

Bert Lue
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan St
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 68109-1220
bertlue@umich.edu




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19922
1     Introduction

Households face many trade-offs when they decide where to live as areas close to high-paying
jobs or with desirable amenities are often expensive. Below, we consider how local wage levels,
housing costs (or “rents”), and commuting costs vary both within and across metropolitan areas,
using the most detailed level of geography in public-use Census files.1 We then use these measures
to construct a local willingness-to-pay index for a typical household based on how high housing
and commuting costs are relative to available wages. Under strong conditions, such as household
mobility and homogeneity, this index provides the value households place on local amenities,
otherwise known as local “quality of life” (QOL).
    Given how households are imperfectly mobile and heterogeneous, this one-dimensional quality-
of-life index can only provide a limited perspective on the relative desirability of neighborhoods.
The index is transparent and provides an economically intuitive complement to other measures of
neighborhood quality or “livability” that abound in popular literature. It ranks beautiful areas along
the Pacific the highest and areas rife with urban decay the lowest, lending it some plausibility. It is
also positively correlated with various neighborhood amenities such as mild climate, safety, enter-
tainment, and well-funded schools – typically thought of as desirable. While regression methods
may be used with this index to try to value specific amenities, these methods are subject to poten-
tially important omitted variable and simultaneity problems, such as household sorting. Indeed,
the residents of a neighborhood will not only influence the amenities it provides, but may also be
considered an amenity themselves.
    Although this work focuses on constructing a single index of neighborhood quality, its elements
are pertinent to more complex analyses of hedonic markets and household sorting, e.g. Bajari
and Kahn (2005), Yinger (2014), which measure willingness-to-pay through rents alone. Our
index makes it easier to compare neighborhoods across metropolitan areas. In particular, we make
several adjustments beyond the last similar study of sub-metropolitan quality of life by Blomquist,
    1
      We often allude to “housing costs” which are either a rent or an imputed rent for housing. We find it important to
distinguish land rents from housing rents because construction costs may vary across metro areas.



                                                           1
Berger, and Hoehn (1988). First, following Albouy (2008) – who estimates willingness-to-pay
across metro areas – we down-weight the benefit of wage levels to account for federal taxes, and
up-weight rent levels to account for unobserved differences in non-housing costs. Second, we add
commuting costs to rents to provide a fuller measure of the “urban costs” faced by households.
Third, we estimate local wage levels by place of work, rather than place of residence, to mitigate
potential biases from unobserved skills. Fourth, we cover the entire United States including non-
metro areas, and areas within counties where possible.
   To complement and contextualize the analysis on willingness to pay, we also describe patterns
in local rents, wages, and commuting costs, as well as household characteristics and observable
amenities. These patterns involve variation within and across metros, between suburbs and central
cities, and across communities of varying densities. Using regression methods, we distinguish how
much raw variation in wages, rents, and commutes are explained by the observed characteristics
of workers or housing units, as opposed to the locations themselves. We find that rent and wage-
predicting characteristics vary more strongly within metros than across them, indicating stronger
household sorting. Meanwhile, rent and (especially) wage levels due to location vary much more
across metro areas than within. Controlling for local wages, rents fall weakly with commutes,
suggesting that workers travel longer in the pursuit of amenities.
   Section 2 motivates our analysis in the context of existing research on local amenities and
commuting. We synthesize relevant theories in section 3 to provide the basis for the quality-of-
life index. Section 4 describes the data at the Public Use Microdata Area, or “PUMA,” level of
geography. We present our measure of quality of life in section 5 using maps for for the continental
United States, as well as New York, San Francisco, Detroit, and Atlanta. These maps show as much
difference in willingness-to-pay within Manhattan as across the most and least desirable states. In
section 6, we document how a few amenities predict much of the variation in quality-of-life, and
how their estimated values are consistent with existing research, while being subject to numerous
caveats and limitations.




                                                 2
2        Motivation and Related Literature

Our methodology combines insights from two lines of research on how local wages and rents are
determined: the first on local amenities, the second on commuting. Beginning with Oates (1969),
the empirical literature on amenities (including local public services) builds off of the theory of
Tiebout (1956) by assuming that workers are mobile, have access to the same labor market, and
that commutes can be ignored or controlled for. In this framework, amenities may be valued by
examining how they co-vary with rents inside a metro area, holding other factors constant.
        Rosen (1979) adapts this framework to examine amenity differences across metro areas with
separate labor markets, arguing that low wages as well as high rents signal amenity values. He and
his student Roback (1982) use several measures of individual amenities as independent variables
in wage and rent regressions. The quality-of-life index is then given by the difference in rents
to wages predicted by those amenities. One concern with such an index is that it is sensitive to
which amenities the researcher considers relevant.2 Gabriel, Mattey, and Wascher (2003) factor
in non-housing costs-of-living in addition to rents, albeit only at the state level. Not taking a
stand on what amenities belong in the quality-of-life index, Beeson and Eberts (1989), Gabriel and
Rosenthal (2004), and Chen and Rosenthal (2008) construct indices at the metro level based on how
high wages are compared to rents, controlling only for worker and housing characteristics. This
“agnostic” index implicitly includes the value of observed and unobserved amenities together.3
Albouy (2008) incorporates federal taxes and missing non-housing costs into a similar index to
infer that willingness-to-pay in high-rent, high-wage (typically large) metro areas is larger than
previously thought. He regresses the agnostic quality-of-life index in a second-stage regression to
infer how much quality of life is predicted by observed amenities.4 We follow a similar method,
    2
      A more artificial approach is seen in various popular scores of quality of life, often termed “livability.” Detailed
scores, often at the neighborhood level, are available on websites such as Areavibes.com and Streetadvisor.com. Nate
Silver (2010), of election polling fame, provides quality-of-life rankings for neighborhoods in New York City. Stree-
tadvisor.com relies on crowdsourced user reviews for streets, neighborhoods, and cities. Areavibes.com and Silver
(2010) apply weighting algorithms to various observable amenities. For further details see Appendix E.
    3
      Beyond amenity indices, the essential insight of equal indirect utility across areas has also been used by McDuff
(2011) to predict migration flows and Kim, Liu and Yezer (2009) to explain intra-city wage differentials.
    4
      A recent unpublished working paper by Bieri, Kuminoff, and Pope (2013) performs an analysis similar to
Blomquist, Berger, and Hoehn (1988) at the county-level. They incorporate many of the features new in Albouy


                                                            3
but add refinements helpful for a sub-metropolitan analysis.
    Most recent estimates of individual amenity values follow a more quasi-experimental or struc-
tural approach. The quasi-experimental approach helps to eliminate problems with unobserved
variables, but may still be confounded by household sorting behavior.5 Furthermore, quasi-experiments
are unavailable for many amenities making this approach too limited to provide an overall index of
neighborhood desirability. Structural approaches offer a wealth of methods to account for house-
hold sorting according to preferences and income, as well as how this sorting may generate local
amenities, such as the provision of local public goods. Despite their strengths and flexibility, these
models often require strong parametric identifying assumptions and computationally-intensive es-
timation procedures which make their validity difficult to assess.6
    Research on how commuting impacts local prices is focused on intra-urban gradients. Alonso
(1964), Mills (1967), and Muth (1969) predict rent gradients that fall with distance to a central busi-
ness district, as lower rents compensate households for higher commuting costs. Hoehn, Berger,
and Blomquist (1987) consider how a city-wide amenity affects wages and prices in a monocentric
city, and conclude “the amenity valuation results of Roback’s pure inter-regional case carry over.”
Muth (1969), White (1976) and Straszheim (1984) theorize that wages should fall with distance
from urban centers and sub-centers as workers accept lower wages for shorter commutes.7
(2008) regarding taxes and non-housing costs, and correct for selection from inter-state migration using techniques
adapted from Dahl (2002). While they find the Dahl correction important, we find it to be negligible, perhaps as we
used a larger set of worker controls in our wage equation. Bieri et al. use a set of amenities larger than any similar
study to determine relative amenity expenditures. Since many amenities as well as worker and housing characteristics
remain unobserved, this technique does not guarantee reduced omitted variable bias. We prefer to use a more agnostic
quality-of-life measure and explore how it is predicted by a parsimonious set of amenities.
    5
      For examples, see Davis (2004) for health, Chay and Greenstone (2005) for air quality, and Cellini, Ferreira and
Rothstein (2010) for school facilities. Crime has also been valued using housing prices, see Linden and Rockoff
(2008), Pope (2008), or Gautier et al (2009). Crime has even been examined as a cause of misallocation of time
at work, see Hamermesh (2009). Over time, residents may re-sort across neighborhoods, causing issues with the
estimates, see Kuminoff and Pope (2013) and Banzhaf (2013). Studies that use spatial discontinuities, such as district
borders (Black 1999), may be subject to sorting effects (Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillen 2007). Many amenities, like
climate or geography, change over long time frames, and so it is sensible to model sorting explicitly. Albouy et al.
(2013) do just that using the QOL measures here with the method of Bajari and Benkard (2006) to examine the problem
of climate change.
    6
      See Kuminoff, Smith, and Timmins (2013) for a review of this literature. Notable examples include Epple and
Sieg (1999) on levels of school funding, and Bayer and Timmins (2005) on equilibrium properties of sorting models.
Angrist and Pischke (2010) and Nevo and Winston (2010) provide an interesting debate on the pros and cons of
structural modeling and credible inference.
    7
      Turnbull (1992) examines the role of leisure in a related model and concludes that it makes little difference for


                                                          4
    Empirical evidence on wage gradients (e.g. Eberts 1981, Madden 1985, Zax 1991, McMillen
and Singell 1992) often supports the above hypothesis. Evidence on rent gradients is more mixed
(e.g. Dubin and Sung 1987), at least over short distances, suggesting the importance of confound-
ing amenities. A stark example is metro Detroit, where central-city land is often cheaper and less
developed than suburban land. Gabriel and Rosenthal (1996) provide a useful theory for such an
application, but use it to address the spatial mismatch of employment for minorities.8
    Estimates of local wage and rent levels may be biased by unobserved differences in worker
skills or housing quality. Fu and Ross (2013) estimate a positive effect of employment density on
wages that is unaffected by detailed controls for place of residence, but is rendered insignificant
when commuting is controlled for. This provides evidence that workers’ unobserved earnings
abilities are unrelated with where they work, even if they are related to where they live.9



3     A Model of Residential Choice with Commuting

3.1     Household Preferences and Constraints

We incorporate commuting into Rosen’s (1979) model, expanded by Albouy (2008). Households
are homogeneous, mobile, and have information about each community. They consume a traded
good, x, with price normalized to one, a non-traded home good, y, with price (or rent) p, leisure
time, l, commuting time, f , and a vector of amenities, Z. For simplicity, we aggregate ameni-
ties into a single index, Q = Q̃(Z). Household preferences are modeled by a utility function,
U (x, y, l, f ; Q), which is quasi-concave and decreasing in f and increasing in x, y, l, and Q.10
examining wage gradients. “The introduction of leisure choice into the local employment location model does not alter
either the form of the location equilibrium location condition or the immediate implication for the wage rate-distance
relationship.” This occurs since households put the same value on work and leisure on the margin.
    8
      Work on racial segregation is extremely interesting and important for many areas, including that related to the
spatial-mismatch hypothesis. For now, we defer questions on race to existing and future research. When we do
examine worker heterogeneity, we focus on a single-index that aggregates observable characteristics such race, age,
education, and immigrant status according to how these factors impact wages.
    9
      No such method exists to control for unobserved housing quality, although our fears are partly allayed by the lack
of correlation between quality and location measures discussed below.
   10
      Note that the amenities of a location j may be physically located in adjoining areas, such as museums within the
metro area. By aggregating the amenities we impose that preferences for consumption goods and amenities are weakly


                                                           5
    Households choose their place of residence, j, which differ in local prices, pj , and qual-
ity of life, Qj . They also choose their hours, h, and place of work, k, which differ in wages,
wk . Commuting between home and work takes time f jk , and is assumed to have a propor-
tional monetary cost, c · f jk , where c ≥ 0 is a constant. Households receive income from
wages, wk h, plus non-labor income, I, from a diversified portfolio of land and capital. They
pay federal taxes τ (wj h + I), which are rebated lump-sum. State taxes and tax benefits to owner-
occupied housing are modeled in Appendix C.11 The resulting household budget constraint is then
x + pj y + cf jk ≤ wj h + I − τ (wj h + I). The time endowment is normalized to one, so that
households satisfy the time constraint h + l + f jk ≤ 1. The following expenditure function joins
the utility function and two constraints to express the after-tax net expenditure necessary for a
household to obtain utility u:


  e(pj , wk , f jk ; Qj , u) = min {x + pj y − wj h − I + cf jk + τ (wj h + I)
                               x,y,h,l

                                                               : U (x, y, l, f jk ; Qj ) ≥ u, h + l + f jk ≤ 1},


This function, assumed to be continuously differentiable, increases in the urban-cost parameters pj
and f jk and decreases in the local opportunity parameters wk and Qj , meaning ∂e/∂p, ∂e/∂f ≥ 0
and ∂e/∂w, ∂e/∂Q ≤ 0.
separable, which is unlikely to hold. Some amenities, such as beaches, may be closer substitutes to leisure than others.
Colwell, Duhring, and Turnbull (2012) considers how amenities may impact behavior with varying commutes. In such
cases, the utility function would need to incorporate multiple Q or Z arguments. In practice, these concerns could have
a second-order importance on QOL estimates that our measures ignore. For instance, in high amenity areas, residents
may work less at their market job, and thus put less importance on local wages.
   11
      We do not model savings behavior explicitly, as the portfolio or return to savings do not depend on where people
live. A degree of household wealth is tied up in home equity, but with perfect capital markets, this will not matter.
In real life, homeowners in more expensive areas may have greater equity (or leverage) in local land, but the rate of
return on risk-adjusted savings should be the same. In a dynamic setting, it could be interesting to look at income
effects from windfall capital gains in local land markets. This would then require us to distinguish individuals from
where they used to reside to where they currently do. We save this complex issue for future research.




                                                           6
3.2   Equilibrium in Places of Residence and Work

Mobile and informed households do not choose a place-of-residence and place-of-work combina-
tion (j, k) less satisfying than any other. When households are homogeneous, all observed com-
binations (j, k) must provide the same level of utility, u. This equilibrium can be characterized
neatly with the expenditure function:


                                     e(pj , wk , f jk ; Qj , u) = 0,                            (1)


for all (j, k) combinations in the data. No one, on net, needs to be paid extra for where they live
and work; everyone is equally satisfied with the conditions they face.
   To characterize differences in prices and wages, we implicitly differentiate condition (1). By
varying the place of residence, j, we find

                                 ∂e j ∂e j       ∂e
                                    dp +    df +    dQj = 0.                                    (2)
                                 ∂p      ∂f      ∂Q

should hold for all observed residences and commutes. With some abuse of notation, df j denotes
the change in commuting time by varying residences. This expression generalizes the rent gradient:
higher rents may be associated with lower commute times or higher quality of life.
   The urban-wage gradient is expressed by varying the place of work, k, requiring that

                                        ∂e k ∂e k
                                           dw +    df = 0.                                      (3)
                                        ∂w      ∂f

across all observed commutes and workplaces. Here, df k is the change in commuting time by
varying workplaces. Workers will travel longer if they are compensated with higher wages.
   The model so far is similar to that on rent and wage gradients (e.g. McMillen and Singell
1992) with amenities added in. The goal here is not to test whether these gradients hold. Instead,
we combine (2) and (3) to infer a local willingness-to-pay measure for changes in quality of life,
dQj . This yields the expression −(∂e/∂Q)dQj = (∂e/∂p)dpj + (∂e/∂w)dwk + (∂e/∂f )df jk


                                                   7
where df jk ≡ df j + df k is the total difference in time spent commuting. We apply the envelope
theorem (i.e. Shepard’s Lemma) to the expenditure function (1) to interpret the derivatives, which
we evaluate at the national average. Accordingly, ∂e/∂p = ȳ is average housing consumption,
∂e/∂w = −(1 − τ 0 )h̄, average labor supply net of taxes, and ∂e/∂f = [c + (1 − τ 0 )w̄ − α], the
sum of monetary and after-tax opportunity cost of working net of the “leisure-value” of commuting,
α ≡ (∂U/∂f )/(∂U/∂x). Combining these, we solve for the marginal willingness-to-pay for local
quality of life in terms of local rents relative to wages, adjusted for commuting:


                    pQ dQj = ȳ · dpj − (1 − τ 0 )h̄ · dwk + [c + (1 − τ 0 )w̄ − α] df jk ,                        (4)


where pQ ≡ ∂e/∂Q is the marginal valuation of Q.12 If wages are rearranged on the left, the
expression relates how higher urban costs, ȳ · dpj + [c + (1 − τ )w̄ − α] df jk are paid to access
residential amenity opportunities, pQ dQj , or employment opportunities, (1 − τ 0 )h̄ · dwk .13 In other
words, high wages compensate workers for high urban costs or low amenities.


3.3     Applying and Parameterizing the Model

To operationalize the model, we divide (4) by average income m̄, re-express the level-differentials
in terms of log-differentials p̂j ≡ dpj /p̄, ŵk ≡ dwk /w̄, fˆjk ≡ df jk /f¯, and replace the coefficients
with share parameters. The marginal willingness-to-pay for local amenities, expressed as a fraction
  12
      Since Q does not have natural units, neither pQ nor dQj alone have operational meaning, although their product
does as pQ dQj is the marginal willingness-to-pay to enjoy the amenities in location j. Although the approximation
sets pQ at the national average, the price of amenities may change across locations.
   13
      Timothy and Wheaton (2001) consider the situation when wages, wk , are fixed and exogenous. Then, only in
knife-edge cases will households commute from the same place of residence to more than one work place . With
endogenous wages, wages in further (closer) places may rise (fall) to allow for more varied commuting behavior, as
we see in the data. Moreover, in a more realistic model, workers may vary in their transportation costs, preferences of
location, or receive idiosyncratic wage offers from different locations, each with mean wk , all of which could cause
workers from the same residences to commute to a large variety of workplaces. For an example of such a model which
allows for income heterogeneity, see Gabriel and Rosenthal (1996).




                                                          8
of income, Q̂ ≡ pQ dQj /m̄, is then

                                                                 f¯  f¯ ˆjk
                                                                       
                      j        j           0     k                   0
                    Q̂ = sy p̂ − (1 − τ )sw ŵ + sc + (1 − τ )sw − α      f ,                              (5)
                                                                 h̄  m̄
                                                |             {z           }
                                                                         ĉjk



where sy = p̄ȳ/m̄ is the expenditure share for home goods, sw ≡ w̄h̄/m̄ is the income share
from labor, sc ≡ cf¯/m̄ is share of income spent on commuting, and f¯/h̄ is the the ratio of time
spent commuting to time spent working. The last term on the right, ĉjk , is the “commuting-cost
differential,” which measures the full cost of commuting as a fraction of gross income.
       For the non-commuting parameters, we follow Albouy (2008) by assigning sw = 0.75, sy =
0.33, and τ 0 = 0.35. We allow for 25 percent of income to come from non-labor sources, such as
transfers and savings. We account for differences in the prices of non-housing goods, which are
strongly related to the costs of local housing, by putting a higher weight on rents than the literal
expenditure share on housing, which is closer to 0.22. Marginal tax rates are based on average
income tax rates, as well as a portion of payroll tax rates and some amount for state taxes, insofar
as wages vary within states.14
       For the commuting parameters, we use information from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) and National Highway Summary of Travel Trends. We take the median per-
cent of income spent on commuting by mode: sc = 0.049 for drivers, sc = 0.033 for transit-users,
and sc = 0.00 for walkers. To determine time costs, we calculate that the average worker in
2000 worked 1822 hours and spent 184 hours commuting (U.S. Census), roughly 10 percent of the
working day, and thus f¯/h̄ = 0.10.15
       The greatest uncertainty involves the parameter α: marginal commuting time is valued as work
time if it equals zero and as leisure time if it equals the after tax wage, (1 − τ 0 )w̄. Studies have
suggested a range of values for this parameter, although we find the value of α = 0 to be the most
plausible and straightforward. This value is supported by evidence from Small et al. (2005), from
  14
     In Appendix C.2 we explain how we adjust marginal rates by state. 35% is merely an average.
  15
     Annual commuting time is the product of 418 commuting trips, averaging 26.4 minutes each way. Commute time
is assumed to be equal by mode.


                                                      9
stated and revealed preference, and Fu and Ross (2013), from wage gradients, that commuting is
not preferred to working. Well-being data from Kahneman and Krueger (2006) find that subjective
affect while commuting is as low or lower than while working, reinforcing this value. Alternative
values of α may be accounted for easily.


3.4       Strengths and Limitations of the Model

The quality-of-life index proposed in (5) is based on a straightforward integration of standard urban
theories. The chosen parametrization of willingness-to-pay applies only to a typical household.
Particular households will vary in how they weigh wages relative to housing and commuting costs.
Households with fewer earners, such as retirees, put less importance on wages; households with
children may put more importance on housing and commuting costs. Implicit marginal tax rates
in taxes and transfers may also differ across households. How the index would change under
alternate parameterizations or estimates is uncomplicated. The index is also moderately robust to
behavioral responses in leisure or consumption due to differences in rents, wages, or commuting
costs – because of the envelope theorem, such considerations have only a second-order effect.
While free mobility is a standard assumption, in reality, households do not move unless the benefit
merits the cost of moving. Declining areas tend to keep households with greater moving costs, and
thus may have inflated measures of willingness-to-pay.
       Households may vary considerably in their tastes for local amenities, especially features like
schools. In a survey, Pew Research Center (2009) finds that individuals of different ages, gen-
der, income, and education often state similar preferences for which metro areas they find most
livable.16 Research on revealed preferences generally assumes that different groups pay the same
rent and relies on differences in relative population frequencies to infer different tastes. While there
is much evidence of sorting by race and income across neighborhoods (e.g. Cutler and Glaeser
  16
     For those making less than $30,000 a year, 13 percent state they would live in Detroit, 30 percent in San Francisco.
For those making over $100,000, the rates are 7 percent for Detroit and 48 percent for San Francisco. The differences
for most other cities, like Atlanta (24 and 26 percent) and New York (21 and 35 percent), are smaller, and there are
very few cases of inversion.




                                                          10
1997 and Ioannides 2004), converting relative frequencies into willingness-to-pay differences has
generally relied on strong parametric assumptions.
   With heterogeneous preferences, the supply and demand of amenities matters. For example, the
marginal bid for land on the coast should rise if the supply of coastline per person falls. Although
typical households may value car-friendly suburbs developments, if they are abundant relative to
walkable downtowns, the latter may be costlier, as downtown residences are allocated only to the
highest bidders (Gyourko et al. 2013).
   Tastes for different areas may depend considerably on the local population either directly or
indirectly for the “artificial” amenities they bring. Yinger (2014) finds considerable differences in
demand for neighborhood ethnic composition. Boustan (2013) estimates high demand for high-
income neighbors, as they provide high-quality schools relative to property tax rates. Ultimately,
neighborhood “quality” is a sensitive topic that depends on many subjective factors.
   As an example, consider a housing project built for low-income households in a low-wage area,
such as Decatur, IL. Even if new residents prefer Decatur to their old location, say Chicago, they
should still have a lower willingness-to-pay than existing residents, who paid full price to be there.
As the proportion of low-income households increases, the local per-capita tax base may decline,
causing public services to fall. Unless original residents prefer the new mix of residents to the old,
or the change in local amenities it brings, the introduction of public housing is likely to reduce
local willingness-to-pay, although this remains an empirical question.
   As another example, consider the impact of exclusionary zoning meant to keep out low-income
households. If such zoning is binding, low-income households will have a limited supply of neigh-
borhoods to choose from, say in the central city. These limits may lengthen commuting times and
raise rents in those neighborhoods, increasing measured willingness-to-pay. If low-income house-
holds live in less desirable neighborhoods, zoning would attenuate the quality-of-life differences
we infer. The resulting segregation of rich from poor could also reinforce differences in artificially
produced amenities, increasing differences in actual neighborhood quality.




                                                 11
4         Wage, Rent, and Commuting-Cost Estimates

4.1         Units of Geography

We estimate wage, rent, and commuting-cost differentials from the 5 percent sample of the U.S.
Census in the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for 2000 (Ruggles et al. 2004).17
The public-use files identify households’ location of residence down to 2071 Public Use Microdata
Areas. These areas have an average population of 135,887, and a minimum of 100,000. The
Census Bureau does not provide names for 2000 PUMAs; we name them using the counties,
municipalities, or neighborhoods they contain.
         The geographic detail of the PUMAs increases with population density. 186 PUMAs corre-
spond exactly to counties. 1,266 PUMAs are entirely contained within a subset of 288 counties,
and are often identifiable neighborhoods or municipalities. For example, in Washtenaw County,
MI, one PUMA corresponds to the city of Ann Arbor while the other refers to areas in Washtenaw
County outside Ann Arbor. In the borough of Manhattan (New York County, NY), the PUMAs
correspond to sub-boroughs, such as the Upper East Side. 2,654 counties are entirely contained
within one of 526 larger PUMAs. For example, Clarke, Madison, and Occonee counties in Georgia
form a single PUMA around Athens, GA.
         We aggregate our PUMA level estimates up to the level of Metropolitan Area, as defined by the
Office of Management and Budget (1999). These 276 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) are
supersets of counties – such as the MSA for Athens, GA which coincides with the three counties
listed above. 19 of the largest MSAs are categorized as Consolidated MSAs (CMSAs) which are
in turn made up of 55 Primary MSAs (PMSAs). Thus, from 2071 PUMAs we may assemble the
data into 3081 counties, 331 PMSAs, and 276 MSAs (putting the 55 PMSAs into 19 CMSAs).18
    17
      We acknowledge that the quality-of-life estimates are slightly dated. Nevertheless, the 2000 Census offers the last
5 percent snapshot of the U.S. More recent data on housing prices may not be driven by market fundamentals due to
the wake of the boom and bust cycle, as detailed in Ferreira and Gyourko (2011). Furthermore, recent evidence in Lee
and Lin (2013) highlights remarkable persistence in the desirability of most neighborhoods, especially in areas with
natural amenities.
   18
      PUMAs can usually be assigned uniquely to counties or MSAs, but in cases where they overlap MSA (or county)
boundaries, the observations are subdivided and given a fractional weight according to the proportion of the popula-
tion that resides in each area. We only truly estimate quality-of-life at the PUMA level; all of our aggregations use


                                                          12
    Within metro areas, the Census designates some places as central cities, typically the largest
population and employment centers. We separate these from other places within MSAs, which we
label suburban; places completely outside of MSAs are non-metropolitan.19 We also classify areas
according to residential population density – calculated at the census-tract level and averaged by
population – using cut-offs of 1,000 and 5,000 residents per square mile.
    Panel 1 of Table 1 presents means of the estimated differentials and related statistics for cen-
tral city, suburban, and non-metro areas. Panel 2 presents this information summarized by the
location’s average density. Panel 3 presents the standard deviations of the differentials across the
United States, and decomposes the variance within and across metro areas. In Table 2, these statis-
tics are presented for PUMAs in two well-known counties: New York, NY (Manhattan), and San
Francisco, CA. Table 3 contains the differential measures for various levels of geography in 5
MSAs; Table A1 in the Appendix contains them of all 2071 PUMAs.


4.2     Housing Costs due to Location and Composition

We use both housing values and gross rents, including utilities, to calculate rent, or “housing-
cost,” differences, interpreted as the flow-cost of housing faced by households. To impute owned
housing rents, and make them comparable to gross rents for rental units, we multiply housing
values by a rate of 7.85 percent (Peiser and Smith 1985) and add utility costs. We regress rents on
                                                                                    j
place-of-residence indicators, µjp , and controls for housing composition, denoted Xpi – i.e., size,
rooms, acreage, commercial use, kitchen and plumbing facilities, type and age of building – each
interacted with renter status.20 The resulting regression equation is


                                           ln pji = Xpi
                                                     j
                                                        βp + µjp + εjpi ,                                         (6)
population-weighted averages of these PUMA level values.
   19
      For instance, all of New York City, Bridgeport, Newark, and New Haven are deemed central city, but none of Long
Island is. The cities of San Francisco, Oakland, San Jose, Berkeley, and Richmond are all central city, but Fremont,
Hayward, Union City, and all of Marin and San Mateo counties are not.
   20
      We combine rent and imputed-rent measures to avoid potential problems created by local differences in home-
ownership (see Table A2). For instance, in Manhattan 80 percent of housing units are rented, whereas in King William
Co., VA, only 13 percent are rented. Using more recent data, Albouy and Hanson (2014) calculate an average user cost
for owner-occupied housing of 6.2 percent. With our controls for tenure status, the rate used has only a minor effect.

                                                         13
where estimates of µjp are the rent differentials, p̂j , for location j. Remaining differences in mean
housing costs, ln pj − µp = X̄pj β j , are attributed to mean differences in observable housing com-
position across areas, X̄pj , which we call “housing quality.” Since X involves measures like the
number of rooms, “quality” also refers to quantity of housing. We also include corrections for rent
control for New York City and San Francisco.21
    Identifying the rent differentials requires that mean differences in unobserved housing quality
across areas are orthogonal to the location index. This requirement may not hold. For exam-
ple, two-bedroom apartments built in a 1960s-era Chicago suburb are likely to be more spacious
than similar ones built contemporaneously in the Chicago Loop. Biases in rent differentials bias
quality-of-life estimates in the same direction. Thus, “quality of life” may also reflect unobserved
housing quality. If these biases are important, it seems likely that the quality-of-life measures
would be correlated with measures of observed housing quality. As shown in Appendix Figure
A1, the correlation is almost zero, suggesting that unobserved housing quality differences are not
systematically correlated with underlying willingness-to-pay for local amenities.22
    Figure 2A maps the rent index across the United States. Appendix Table A2 summarizes the
index and details the variables. In Table 1, we see rents are 2 percent higher, on average, in the
suburbs than in central cities, despite longer commutes. This fact runs contrary to standard rent-
gradient predictions, although from the maps we see that rents do eventually fall away from city
centers. Outside of metro areas, rents are 34 percent (41 log points) lower than in suburbs. In Panel
B, we see dense areas have the highest rents, as predicted by standard urban models.
   21
      Pollakowski (2003) estimates that in core Manhattan areas, the lower 6 neighborhoods, prices for rent-controlled
units would be 37 percent higher without rent control. Using a similar method with Census data, we determine that
prices for rent-controlled units in San Francisco would be 22 percent higher in the absence of rent control. To correct
for this, we add the fraction of rent-controlled units in each PUMA times ln(1 + a) to the housing cost index, where
a is how much prices for units would appreciate in the absence of rent control.
   22
      For instance, the compositional component of housing cost is very high in parts of suburban Atlanta (e.g. Al-
pharetta and Snellville), although the location is quite average. Meanwhile, the compositional component is quite low
where the locational rent is high, such as in Hawaii, Manhattan, and the San Francisco Bay Area. Within Manhattan,
units in lower cost Harlem have a higher value than units in Midtown, Downtown, or the Upper East and West Sides.
For homes of the very wealthy, possible biases are mitigated by the fact that housing values are censored at $1 million.
When density is flexibly controlled for, a one-point increase in housing-cost predicts a 0.1 point increase in the value
of housing composition. Nevertheless, Malpezzi et. al. (1998) determine that rent indices derived from the Census
using hedonic methods perform as well as most other indices.



                                                          14
   In column 3, we see that housing quality in central cities is 15 percent lower than in suburbs.
Quality also falls by about 10 percent each time between high and medium, and medium and low
density areas. This is the case as units in denser, central areas are older and smaller.
   Panel C provides evidence that differences in housing quality are considerable, but smaller than
differences due to location. In addition, rent levels vary more across metro areas than within them,
while the opposite is true of housing quality.


4.3    Wage Levels by Workplace and Residence

To calculate wage differentials, ŵk , we use hourly wages from a sample of workers, ages 25 to 55,
who worked at least 30 hours a week and 26 weeks a year. We regress log wages on place-of-work
indicators, µkw , and controls for worker composition, or skills, Xwi
                                                                   k
                                                                      , – i.e., education, experience,
race, occupation, industry, and veteran, marital, and immigrant status – each interacted with gender.
The regression equation is
                                     ln wik = Xwi
                                               k
                                                  β + µkw + εkwi .                                (7)

We calculate wage differentials for residents in location j by averaging µkw , according to the pro-
portion of residents of j who work in each place k. This is interpreted as the measure of the wage
opportunities, ŵk , available to residents, when they incur the commuting costs estimated below.
We map the wage index in Figure 2B. The Appendix summarizes related worker measures (Table
A3), and details the variables. We also estimate differences in wages due to average differences in
observed characteristics or “skills”, X̄wk , weighting them by their estimated return, β̂.
   In column (6) of Table 1 we see notable differences in observed skills: workers’ predicted
wages are 4 percent below average in central cities, 3 percent above average in suburbs. This
fact is consistent with sorting models when the income elasticity for housing is higher than that
for the costs of commuting. Observed skills are also 6 percent lower in high-density areas, and
4 percent higher in medium-density areas. The typical standard deviation is 10 log points, with
much of the variation within metro areas, highlighting the importance of income-sorting at the



                                                  15
sub-metropolitan level.
    The evidence of sorting on observed wage determinants raises concerns about unobserved de-
terminants of wages. To mitigate this problem within metros, we use measures of wage opportu-
nities by place of work, following evidence in Fu and Ross (2013) that workers do not sort across
workplaces according to their unobserved skills.23 Figure 1 graphs wage estimates by place of
work against those by residence. We see that the the former vary less than the latter.
    Our estimates of wage levels by place of residence vary by amounts too large than would be
predicted by commuting costs, suggesting that residential selection based on unobserved skills
leads to biases. In Table 2, we see wages by residence vary remarkably in Manhattan. In the Upper
West Side they are 53 percent higher than in Washington Heights, even though the two areas are
separated only by a 14-minute subway ride, costing a $1.50 fare in 2000. Wages by place of work
exhibit a much more plausible difference, with wages only 6 percent higher in the Upper West
Side. By place of residence, wages in the Long Island suburbs are often higher than in Manhattan,
but by place of work (the two have different PWPUMAs), wages in Long Island are much lower.24
    On average, residential wage measures indicate wages are lower in central cities, contradicting
standard wage-gradient predictions. Place-of-work wages are as high in central cities as in suburbs.
Furthermore, they rise with density, as seen in Figure 2B, and eventually fall in the distant suburbs.
    Whether we measure wages by place of work or residence, the evidence in Panel C of Table
1 implies that wages vary much more across metro areas than within them. This supports the
view that metro areas are sensible labor-market areas. On the other hand, wages due to observed
skills vary much more within metro areas than across them. This fact supports the hypotheses that
   23
      Note that place of work in the public-use files is only available at the Place of Work Public Use Microdata Area
(PWPUMA) level. These number 1240, and are made up of the 2071 standard PUMAs. Selection at this coarser level
should be no worse than at the PUMA level (used by Fu and Ross). However, the coarser geography eliminates some
wage differences mechanically. Appendix D has more details on PWPUMAs. In Appendix Table A3, we determine
that half of the differences between the residential and workplace estimates is due to coarser geography; the remaining
half is due to actual commuting. The averaging effect may still reduce potential biases, although it may introduce new
ones if agglomeration effects are highly localized and commutes are short. See Rosenthal and Strange (2001) for more
about how agglomeration varies at different levels of geography.
   24
      Within San Francisco, wages by place of residence are 28 percent higher in the primarily residential Marina-
Northeastern area than in the skyscraper-filled Downtown. These areas are adjacent, connected by a walk, short drive,
or bus ride. Morning commuters head Downtown, which would be the wrong direction if the place-of-residence
estimates were accurate. Again, place-of-work wages are much more plausible, exhibiting a 1-percent difference.


                                                         16
residential sorting is more important within metro areas than across them, while wage differences
across metros are due largely to real differences in local productivity.
       The differences between residence and workplace wage measures may be used as an index
of unobserved skills. In Figure 1, such differences are illustrated by the rightward distance from
the diagonal to each PUMA’s marker. Across PUMAs, a one-point increase in observed skills
predicts a half-point increase in this unobservable skill measure. This relationship is 20 percent
stronger within MSAs, reinforcing the hypothesis that within-metro sorting is strong. In column 6
of Table 2 we see evidence that both observed and unobserved skill levels are low in neighborhoods
like Harlem and Bayview, and high in the Upper East Side and N.E. San Francisco. Overall, the
evidence suggests that using wages by residence biases quality-of-life estimates upwards in areas
with low-skilled workers, which are confused with areas where wage opportunities are poor.


4.4      Commuting Costs

We estimate commuting-costs using reported commuting times and modes from the same sample
used for wages. We regress the square root of commute time, with place-of-residence indicators,
µjf , and controls, Xfj i . The controls are the same as in the wage equation, plus controls for children,
– each interacted with gender. Thus, the regression equation is

                                          q
                                           fij = Xfj i βf + µjf + εjf i .                                         (8)


We use the square root as it fits the data better than most power transformations, and as it accom-
                                                                                                √
modates reports of zero commuting time. The differential is then constructed using fˆj = 2µjf / f ,
      √
where f is the average of square-root commuting time.25
   We assume that the time costs of commuting, (1 − τ 0 )sw f¯/h̄ − αf¯/m̄ fˆjk , are independent
                                                                            

of transportation mode, and that transportation mode only determines monetary costs. Using a
linear probability model, we calculate demographically-adjusted probabilities of using each mode
  25
    The R-squared is 0.08 using the square root. Using powers of 0.25 and 1 (linear) caused even worse fits. As the
predictive power of the regression is rather low, we forgo discussion of time predicted by observable characteristics.


                                                         17
of transportation, ρjl , for modes l – own car, carpool, public transportation, and other methods (e.g.
walking and biking). The monetary cost of commuting, represented by sc fˆjk , is the weighted av-
erage of the mode costs multiplied by the time differential, plus the deviation in average monetary
costs:
                                               X                  X
                                   sc fˆjk =       ρjl cl fˆj +       ρjl − ρ̄ cl .
                                                                              
                                               l                  l

Outside of New York City, these modal adjustments are minor since most people drive.26 The
Appendix details these methods and summarizes the component measures in Table A4.
       Column 7 in Tables 1 and 2 report the index of commuting costs, ĉjk , the last term of (5), which
depends primarily on commuting times, reported in column 8. Consistent with standard urban
models, these costs are lower in central cities than in the suburbs. These costs are lowest in non-
metro areas where labor markets are more dispersed. They vary slightly less within metropolitan
areas than across them. The map in Figure 2C, illustrates these facts. In large metros like Atlanta,
Dallas, and Houston, commuting costs exhibit a remarkable annulus or “donut” pattern around their
central cities. In other metros, the patterns are more asymmetric: in Detroit they rise going north;
in Boston they rise heading south towards Cape Cod. The highest commuting times nationwide
are on the outskirts of Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco. The lowest costs are typically
in more remote areas, particularly in the Great Plains.
       Within metro areas, commuting costs obey the predictions of monocentric urban models better
than rents and wages. Figure 3 plots commuting costs relative to housing costs, controlling for local
wage levels.27 A one-point increase in commuting costs is associated with a 2.3 point reduction in
housing costs. This negative relationship agrees with rent-gradient predictions. When interpreted
strictly through equation (5) the calibration predicts the slope should be -3.0, when quality of
life is constant. This suggests that residents are commuting longer for better amenities, although
measurement error or commuting being more desirable than work are also possible explanations.
  26
      Within the city borders of New York, San Francisco, Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago, the monetary costs of
transit riders are independent of travel time, as their transit agencies charge a flat fare.
   27
      Each cost measure is the residual from a simple regression on the local wage level.




                                                         18
4.5         Household characteristics

Table 3 reports how several household characteristics vary spatially. Some of these characteristics
vary rather little. The proportion of children under 18 is about 28 percent in central cities, suburbs,
and non-metro areas; these means do not change much by density either. The standard deviation
is 4 percentage points across PUMAs. 12 percent of those in medium density areas are over 65,
and this deviates by only 1 percentage point in high and low density areas. About 50 percent of the
population is in the labor force; this number is only 1 percent higher in the suburbs and medium-
density areas. Household size also varies little. Marriage rates are 37 percent in the central city
versus 45 percent in the suburbs.
         Differences related to education, race, and ethnicity are more substantial. College degrees are
relatively rare outside metro areas. Within metros, college-degree frequency varies considerably,
although the average difference between central cities and suburbs is small. Blacks are much more
likely to reside in central cities, constituting 20 percent of the population there. Immigrant status is
also concentrated in urban and dense areas, and varies more across metropolitan areas than within.
Home ownership rates are much higher in suburban and low-density areas, although this is strongly
related to the presence of single-family buildings.



5         Quality of Life across the United States

We combine the rent, wage, and commuting differentials to estimate average local willingness-
to-pay – or, “quality of life” – from equation (5).28 The comprehensive geographic information
provided by the Census Bureau allows us to map the differentials with some detail: Figure 4 covers
the continental United States, and Figures 5A, 5B, 5C, and 5D cover areas around San Francisco,
New York, Detroit, and Atlanta respectively. Quality-of-life differentials for these four MSAs,
and for Honolulu, are presented in Table 4.29 In these locations, we aggregate our quality-of-life
    28
     The estimates include adjustments for state taxes and housing deductions. Refer to Appendix C for details.
    29
     We also estimated the quality-of-life differentials separately for whites and non-whites. The relationship between
the two was nearly one-to-one, with a correlation of 0.83. This is remarkable given possible noise in the data as well
as segregation within PUMAs.


                                                         19
estimates according to four levels of geography: MSA-equivalents, PMSA-equivalents, counties,
and PUMAs. Each level of geography is given its own ranking by type, so there are separate rank-
ings for each of these four geographic levels.30 Table A1 ranks and list quality-of-life differentials
across all 2071 PUMAs.
       The highest quality-of-life PUMA in the United States contains the communities of East Oahu,
including Waialae-Kahala – known for its secluded beaches and accessibility to Honolulu, HI and
Diamond Head. To live here, households sacrifice the equivalent of 29 log points (25 percent) of
real after-tax income relative to the national average. This PUMA is inside the Honolulu MSA,
which was already found to be the highest quality-of-life MSA in Albouy (2008).
       The highest ranked county is Marin, CA just north of the Golden Gate Bridge. It contains two
PUMAs. One, with the communities of San Rafael, Sausalito, and Mill Valley (see figure 5A),
is ranked fourth among PUMAs. The second and fourth ranked counties are San Mateo and San
Francisco, both in California. Together, these three counties comprise the San Francisco PMSA,
which ranks first among PMSA equivalents (as a PMSA-equivalent, Honolulu is second). When
San Francisco is combined with other nearby California PMSAs, including Santa Cruz (#3), San
Jose (#4) and Oakland (#11), the Combined MSA is ranked second, just behind Honolulu.31
       New York City’s dense and renowned areas are interesting to examine. Manhattan, 2 miles wide
and 13 miles long, is split into 10 quite different sub-boroughs (see Figure 5B). While the island
appears to be a unified labor market, the rents vary tremendously relative to manageable differences
in commuting costs, signalling major differences in quality of life. Four of the sub-boroughs rank in
the top 25 PUMAs, while two are in the bottom 50. Most locals are quite aware of these differences
in neighborhood desirability, some rather discontinuous, such as between the Upper East Side and
East Harlem. As these areas share the same geography, climate, and municipality, these differences
raise the issues mentioned earlier regarding heterogeneous populations, endogenous amenities, and
  30
     All measures not at the PUMA level are population weighted means of PUMA estimates.
  31
     Blomquist et al. (1988) found Alameda County, which contains Oakland, to be one of the best and Marin County
to be one of the worst counties in the SF Bay Area. Among other things, this is probably due to their use of wage
levels based on residence rather than place of work, since unobserved skill levels there are high. As explained in
Albouy (2008), the SF Bay Area in general fared badly in their article as they did not take into account federal taxes
and non-housing costs-of-living.


                                                         20
sorting. These large differences are not exclusive to the central city: nearby suburbs in Long Island
and New Jersey contain areas with a wide range of desirability.
       The lowest quality of life is found in southwest Detroit City, MI, in the area containing the
neighborhoods of Chadsey, Condon, and Vernor (see Figure 5C). Households are compensated
with 25 percent (22 log points) of real income to live here (seen in Appendix Table A1). The
Detroit MSA is relatively undesirable on average, though the suburbs of West Bloomfield and
Birmingham are in the top 5 of PUMA rankings. Detroit has two satellite PMSAs, Flint and Ann
Arbor, with contrasting central cities. Both have similar wages and commutes, but the higher rents
in Ann Arbor signal its attractiveness.
       Quality of life discrepancies in Atlanta, GA are less stark. The greatest range is within the city
limits: Buckhead is the highest and Center Hill/West Lake is the lowest, with Midtown/Downtown
in-between.
       Each metro area has its idiosyncrasies, although some national patterns emerge in column 9 of
Table 1. On average, the typical household prefers suburban areas to central cities, as they pay 2
percent more in rents, and endure commutes 10 percent longer to get the same wages. Willingness-
to-pay in central cities is still 4 percent of income higher than outside of metro areas altogether.
       Quality of life is higher in denser areas. This does not prove that density is itself desirable:
more people should want to live in amenable areas, although local housing supply restrictions
may impede them. Twenty percent of suburbs have over 5,000 residents per square mile, where
willingness-to-pay is 5 percent above average. Some central-city areas have densities under 5,000,
such as downtown Kansas City, MO: these areas offer a quality of life 3 percent below average.
The results in Panel C formalize the finding that there appears to be about as much variation in
willingness-to-pay within metro areas as across them. At each level, the standard deviation in
values is almost 5 percent of gross income.32 This variation is remarkable given that rents, and
especially wages, vary less within MSAs than they do across them. This suggests that, geographi-
  32
    While the variation within metro areas appears slightly lower than the variation across, it is probably understated,
since PUMAs obscure variation at lower levels of geography. Thus, there is likely to be even more variation within
metros than across metros.



                                                          21
cally, a metro area’s labor market is more homogeneous than its amenities.
         To highlight the importance of commuting, column 10 presents quality-of-life estimates that
ignore commuting costs and use place-of-residence wages. These estimates make central cities
look more desirable to typical households than the suburbs. They also lower rankings of large
metro areas relative smaller ones, and also relative to non-metro areas. Without commuting, the
San Francisco MSA would fall from number 2 to 4, behind the Santa Barbara and Salinas (Mon-
terey Co.) MSAs in California, which offer lower wages and shorter commutes. Workers appear
to be commuting for both higher wages and better amenities.



6         Predictors of Willingness-to-Pay

The quality-of-life index should capture the value of all amenities, many of which may be very
difficult to observe, such as smells, beautiful gardens, friendly residents, or charming architecture.
Nevertheless, it is reassuring if the quality-of-life index has significant partial correlations of the
“correct” sign for ostensibly desirable amenities. We model this relationship using the regression
equation
                                                    X
                                            Q̂j =        πkQ Zkj + εQj ,                                        (9)
                                                     k

In a hedonic framework, where amenities are exogenous and households have the same pref-
erences, this relationship would be taken as causal. The regression coefficients would then be
                           
πk = −(∂E/∂Q) ∂ Q̃/∂Zk /m̄ , i.e., the fraction of gross income a household is willing to pay
for one more unit of amenity k.33 The residual εQj results from measurement error, unobserved
amenities, mis-specification, and unobserved housing quality and worker skills. In practice, the
requirements needed for this regression to have an error term orthogonal to the amenity measures
are not met.34 Thus, the dollar values we give are merely illustrative. More uniquely, we examine
    33
     Multiplying this coefficient by average gross household income ($68,000 in 2000) produces a dollar value.
    34
     Amenities are often collinear, making it hard to get precise estimates for a large set of variables. Unmeasured
amenities may contribute to omitted variable biases. Artificial amenities may be endogenous to other determinants
of quality of life, including local populations with heterogeneous preferences. There may also be important non-
linearities in the hedonic equation.



                                                         22
whether estimates within metro areas are similar to those identified across all areas by adding MSA
indicators, or “fixed effects,” to the regression. This reduces the identifying variation, but may pro-
vide some insights, particularly if confounding effects are different within metro areas relative to
across them.
   Our amenity variables are described in Appendix B, and summarized in Table 5. The three
climate variables – measuring cold, heat, and sunshine – vary little within metros. The geography
measures – average slope of land and inverse distance to the coast – vary more within. We also use
three amenity variables that are largely endogenous to the local population and available nation-
wide only at the county level. We proxy for safety using minus the murder rate, which varies more
within metros than across; such crimes are more common in central and dense areas. The same
is true of bars and restaurants, which is our proxy of local entertainment. Public school revenues
exhibit less variation within metros, much like local wage levels, which are likely the main source
of cost differences. Nevertheless, these revenues are highest in the suburbs. As these artificial
amenities are largely a product of local populations, they may proxy for the overall desirability of
the populations themselves.
   Table 6 reports the estimates from the amenity regressions. The eight variables explain 40
percent of the variation in quality of life over all 2071 PUMAs. The finding that households value
areas with mild winters, mild summers, sloped land, sunshine, and coastal proximity echoes that
of Albouy (2008) for metro areas; the importance of climate is explored in greater depth in Albouy
et al. (2013). The main observation here is that the coefficients for the temperature and slope
variables are still relatively precise within metros and slightly larger than when predicted across
metros. The sunshine estimate is understandably imprecise, mainly since we have fewer weather
stations measuring it than metro areas. The coastal estimate however, remains more precise but
becomes insignificant. This may be the result of how the variable is specified or measured, or
perhaps residents in communities near the coasts find that “close is good enough,” in the words of
Schmidt and Courant (2006).
   Although crime rates are available only at the county level, the regressions here associate an


                                                  23
increase in the murder rate from 10 to 20 per 100,000 residents – the difference between Los
Angeles and Philadelphia – with a reduction in willingness-to-pay of $1,000 to $1,600 per house-
hold, depending on the specification.35 The geographic coarseness of the crime measure suggests
a downward bias, while murder’s correlation with other crimes and other disamenities suggest an
upward bias. The estimate is smaller than crime valuations in Bishop and Murphy (2011), based
on geographically finer data for the SF Bay Area.
       The number of local bars and restaurants is strongly associated with willingess-to-pay. Per
1,000, each establishment is associated with $170 rise in willingness-to-pay, or $170,000 total.
This is roughly a third of the average revenue of a restaurant. This large number is unlikely to
represent the value of having a bar or restaurant in the neighborhood, as they are located near other
retail and entertainment establishments, in highly visited areas where residents can afford to eat
out. The estimate would also cannot capture the value to residents outside the neighborhood.
       The estimates reveal a strong association with school funding. This is despite the fact that local
taxes are not controlled for. An increase in funding of $1,000 per student (or, since there are 0.9
students per household, $900 per household) is associated with a quality-of-life increase of $570.
This number is likely biased from well-funded areas being nicer or having more desirable residents.
Interpreting this number causally would indicate that schools are underfunded, especially if, on the
margin, households fund schools out of local taxes (see Brueckner 1982). Yet, these estimates have
the same order of magnitude as the Cellini, Ferreira, and Rothstein (2010) estimate of the value of
school facilities and the Black (1999), Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan (2007), and Caetano (2010)
estimates of the willingness to pay for schools with higher test scores.
       For the artificial amenities, the estimates from within metro areas is roughly similar to the
overall estimates, except for crime, where the estimates are larger. Whether this is due to greater
household sorting within metro areas deserves further investigation.
  35
    It is worth noting that crime victims may not residents of the neighborhood where the crime occurred, although
our measure is at the county level and counties are fairly large.




                                                       24
7    Conclusion

Although rankings of neighborhood quality are common in the popular literature, using a single
index does require considerable simplification. Our index, based on the consumption “sacrifice” a
typical household would make to live in different areas does seem to produce plausible results that
many would find to be correlated to their own tastes. Analogously, it can be very useful to charac-
terize policy preference from left to right, even though preferences over multidimensional policy
issues will surely show some independence. While locally there may be differences in opinion on
what makes for a good neighborhood, it does seem useful to have a standardized willingness-to-pay
measure that may be used to compare neighborhoods in different metro areas.
    By incorporating commuting and place-of-work wages, our simple quality-of-life model fits in
well with the standard model on local rent and wage gradients. The commuting adjustment reveals
that willingness-to-pay to live in the suburbs or in dense areas, where commutes are long, is higher
than simpler measures imply. The place-of-work wage adjustment reveals that wages offered in
central cities are as high as in the suburbs, implying that on average, central-city residents are not at
a great disadvantage. Overall, the variation in local willingness-to-pay within metro areas appears
to be as large as the variation across metro areas, often across nearby areas. In most places, such
internal differences appear to have more to do with the population and artificial amenitiies, rather
than the natural environment.
    This analysis suggests interesting directions for future research. As we found that wages levels
vary by much less than quality-of-life measures within metro areas, researchers might examine
how households decide where to live based on the jobs available in different cities, and the clusters
of neighborhoods that are accessible to them. Another natural extension would consider how
willingness-to-pay for neighborhoods varies across groups, together with their propensity to live
in those neighborhoods.




                                                   25
References

Albouy, David (2008), ”Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live: Estimating Quality of Life across
Metropolitan Areas.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 14472, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Alonso, William (1964), Location and Land Use: Towards a General Theory of Land Rent. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (2010) “The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Eco-
nomics: How Better Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives, 24(2), pp. 3-30.

Areavibes.com     (2013)    “Top       10    Cities        -   Best   Place   To   Live   2013.”   Re-
trieved    February    2,     2014          from      http://www.areavibes.com/library/
top-10-best-cities-to-live-2013/.

Bajari, Pat and Matthew Kahn (2005) “Estimating Housing Demand With an Application to Ex-
plaining Racial Segregation in Cities.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 23(1): 20-33.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Ronni Pavan (2012) ”Understanding the City Size Wage Gap” Review
of Economic Studies, 79: 88-127.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan (2007) ”A Unified Framework for Mea-
suring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(4), pp.
588-638.

Bayer, Patrick and Christopher Timmins (2005) “On the Equilibrium Properties of Locational
Sorting Models.” Journal of Urban Economics, 57(3), pp. 462-77.

Becker, Richard A., Lorraine Denby, Robert McGill, and Allan R. Wilks (1987) ”Analysis of Data
From the Places Rated Almanac.” The American Statistician, 41, pp. 169-186.



                                                      26
Beeson, Patricia E. and Randall W. Eberts (1989) ”Identifying Productivity and Amenity Effects
in Interurban Wage Differentials.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 71, pp. 443-452.

Berger, Mark C., Glenn C. Blomquist, and Werner Waldner (1987) ”A Revealed-Preference Rank-
ing of Quality of Life for Metropolitan Areas” Social Science Quarterly, 68, pp. 761-779.

Bieri, David S. Nicolai V. Kuminoff and Jaren C. Pope. (2013) ”National Expenditures on Local
Amenities.” Unpublished manuscript. October 13.

Bishop, Kelly and Alvin Murphy (2011) ”Estimating the Willingness to Pay to Avoid Violent
Crime: A Dynamic Approach” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101, pp.
625-629

Black, Dan, Natalia Kolesnikova and Lowell Taylor (2009) ”Earnings Functions When Wages and
Prices Vary by Location” Journal of Labor Economics, 27(1), pp. 21-47.

Black, Sandra E. (1999) ”Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp. 577-599.

Blomquist, Glenn C., Mark C. Berger, and John P. Hoehn (1988) ”New Estimates of Quality of
Life in Urban Areas.” American Economic Review, 78, pp. 89-107.

Boustan, Leah Platt (2013) “Local Public Goods and the Demand for High-Income Municipali-
ties.” Journal of Urban Economics, 76, pp. 71-82.

Brownstone, David and Kenneth A. Small. (2005) ”Valuing Time and Reliability: Assessing the
Evidence from Road Pricing Demonstrations.” Transportation Research Part A, 39, pp. 279-293.

Brueckner, Jan K. (1982) ”A Test for Allocative Efficiency in the Local Public Sector” Journal of
Public Economics 15, pp. 566-589.

Caetano, Gregorio (2010) “Identification and Estimation of Parental Valuation of School Quality
in the U.S,” mimeo, University of Rochester.


                                               27
Cellini, Stephanie, Fernando Ferreira and Jesse Rothstein (2010) ”The Value of School Facility
Investments: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125, pp. 215-261.

Chen, Yu and Stuart Rosenthal (2008) ”Local Amenities and Life-Cycle Migration: Do People
Move for Jobs or Fun?” Journal of Urban Economics, 64, pp. 519-537.

Colwell, Peter F., Carolyn A. Dehring and Geoffrey K. Turnbull (2002) “Recreation Demand and
Residential Location.” Journal of Urban Economics, 51(3), pp. 418-428.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton and Gobillon Laurent. (2008) ”Spatial Wage Disparities:
Sorting Matters!” Journal of Urban Economics 63(2), pp. 723-742.

Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser. (1997) ”Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112(3), pp. 827-872.

Davis, Lucas (2004) ”The Effect of Health Risk on Houisng Values: Evidence from a Cancer
Cluster.” American Economic Review, 94(5), pp. 1693-1704.

Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg (1999) ”Estimating Equilibrium Models of Locational Sorting.”
Journal of Political Economy, 107(4), pp. 645-681.

Feenberg, Daniel R. and Elisabeth Coutts (1993), ”An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.” Jour-
nal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12, pp. 189-194.

Ferreira, Fernando and Joseph Gyourko (2011) ”Anatomy of the Beginning of the Housing Boom:
U.S. Neighborhoods and Metropolitan Areas, 1993-2009.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 17374, Cambridge, MA.

Fu, Shihe, and Stephen L. Ross (2013) ”Wage Premia in Employment Clusters: Agglomeration or
Worker Heterogeneity?” Journal of Labor Economics, 31: 271-304.




                                              28
Gabriel, Stuart A., Joe P. Mattey, and William L. Wascher (2003) ”Compensating differentials and
evolution in the quality-of-life among U.S. states” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 33,
pp. 619-649.

Gabriel, Stuart A. and Stuart S. Rosenthal (1996) ”Commutes, Neighborhood Effects, and Earn-
ings: An Analysis of Racial Discrimination and Compensating Differentials” Journal of Urban
Economics, 40, pp. 61-83.

Gabriel, Stuart A. and Stuart S. Rosenthal (2004) ”Quality of the Business Environment versus
Quality of Life: Do Firms and Households Like the Same Cities?” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 86, pp.548-444.

Gautier, Pieter A., Arjen Siegmann, and Aico Van Vuuren (2009) “Terrorism and attitudes towards
minorities: The effect of the Theo van Gogh murder on house prices in Amsterdam.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 65, pp. 113-126.

Glaeser, Edward L. and David Maré (2001) ”Cities and Skills.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19,
pp. 316-342.

Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy (1989) ”The Importance of Local Fiscal Conditions in Analyz-
ing Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 1208-31.

Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy (1991) ”The Structure of Local Public Finance and the Quality
of Life.” Journal of Political Economy, 99, pp. 774-806.

Gyourko, Joseph, Matthew Kahn and Joseph Tracy (1999) ”Quality of Life and Environmental
Comparisons.” in E. Mills and P. Cheshire, eds. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai (2013) “Superstar Cities” American Eco-
nomic Journal: Economic Policy. 5(4), pp. 167-99




                                               29
Hamermesh, Daniel (1999) “Crime and the Timing of Work.” Journal of Urban Economics, 45(2),
pp. 311-330.

Hoehn, John P., Mark C. Berger, and Glenn C. Blomquist (1987) ”A Hedonic Model of Interre-
gional Wages, Rents, and Amenity Values.” Journal of Regional Science, 27, pp. 605-620.

Ioannides, Yannis M. (2004) ”Neighborhood income distributions.” Journal of Urban Economics,
56, pp. 435-457.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Alan Krueger (2006) ”Developments in the Measurement of Subjective
Well-Being” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, pp. 3-24.

Kim, Dongsoo, Feng Liu, and Anthony Yezer (2009) “Do inter-city differences in intra-city wage
differentials have any interesting implications?” Journal of Urban Economics, 66(3), pp. 151-232.

Krueger, Alan B. (1999), ”Measuring Labor’s Share.” American Economic Review, 89, pp. 45-51.

Kuminoff, Nicolai, and Jaren Pope. (2013) ”Do ’Capitalization’ Effects for Public Goods Reveal
the Public’s Willingness to Pay?” International Economic Review.

Kuminoff, Nicolai, V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher Timmins (2013) ”The New Economics of
Equilibrium Sorting and Policy Evaluation Using Housing Markets.” Journal of Economic Litera-
ture 51(4), pp. 1007-1062.

Lee, Sanghoon and Jeffrey Lin (2013) ”Natural Amenities, Neighborhood Dynamics, and Persis-
tence in the Spatial Distribution of Income.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper
No. 13-48. Philadelphia, PA.

Linden, Leigh and Jonah E. Rockoff (2008) “Estimates of the Impact of Crime Risk on Property
Values from Megan’s Laws.” American Economic Review 98(3), pp. 1103-1127.

Malpezzi, Stephen, Gregory H. Chun, and Richard K. Green (1998) ”New Place-to-Place Housing
Price Indexes for U.S. Metropolitan Areas, and Their Determinants.” Real Estate Economics, 26,
pp. 235-274.

                                               30
McDuff, DeForest (2011) “Demand Substitution Across US Cities: Observable Similarity and
Home Price Correlation.” Journal of Urban Economics 70(1), pp. 1-14.

McMillen, Daniel P. and Larry D. Singell Jr. (1992) ”Work Location, Residence Location, and the
Intraurban Wage Gradient.” Journal of Urban Economics, 32, pp. 195-213.

Mills, Edwin S. (1967), ”An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Area”,
American Economic Review Proceedings. 57 197-210.

Muth, Richard .F. (1969) Cities and Housing: The Spatial Pattern of Urban Land Use. Chicago:
Univ of Chicago Press.

Nevo, Avia and Michael D. Whinston (2010) “Taking the Dogma out of Econometrics: Structural
Modleing and Credible Inference.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), pp. 69-82.

Oates, Wallace E. (1969) ”The Effects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on Property
Values: An Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and the Tiebout Hypothesis.” Journal of Political
Economy, 77, pp. 957-71.

Office of Management and Budget. (2000) ”Standards for Defining Metropolitan and Micropolitan
Statistical Areas: Notice.”

Peiser, Richard B. and Lawrence B. Smith (1985) ”Homeownership Returns, Tenure Choice and
Inflation.” American Real Estate and Urban Economics Journal, 13, pp. 343-60.

Petitte, Ryan A. and Stephen L. Ross (1999) ”Commutes, Neighborhood Effects, and Compensat-
ing Differentials: Revisited.” Journal of Urban Economics, 46, pp. 1-24.

Pollakowski, Henry O. (2003) ”Who Really Benefits from New York City’s Rent Regulation Sys-
tem?” Civic Report, 34, pp. 1-27.

Pope, Jaren C. (2008) “Fear of Crime and Housing Prices: Household Reactions to Sex Offender
Registries.” Journal of Urban Economics, 64, pp. 601-614.


                                               31
Schmidt, Lucie and Paul Courant (2006) ”Sometimes Close is Good Enough: The Value of Nearby
Environmental Amenities.” Journal of Regional Science, 46(5), pp. 931-951.

Roback, Jennifer (1980) ”The Value of Local Urban Amenities: Theory and Measurement.” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Rochester.

Roback, Jennifer (1982) ”Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy,
90, pp. 1257-1278.

Roback, Jennifer (1988) ”Wages, Rents, and Amenities: Differences among Workers and Re-
gions.” Economic Inquiry, 26, pp. 23-41.

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange (2001) ”The Determinants of Agglomeration.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 50, pp. 191–229.

Ruggles, Steven; Matthew Sobek; Trent Alexander; Catherine A. Fitch; Ronald Goeken; Patricia
Kelly Hall; Miriam King; and Chad Ronnander. (2004) Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
Version 3.0. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center.

Rosen, Sherwin (1979) ”Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life.” in P. Mieszkowski and
M. Straszheim, eds. Current Issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore: John Hopkins Univ. Press.

Rosenthal, Stuart and Amanda Ross (2010) ”Violent Crime, Entrepreneurship, and Cities.” Journal
of Urban Economics 67, pp. 135-149.

Savageau, David (1999) Places Rated Almanac. Foster City, CA: IDG Books Worldwide.

Silver, Nate (2010) “The Most Livable Neighborhoods in New York: A quantitative index of
the 50 most satisfying places to live.” New York Magazine, April 11. http://nymag.com/
realestate/neighborhoods/2010/65374/.

Small, Kenneth A. and E. T. Verhoef (2007) The Economics of Urban Transportation, New York:
Routledge.


                                              32
Small, Kenneth A., Clifford Winston, and Jia Yan (2005) ”Uncovering the Distribution of Mo-
torists’ Preferences for Travel Time and Reliability.” Econometrica, 73, pp. 1367-1382.

Streetadvisor.com (2013) “Best Cities in New York City.” Retrieved February 2, 2014 from http:
//www.streetadvisor.com/search/cities-in-new-york-city-new-york.

Straszheim, Mahlon R. (1984) ”Urban Agglomeration Effects and Employment and Wage Gradi-
ents.” Journal of Urban Economics, 16, pp. 187-207.

Tiebout, Charles M. (1956) ”A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.” Journal of Political Economy.
64 pp. 416-424.

Timothy, Darren and William C. Wheaton. (2001)”Intra-Urban Wage Variation, Employment Lo-
cation, and Commuting Times.” Journal of Urban Economics, 50, pp. 338-366.

Turnbull, Geoffrey K. (1992) “Location, Housing, and Leisure Demand under Local Employment.”
Land Economics, 68, pp. 62-71.

Turnbull, Geoffey K. (1995) Urban Consumer Theory. Washington D.C.: Urban Institute Press.

Yinger, John (2014) “Hedonic Markets and Sorting Equilibria: Bid-functions for Public Services
and Neighborhood Amenities.”

Zax, Jeffrey S. (1991) ”Compensation for Commutes in Labor and Housing Markets.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 30, pp. 192-207.




                                               33
             TABLE 1: RENT, WAGE, COMMUTING-COST, AND QUALITY-OF-LIFE DIFFERENTIALS ACROSS THE U.S., 2000
                    Differential             Rents/Hous. Cost              Wage               Commuting    Quality of Life
                                            Location Compo-      Index   Index   Compo-    Index    Time Workpla. Simple
                                            Index or sition or by Work- by Resi- sition or of Full   Cost  Adj.       (not
                                 Population  "Rent" "Quality"    place   dence    "Skill"   Cost     Only Index      used)
                                    (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)     (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)  (9)        (10)

Panel A: Central City, Suburban, or non-Metropolitan Area
          Central City (in Metro)    85,401,116      0.060         -0.100     0.031      0.010      -0.044     -0.003      -0.010     -0.001     0.013
             Suburban (in Metro) 141,255,868         0.083         0.057      0.032      0.051      0.034      0.006       0.055      0.016      0.000
         Non-Metropolitan Areas      54,764,922     -0.329         0.009      -0.141     -0.158     -0.021     -0.013      -0.141     -0.042     -0.021


Panel B: By Residential Population Density
           >5,000 per square mile   75,957,757         0.261       -0.141     0.108      0.085      -0.061      0.006      0.106      0.031      0.036
      1,000-5,000 per square mile 126,073,690          0.006       0.061      0.002      0.019      0.040       -0.001     -0.029     0.000      -0.008
           <1,000 per square mile   79,390,459         -0.274      0.039      -0.113     -0.119     -0.005      -0.005     -0.065     -0.032     -0.023


Panel C:Standard Deviations
                     All PUMAs                          0.348      0.146      0.127      0.145       0.104      0.019      0.220      0.068      0.056
       Across Metropolitan Areas                        0.302      0.071      0.123      0.130       0.047      0.015      0.176      0.051      0.043
       Within Metropolitan Areas                        0.173      0.128      0.033      0.065       0.093      0.012      0.132      0.046      0.037
     Fraction of Variance Within                        0.247      0.769      0.068      0.201       0.800      0.399      0.360      0.458      0.437

In Panels A and B, the population numbers in column 1 are totals, while the rest are averages. Wage, housing price, and commuting data are taken from
the U.S. Census 2000 IPUMS for 2071 Public-Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs). Differentials are relative to the national average. Housing-cost
differentials are based on the average logarithm of gross rents or housing prices plus utilities, with the cost-index determined by the indicitor for what
PUMA it is located in, and the composition index by the predicted value based on other observable housing characteristics Wage differentials are
based on the average logarithm of hourly wages for full-time workers ages 25 to 55, with the "By workplace" differential estimated off of work-place
indicators, averaged over resident workers, the "By Residence" estimated off of residential indicators, and the "Composition" index by the wage
predicted by observable characteristics. Commuting-cost differentials for workers are estimated from monetary-cost and time-cost differentials
explained in the text, the latter based on time to work. The adjusted quality-of-life index is estimated from the housing-cost, workplace-wage, and
commuting-cost indices in columns 2, 3, and 7, according to equation (5), as calibrated in the text, while the simple index is estimated from the housing-
cost and residence-wage indices, only. In Panel C, non-metropolitan areas of each state are treated like a distinct metropolitan area, although the results
do not change substantially if they are excluded. See text for greater detail.
    TABLE 2: RENT, WAGE, COMMUTING-COST, AND QUALITY-OF-LIFE DIFFERENTIALS WITHIN MANHATTAN AND SAN FRANCISCO, 2000
                                           Rents/Hous. Cost               Wage              Commuting         Quality of Life
                                          Location Compo-      Index   Index   Compo-    Index    Time Workpla. Simple        QOL
                                          Index or sition or by Work- by Resi- sition or of Full   Cost  Adj.       (not      rank
                               Population  "Rent" "Quality"    place   dence    "Skill"   Cost     Only Index      used) from (9)
                     Area Name    (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)  (9)        (10)      (11)

New York Co., NY (Manhattan)              1,537,195      0.621      -0.264     0.270     0.287      0.004     -0.006     0.114      0.047      0.045          72
                     Upper East Side        217,063      1.327      -0.520     0.269     0.479      0.224     -0.004     0.155      0.265      0.123           5
               Stuy Town/Turtle Bay         143,441      1.256      -0.615     0.266     0.431      0.195     -0.019     -0.017     0.230      0.119          11
         Greeewich Vlg./Fin. District       125,567      1.230      -0.540     0.268     0.409      0.186     -0.020     -0.084     0.220      0.126          15
                    Upper West Side         192,213      1.132      -0.556     0.269     0.458      0.208     -0.003     0.138      0.207      0.072          23
              Midtown West/Chelsea          122,241      1.027      -0.586     0.267     0.415      0.125     -0.025     -0.123     0.154      0.056          64
            Washington Hts./Inwood          216,234      0.275      -0.561     0.223     0.049      -0.221     0.021      0.496     -0.007     0.060         976
           Lower E. Side/Chinatown          166,379      0.379      -0.518     0.249     0.070      -0.133    -0.007      0.148     -0.016     0.037        1118
     Morningside Hts./Hamilton Hts.         129,533      0.264      -0.497     0.232     0.113      -0.088     0.008      0.320     -0.027     0.024        1250
                     Central Harlem         109,091      -0.046     -0.446     0.235     0.204      -0.185     0.010      0.294     -0.121     -0.116       2037
                        East Harlem         115,433      -0.060     -0.461     0.233     0.138      -0.198     0.011      0.348     -0.125     -0.087       2042

San Francisco City & Co., CA                776,733      0.934      -0.176     0.265      0.245     -0.016     -0.001    0.082      0.151      0.161           5
                            Ingleside       105,194      1.116      -0.148     0.258      0.256      0.008      0.018    0.259      0.229      0.198          13
                              Sunset        105,532      1.077      -0.203     0.266      0.228      0.051      0.023    0.347      0.217      0.194          17
      Buena Vista/Central/Bernal Hts.       109,355      1.055      -0.272     0.264      0.254      0.077      0.007    0.163      0.196      0.161          29
                      Marina/N.E. SF        107,285      1.042      -0.423     0.264      0.385      0.088     -0.002    0.099      0.183      0.090          33
              Richmond/W. Addition          136,975      0.976      -0.284     0.262      0.265      0.054      0.012    0.215      0.178      0.132          38
               S. Bayshore/S. Central       105,338      0.662      -0.168     0.245      0.164     -0.200      0.014    0.222      0.093      0.106         199
          Downtown/SOMA/Mission             107,054      0.680      -0.585     0.254      0.177     -0.110     -0.015    -0.039     0.065      0.077         319

Differentials are relative to the national average and are expressed in logarithms or logarithm equivalents. The sub-county measures are for Public-Use Microdata
Areas, each containing over 100,000 inhabitants. Area names for the PUMAs here are based on sub-borough and planning area names from the Census. To offset
bias due to rent control, the fraction of units that are controlled was multiplied by ln(1.37) in the six lower sub-broughs of Manhattan and by ln(1.19) in San
Francisco. Quality-of-Life Rankings are out of 2071 PUMAs. See Table 1 for more.
   TABLE 3: HOUSEHOLD CHARACETRISTICS WITHIN, ACROSS, AND OUTSIDE U.S. METROPOLITAN AREA
                                                 House-
                          Under   Over            hold   In Labor College  Race:  Immi-
                           18      65    Married  size     Force  Degree   Black   grant
                           (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)

Panel A: Central City, Suburban, or non-Metropolitan Area
          Central City (in Metro)    0.27     0.11        0.37   2.58     0.49      0.37      0.20      0.18
             Suburban (in Metro)     0.28     0.12        0.45   2.68     0.51      0.38      0.09      0.12
         Non-Metropolitan Areas      0.28     0.14        0.46   2.52     0.48      0.22      0.08      0.04


Panel B: By Residential Population Density
           >5,000 per square mile   0.27       0.11      0.37    2.71     0.49      0.38      0.19      0.26
      1,000-5,000 per square mile   0.28       0.12      0.44    2.60     0.51      0.39      0.10      0.10
           <1,000 per square mile   0.28       0.13      0.47    2.56     0.49      0.24      0.08      0.04


Panel C:Standard Deviations
                     All PUMAs     0.041      0.041      0.066   0.326   0.055     0.187     0.172     0.127
       Across Metropolitan Areas   0.023      0.028      0.026   0.199   0.035     0.102     0.095     0.101
       Within Metropolitan Areas   0.035      0.029      0.060   0.259   0.042     0.156     0.143     0.077
     Fraction of Variance Within   0.729      0.500      0.826   0.631   0.583     0.696     0.691     0.368

Data are taken from the U.S. Census 2000 IPUMS for 2071 Public-Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs). See Table 1 and text
detail.
   TABLE 3: RENT, WAGE, COMMUTING-COST, AND QUALITY-OF-LIFE DIFFERENTIALS FOR FOUR LEVELS OF
                         GEOGRAPHY WITHIN FIVE METROPOLITAN AREAS, 2000
                                                        Housing  Wage      Full  Quality QOL Rank
                                  Unit of                 Cost  by Work- Commute of Life  in Geog.
                                  Geog-      Population  Index    place    Cost   Adj.      Unit
Area Name                         raphy         (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)       (6)

Honolulu, HI                             MSA        876,156    0.589   0.014    0.002   0.174    1
     East Oahu/Waialae-Kahala            PUMA       102,724    0.947   0.014    0.005   0.286                1
     Kaneohe/Kailua                      PUMA       117,994    0.749   0.013    0.010   0.231                10
     Pearl City/Waimalu/W. Honolulu      PUMA       144,481    0.626   0.013   -0.008   0.176                39
     Waipahu/Mililani/Ewa                PUMA       178,534    0.459   0.015    0.026   0.159                57
     Waikiki/Alo Maoni/Kapiolani         PUMA       109,509    0.621   0.015   -0.027   0.155                62
     Downtown Honolulu                   PUMA        109354    0.447   0.015   -0.016   0.112                127
     West Oahu/Midway Islands            PUMA        113560    0.360   0.017    0.009   0.110                134

San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA       MSA       7,039,362   0.784   0.240   0.012    0.130    2
  San Francisco, CA                      PMSA      1,731,183   1.022   0.264   0.009    0.188        1
    Marin Co.                            County     247,289    1.104   0.228   0.018    0.240            1
      San Rafael/Sausalito/Mill Valley   PUMA        146,373   1.208   0.230   0.014    0.267                4
      Novato/Lucas Valley/Point Reyes    PUMA        100,916   0.954   0.224   0.023    0.201                28
    San Mateo Co.                        County     707,161    1.078   0.281   0.006    0.193            2
    San Francisco Co.                    County     776,733    0.946   0.259   0.008    0.166            4
  Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA             PMSA        255,602   0.782   0.162   0.007    0.164        3
  San Jose, CA                           PMSA      1,682,585   0.956   0.300   0.006    0.147        4
  Santa Rosa, CA                         PMSA        458,614   0.566   0.132   0.003    0.110        7
  Oakland, CA                            PMSA      2,392,557   0.625   0.230   0.021    0.096        11
  Vallejo-Fairfield-Napa, CA             PMSA        518,821   0.355   0.152   0.010    0.042        45

New York, N. NJ, Long Is., NY-NJ-CT-PA   MSA      25,036,899   0.416   0.197    0.021    0.048   22
 Nassau-Suffolk, NY                      PMSA      2,753,913   0.528   0.182    0.030    0.099     9
 Bergen-Passaic, NJ                      PMSA      1,373,167   0.455   0.199    0.028    0.067     23
 New York, NY                            PMSA      9,314,235   0.444   0.210    0.020    0.050     37
   Westchester Co.                       County      923,459   0.653   0.210    0.025    0.119       17
   Putnam Co.                            County       95,745   0.469   0.189    0.054    0.102       28
   New York Co. (Manhattan)              County    1,537,195   0.723   0.252   -0.002    0.092       42
   Queens Co.                            County    2,229,379   0.486   0.189    0.038    0.092       43
   Richmond Co. (Staten Island)          County      443,728   0.438   0.189    0.051    0.090       55
   Rockland Co.                          County      286,753   0.479   0.179    0.024    0.080       68
   Kings Co. (Brooklyn)                  County    2,465,326   0.345   0.182    0.033    0.047       171
   Bronx Co.                             County    1,332,650   0.160   0.189    0.032   -0.015       758
 Stamford-Norwalk, CT                    PMSA        882,567   0.582   0.268    0.010    0.053     34
 Danbury, CT                             PMSA      1,064,760   0.516   0.243    0.010    0.045     41
 Monmouth-Ocean, NJ                      PMSA      1,126,217   0.268   0.168    0.034    0.031     60
 Middlesex-Somerset-Hunterdon, NJ        PMSA      1,169,641   0.384   0.220    0.024    0.031     61
 Newark, NJ                              PMSA      2,032,989   0.375   0.214    0.019    0.026     69
 Newburgh, NY-PA                         PMSA        387,669   0.091   0.076    0.030    0.019     82
 Dutchess County, NY                     PMSA        280,150   0.155   0.102    0.020    0.016     89
 Bridgeport, CT                          PMSA      1,706,575   0.380   0.212    0.004    0.014     91
 Jersey City, NJ                         PMSA        608,975   0.322   0.233    0.020    0.001     117
 Waterbury, CT                           PMSA      1,006,201   0.189   0.139   -0.002   -0.014     160
 New Haven-Meriden, CT                   PMSA        979,079   0.192   0.141   -0.003   -0.015     162
 Trenton, NJ                             PMSA        350,761   0.231   0.194    0.004   -0.022     179
TABLE 3: WAGE, HOUSING-COST, COMMUTING-COST, AND QUALITY-OF-LIFE DIFFERENTIALS FOR DIFFERENT
                  LEVELS OF GEOGRAPHY WITHIN FIVE METROPOLITAN AREAS, 2000
                                                     Housing  Wage      Full  Quality QOL Rank
                                 Unit of               Cost  by Work- Commute of Life  in Geog.
                                 Geog-    Population  Index    place    Cost   Adj.      Unit
Area Name                        raphy       (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)       (6)

Atlanta, GA                                   MSA            4,112,198     0.023     0.060     0.018     -0.005    95
    DeKalb Co.                                County          665,865      0.129     0.074     0.018      0.020         302
    Cobb Co.                                  County          607,751      0.091     0.076     0.022      0.012         389
    Fulton Co.                                County          816,006      0.159     0.091     0.006      0.009         425
    Forsyth & Pickens Cos.                    County            98,407     0.015     0.042     0.023      0.006         440
    Cherokee Co.                              County          141,903     -0.014     0.043     0.030      0.004         464
    Gwinnett Co.                              County          588,448      0.023     0.067     0.023     -0.004         579
    Coweta, Fayette, & Spalding Cos.          County            89,215    -0.114     0.014     0.016     -0.026         974
    Carroll & Douglas Cos.                    County            92,174    -0.193    -0.004     0.021     -0.036         1185
    Henry                                     County          119,341     -0.154     0.042     0.029     -0.039         1267
    Bartow & Paulding Cos.                    County            76,019    -0.221     0.014     0.036     -0.039         1281
    Newton & Rockdale Cos.                    County            62,001    -0.164     0.019     0.017     -0.042         1362
    Barrow & Walton Cos.                      County            46,144    -0.219     0.007     0.026     -0.044         1458
    Clayton Co.                               County          236,517     -0.116     0.054     0.012     -0.050         1627

Detroit-Ann Arbor-Flint, MI                   MSA            5,456,428     0.028     0.115      0.008    -0.041    205
 Ann Arbor, MI                                PMSA             578,736     0.138     0.077      0.003     0.007      106
   Livingston Co.                             County           156,951     0.194     0.100      0.025     0.034        230
   Washtenaw Co.                              County           322,895     0.208     0.093     -0.007     0.010        412
      Ann Arbor                               PUMA             114,024     0.346     0.084     -0.022     0.041          485
      Ypsilanti/Saline/Pittsfield Twp.        PUMA             208,871     0.133     0.099      0.002    -0.007          988
   Lenawee Co.                                County            98,890    -0.180    -0.013      0.001    -0.047        1523
 Detroit, MI                                  PMSA           4,441,551     0.039     0.126      0.009    -0.042      257
   Oakland Co.                                County         1,194,156     0.268     0.144      0.012     0.022        287
   St. Clair & Lapeer Co.                     County            87,904    -0.036     0.044      0.021    -0.012        690
   Macomb Co.                                 County           788,149     0.099     0.129      0.014    -0.020        878
   Monroe Co.                                 County           145,945    -0.023     0.069      0.008    -0.034        1149
   Wayne Co.                                  County         2,061,162    -0.103     0.129      0.004    -0.092        2899
 Flint, MI                                    PMSA             436,141    -0.226     0.057      0.003    -0.094      375

Units of geography are MSA, PMSA, County, and PUMA. MSAs that contain several PMSAs, are also called "CMSAs". The
PMSA ranking also includes MSAs that do not contain PMSAs. Counties may be larger, equal to, or smaller than PUMAs. For
example, one PUMA constains St. Clair & Lapeer counties, and so they are listed together. Only some sub-geographies are shown.
All of the PUMAs are contained in Appendix Table A1. The rankings in column 6 are different for each type of geography, and
are indented at the same levels as the names. There are 3081 counties, 2071 PUMAs, 373 PMSA or PMSA-equivalents, and 327
MSAs or MSA-equivalents in the sample See Table 1 for greater detail
           TABLE 5: SELECTED AMENITIES WITHIN, ACROSS, AND OUTSIDE U.S. METROPOLITAN AREAS, 2000
                              Annual   Annual     Annual                                 Rest-     Public
                              Heating  Cooling   Sunshine  Inverse  Average   Murder    aurants    School
                              Degree   Degree     Percent Distance   Slope     Rate    and Bars   Revenues
                               Days     Days     Possible to Coast  of Land  per 1,000 per 1,000 per Student
                                (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)       (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)

Panel A: Central City, Suburban, or non-Metropolitan Area
          Central City (in Metro)     3.98        1.40           0.62         0.13          0.01         0.09         1.80         0.81
             Suburban (in Metro)      4.31        1.28           0.60         0.07          0.02         0.05         1.68         0.85
         Non-Metropolitan Areas       5.15        1.13           0.59         0.02          0.02         0.04         1.68         0.75


Panel B: By Residential Population Density
           >5,000 per square mile    3.71           1.28         0.63         0.19          0.01         0.09         1.80         0.88
      1,000-5,000 per square mile    4.49           1.33         0.60         0.05          0.02         0.05         1.73         0.82
           <1,000 per square mile    4.79           1.22         0.59         0.02          0.02         0.04         1.61         0.75


Panel C:Standard Deviations
                     All PUMAs        2.199        0.912        0.079         0.158        0.022        0.057        0.477        0.168
       Across Metropolitan Areas      2.155        0.888        0.078         0.094        0.016        0.035        0.279        0.153
       Within Metropolitan Areas      0.438        0.208        0.012         0.127        0.014        0.046        0.387        0.070
     Fraction of Variance Within      0.040        0.052        0.023         0.646        0.405        0.651        0.658        0.174

data are taken from sources described in the appendix. Murder rate, restaurants and bars and public school revenues are at the county level.
Cooling and heating degree days are from a 65F base. Revenues per student are measured in $10,000 units. See Table 1 and text for greater
detail.
 TABLE 6: AMENITY PREDICTORS OF LOCAL WILLINGNESS-TO-PAY
                                                           All       Within
                                                          QOL        MSA
                               Dependent Variables      by PUMA     Adj QOL
                                                           (1)        (2)


     Minus 1000s of Heating Degree Days, 65F base       0.019***     0.031***
                          (mean = 4.50, sd = 2.25)       (0.001)      (0.004)

     Minus 1000s of Cooling Degree Days, 65F base       0.036***     0.054***
                          (mean = 1.25, sd = 0.91)       (0.002)      (0.007)

                          Sunshine, percent possible    0.121***     -0.084
                         (mean = 0.060, sd = 0.078)      (0.019)     (0.089)

                            Inverse distance to coast   0.093***      0.013
                             (mean = 0.71, sd =0.14)     (0.016)     (0.017)

                  Average Slope of Land, in percent     0.576***     0.859***
                          (mean = 1.80, sd = 2.22)       (0.060)      (0.093)

                       Minus Murder Rate per 1,000      0.144***     0.252***
                          (mean = 0.05, sd = 0.053)      (0.030)      (0.028)

                 Restaurants and Bars per Thousand      0.026***     0.023***
                           (mean = 1.71, sd = 0.28)      (0.003)      (0.004)

      Public School Revenues per Student, $10,000s      0.084***     0.071**
                          (mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)       (0.009)     (0.020)

                                        R-squared         0.41         0.64
                            Number of Observations        1948         1948

Robust standard errors shown in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Regressions weighted by population. Variables are described in the Appendix,
including Appendix Table A6.
Figure 1: Wages Estimated by Workplace or by Residence
                                         0.5
                                         0.4




                                                                                                                                                                            Norwalk/Greenwich
  Place-of-Work PUMA Wage Differential




                                                                                                                                                      Stamford
                                         0.3




                                                                                                                                                                         Cupertino/Los Gatos/Saratoga
                                                                                                                                                        Menlo Park/E. Palo Alto
                                                                                                                                                        Greeewich  Vlg./Fin.
                                                                                                                                                             Midtown
                                                                                                                                                                 Stuy         Upper
                                                                                                                                                                          Upper   West
                                                                                                                                                                             District
                                                                                                                                                                       West/Chelsea
                                                                                                                                                                      Town/Turtle
                                                                                                                                                                Marina/N.E.  SF       East
                                                                                                                                                                                    Bay    Side
                                                                                                                                                                                        Side
                                                                                                                                      Northwest Newark City/ WestRidgewood/Mahwah
                                                                                                                                                                    Orange
                                                                                                                                              Livermore/Dublin-Pleasanton
                                                                                                                                                        Walnut          San Ramon/Danville
                                                                                                                                                                Creek/Orinda
                                                                                                                                            San Rafael/Sausalito/Mill
                                                                                                                                            White                     Valley
                                                                                                                                                  Plains/Scarsdale/Greenburgh
                                         0.2




                                                                                                                                                             Port
                                                                                                                                                          Port    Chester/Rye
                                                                                                                                                               Washington/Great   Neck
                                                                                                                                                     New Castle/Bedford/North Castle
                                                                                                  Williamsburg/Green Point                        Oceanside/Baldwin
                                                                                                                                                 Oyster Bay/Glen
                                                                                                                                            Massapequa/FarmingdaleCove/Jericho
                                                                                                                                                         Huntington
                                                                       Allegany & Garrett Co.                                                  Needham/Wellesley/Dedham
                                                                                                                                           Acton/Concord/Sudbury
                                                                                                                                 Mission Viejo/Rancho
                                                                                                                                            Newport  Bethesda/Potomac
                                                                                                                                                       Santa Margarita
                                                                                                                                                     Beach/Laguna
                                                                                                                                     Reston/Oakton/Tysons           Beach
                                                                                                                                            Lincoln
                                                                                                                                       Loop/Near
                                                                                                                                             WestN.,  W., &Corner
                                                                                                                                                    Park/Lake
                                                                                                                                                            S.View
                                                                                                                                                               Sides
                                                                                                                                                   Bloomfield/Birmingham
                                                                                                                                          Rancho Palos Ela/Vernon
                                                                                                                                                        Verdes/Lomita
                                                                                                                                                         Redondo Beach
                                                                                         Wilshire
                                                                                          downtown
                                                                                       Bell/Bell       East
                                                                                                   Center
                                                                                                        East
                                                                                                      Los   L.A.
                                                                                                             L.A. Park
                                                                                                          Angeles
                                                                                                 Gardens/Maywood               Sammamish/Mercer Island/Issaquah Air/Beverly
                                                                                                                                                  Brentwood/Bel    Malibu     Crest
                                                                                               Central
                                                                                              South    City
                                                                                             Florence/Huntington
                                                                                                    East L.A.
                                         0.1




                                                                                                                                                            Alpharetta
                                                                                             Center Hill-West Lake


                                                                                                                               Scottsdale/Paradise Valley
                                         0.0




                                                                                          Fort Worth City
                                                                                     Buffalo downtown
                                                                                         W. Hialeah
                                                                                      E. Hialeah
                                                                                       Erie, PA
                                         -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1




                                                                 Near SouthFar
                                                                            SanS.E. Colorado
                                                                                 Antonio
                                                                               South San     Springs
                                                                                          Antonio
                                                                                       Boone
                                                                              Central Tucson Co.
                                                                                      Albuquerque
                                                                             Central N.E.Norfolk
                                                                                        Tucson
                                                                                          Tucson


                     N.W.Washington
                    YavapaiKansas  City/Topeka/Manhattan
                                             Lee
                             Co./Prescott/Sedona
                                         Santa    Co./Auburn
                                                Rosa Pueblo
                                                      Co.
                                       Co./Fayetteville
                   Calhoun                 Cass Bay
                                Blacksburg/Redford
                          Hidalgo/Mission   City
                            Co./Anniston/Oxford      Co.
                                                 Co./Fargo
           Hidalgo/Endinburg
              Donna  Myrtle Wayne
                              City
                     City/Pharr     Co./Goldsboro
                            Beach/Socastee/Conway
                                CityTwin Falls/Burley
                                      Rapides   Parish
                        East South   Baldwin
                                    Okaloosa   Co./Daphne
                                     Yellowstone
                                         SW Co.
                                              Utah
                             Kentucky/Boyd/Greenup
                                    Texas/Starr     Co.
                                     Kennebec   Co.
                                 Dona Ana Co.
             Southeast Kentucky/Pike/Floyd
      Southeast            W. Central Nebraska
                Kentucky/Letcher/Perry
       Southeast Kentucky/Clay/Laurel
            Onslow  Co./Jacksonville
Southeast Kentucky/Harlan/Whitley
                     NE South Dakota




                                                               -0.4       -0.3           -0.2           -0.1             0.0       0.1             0.2              0.3              0.4            0.5
                                                                                             Residential PUMA Wage Differential

                                                                                                Linear Fit, slope = 0.81 (s.e. = 0.01)
                                                                                                Diagonal, slope = 1.00

 Unit of observation is the residential PUMA.
1.31 - 1.40

1.21 - 1.30

1.11 - 1.20


1.01 - 1.10

0.91 - 1.00

0.81 - 0.90


0.71 - 0.80

0.61 - 0.70

0.51 - 0.60

0.41 - 0.50


0.31 - 0.40

0.21 - 0.30

0.11 - 0.20


0.01 - 0.10

-0.09 - 0.00

-0.19 - -0.10

-0.29 - -0.20

                Differences in Rent Relative to National Average, Differences in Logarithms
-0.39 - -0.30

-0.49 - -0.40

-0.59 - -0.50

-0.69 - -0.60


-0.78 - -0.70
                                                                                              Figure 2A: Residential Rents (Gross or Imputed) across the United States, 2000
0.31 - 0.35

0.26 - 0.30

0.21 - 0.25


0.16 - 0.20

0.11 - 0.15

0.06 - 0.10


0.01 - 0.05

-0.04 - 0.00

-0.09 - -0.05

-0.14 - -0.10


-0.19 - -0.15

-0.24 - -0.20

-0.29 - -0.25




                Differences in Wages Relative to National Average, Differences in Logarithms
-0.33 - -0.30
                                                                                               Figure 2B: Wage Levels by Workplace across the United States, 2000
                                     Figure 2C: Commuting Costs across the United States, 2000




Commuting Costs as a Fraction of Gross Income, Relative to National Average
                                                        -0.01

                                                                -0.02


                                                                        -0.03

                                                                                -0.04

                                                                                        -0.05
  0.07

         0.06


                0.05

                       0.04

                              0.03

                                      0.02


                                             0.01

                                                    0
                                                                Figure 3: Housing and Commuting Costs
                                                                                                                  E. Oahu/Waialae-Kahala
                                         0.8


                                                                                              Brentwood/Bel Air/Beverly Crest

                                                           Santa Barbara, CA
                                                                                      Upper East
                                                                                       N. San    Side Bay Area
                                                                                              Diego/N.                            Kaneohe/Kailua
                                                                                                San Rafael/Sausalito/Mill
                                                                                                             Rancho PalosValley
                                                                                                                           Verdes/Lomita
                                                                                    Cupertino/Los Gatos/Saratoga
                                                          Stuy Town/Turtle Bay                                           Redondo Beach
                                         0.6




                                                    Greeewich Vlg./Fin. District                                                  PortMalibu
                                                                                                                                        Washington/Great Neck
                                                                    Waikiki/Alo
                                                                        Menlo      Maoni/Kapiolani
                                                                                 Park/E. Palo Alto
                                                                   Monterey/Seaside/Carmel
Housing-Cost Differential, Net of Wage




                                                         Palo Alto/Mountain  View
                                                                         Aspen/Montrose                 Needham/Wellesley/Dedham
                                                                                      Upper Newport  Beach/Laguna
                                                                                             West Side              Beach
                                                                                                               San Ramon/Danville
                                                                                                             Scottsdale/Paradise Valley
                                                                                                                      Oyster Bay/Glen Cove/Jericho
                                                                                Marina/N.E.
                                                                     Nantucket/Cape    Cod SFYavapai Co./Prescott/Sedona
                                                                                                            Missoula
                                         0.4




                                            Midtown West/Chelsea                                             Bethesda/Potomac
                                                                                                           Walnut   Creek/Orinda
                                                        Key West/Key Largo/MarathonSammamish/Mercer       Lincoln    Park/Lake View
                                                                                                              Island/Issaquah
                                                                          Boulder                            Port Chester/Rye
                                                                                                 West Bloomfield/Birmingham
                                                                      Sunnyvale                                                       New   Castle/Bedford/North
                                                                                                                                         Daphne/Baldwin   Co.    Castle
                                                                 Loop/Near N., W., &Cheyenne   Mission
                                                                                             Great
                                                                                       S. Sides    FallsViejo/Rancho
                                                                                                      Fort Walton        Santa Margarita
                                                                                                                     Beach/Okaloosa    Co.
                                                                                                                   Acton/Concord/Sudbury
                                                                          Central Albuquerque       Rapid
                                                                                                    White  City             Jacksonville/Onslow
                                                                                                            Plains/Scarsdale/Greenburgh
                                                                                                             Ridgewood/Mahwah
                                                                                                        Livermore/Dublin-Pleasanton                Co.
                                                                                                                     Myrtle Beach/Horry Co.
                                                                   Santa Clara               S.W. Utah                  Washington Co.            Huntington
                                         0.2




                                                                                        Twin Falls/Burley Panama City/Bay Co.
                                                                                          Norwalk/Greenwich
                                                                                 Billings/Yellowstone   Co.       Las Cruces/Dona    Ana Co.  Ela/Vernon
                                                                                                            E.  Tucson            Kennebec   Co.   Oceanside/Baldwin
                                                                                          Washington Co./Fayetteville
                                                                                        Abilene/Taylor                Pueblo                    Massapequa/Farmingdale
                                                                                                                                                       Santa Rosa Co.
                                                                                    NEFargo/Cass
                                                                                         South     Co. Co.
                                                                                               Dakota
                                                                                          Casper
                                                                                             Northwest      Norfolk
                                                                                                             N. Tucson
                                                                                                        Newark        City
                                                                                                                  City/  West  Orange          Montgomery Co.
                                                                                                                                           W. Hialeah
                                                      Downtown/SOMA/Mission
                                         Juneau/Ketchikan/Fairbanks                             Wichita  Co.
                                                                                               Reston/Oakton/Tysons       Corner
                                                                                                                      Lawton
                                                                                                                        Joplin                                                        North Shore
                                                                                                                                                                      Bellerose/Rosdale
                                                                                                              Colorado Bangor
                                                                                                         Goldsboro/Wayne
                                                                                                       Auburn-Opelika/Lee
                                                                                                        S.E.                   Co.
                                                                                                                         Springs
                                                                                                                        Jonesboro Hattiesburg
                                                                                                                      Blacksburg/Redford
                                                                           W. Central Nebraska                                     E. Hialeah
                                                                                                      Dubuque
                                                                                                SanEnid
                                                                                                    Angelo                                                      Putnam  Co.  (Carmel)
                                         0.0




                                                                                                            Alexandria/Rapides
                                                                                                      Laredo/Webb
                                                                                                            St.         Dothan Parish
                                                                                                                JosephCo.           Alpharetta
                                                                                                 Central
                                                                                                Bell/BellTucson
                                                                                                          Gardens/Maywood  Wilshire Center
                                                                                   Columbia/Boone     Florence/Huntington
                                                                                              N.W. Kansas                     ParkCo.
                                                                                                      Co. City/Topeka/Manhattan
                                                                                                                             East
                                                                                                                 Sumter/Sumter    L.A.Florence
                                                                                                                   Anniston-Oxford/Calhoun Co.                                Clay Co.
                                                                        Stamford                                                                                         Carroll Co. Monroe Co.
                                                                                                                                        S.E.  Kentucky/Clay/LaurelLake Los Angeles
                                                                                                                                                                            Jamaica
                                                                                                                                            S.E. Kentucky/Pike/Floyd
                                                                                                                                                               Middletown/Wallkill
                                                                                                                   downtown  E. Kentucky/Boyd/Greenup
                                                                                                                Central  City Los Angeles
                                                                                                                                     S.E. Kentucky/Harlan/Whitley
                                         -0.6 -0.4 -0.2




                                                        Rochester/Olmsted Co.         Buffalo downtown                                                                          Oakley/Antioch
                                                                                                                                                                                 Sussex Co.
                                                                                                              East  L.A. South East City
                                                                                                                  Hidalgo/Mission
                                                                                                                                    L.A.
                                                                                                 Williamsburg/Green Point                                                 Charles
                                                                                                    South Texas/Starr
                                                                                                      Donna City/Pharr City
                                                                                                                                            S.E. Kentucky/Letcher/Perry
                                                                                                                                                           Paulding & Bartow
                                                                                                                                                                 Stone MountainCo.Co.
                                                                                  Erie City
                                                                                                           Hidalgo/Endinburg
                                                                                                                  Far South SanCity
                                                                                                                                  Antonio
                                                                                                        Fort Worth City
                                                                               Hartford               Near South San Antonio                                                 Palmdale
                                                                                                                                         S. Chicago/S. Deearing/E. Side/Calumet
                                                                                                                                Englewood & W. Englewood/Auburn Gresham
                                                                                                                                Center Hill-West Lake
                                                                                                                                        Roseland/Pullman & W. Pullman/Riverdale



                                                                               Downtown Detroit/Woodward




                                                                                                                                    Near North Philly/Narberth
                                                                               Allegany & Garrett
                                                                               S.W. Detroit       Co.
                                                                                            (Chadsey/Condon/Vernor)



                                                          -0.06                -0.04                    -0.02                      0.00                     0.02                    0.04
                                                                                     Commuting-Cost Differential Net of Wage

                                                                                        Linear Fit, slope = -2.31 (s.e. = 0.31)
                                                                                        Constant Urban Cost Curve, slope = -3.00

Housing and commuting-cost differentials are residuals from separate regressions
on workplace wage levels. Nome/Barrow/Other Alaska left out of scatter plot.
0.27 - 0.28

0.25 - 0.26

0.23 - 0.24

0.21 - 0.22

0.19 - 0.20

0.17 - 0.18

0.15 - 0.16

0.13 - 0.14

0.11 - 0.12

0.09 - 0.10

0.07 - 0.08

0.05 - 0.06

0.03 - 0.04

0.01 - 0.02

-0.01 - 0.00

-0.03 - -0.02

-0.05 - -0.04

-0.07 - -0.06

-0.09 - -0.08

-0.11 - -0.10

-0.13 - -0.12




                Fraction of Income Willing to Pay to Live in Area, Relative to National Average
-0.15 - -0.14

-0.17 - -0.16

-0.19 - -0.18

-0.21 - -0.20

   -0.22
                                                                                                  Figure 4: Quality of Life across the United States, 2000
       Figure 5A: Quality of Life in the San Francisco Bay Area, 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Vacaville


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fairfield




                                                 San Rafael/Sausalit
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vallejo

 Novato/Lucas Valley/Point Reyes




                                                                    o/Mill Valley                                      Richmond                            El Cerrito/Hercules                                Martinez/Pleasant Hill




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pitt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sbu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         yP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oint
                                                                                                                                      Be
                                                                                                                                        rke
                                                                                                                                         ley
                                                                                                                                            /Al
                                                                                                                                                ba
                                                                                                                                                 y n
                                                                                                                                                                                    Walnut Creek/Orinda
                                                        Marina/N.E. SF                                                                                                                                                                                 Concord
                                           Richmond/W. Additi
                                                              on




                                                                                                                                                         Roc
                                                                            Downtown & W. Oakland/Emeryville
                                            Sunset




                                                                                                                                                          krid
                                                      Downtown/SOMA/Mission




                                                                                                                                                            ge/P
                                            Beuna Vista/Central/Bernal Hts.



                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                 edm
                                            Ingleside
                                                                                                                                                        S.E

                                                                                                                                                                     ont
                                                                  S. Bayshore/S. Central                                                                   .O
                                                                                                                                                           akla
                                                                                    runo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Ramon/Danville
                                                                                                                                                                nd
                                                                                   B
                                                                             o/San
                                       a
                                 acific




                                                                      rancisc




                                                                                                                                                           Alameda
                               City/P




                                                                F




                                                                                                                                                                           Castro Valley/San Lorenzo
                          Daly




                                                         S. San     Sa
                                                                       n            Ma
                                                                                     teo
                                                                                        /Bu
                                                                                           rlin




                                                                                                                                                                              Hayward
                                                                                              ga
                                                                                                me




Fraction of Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Livermore/Dublin-Pleasanton
Willing to Pay to Live
in Area, Relative to
 National Average                                                                                    Redwood City
    County border                                                                                                                                               Union City/Newark                 Fremont

    0.27 - 0.28
    0.23 - 0.24
                                                                                              Menlo Park/E. Palo Alto
    0.21 - 0.22
    0.19 - 0.20
                               San Mateo/Half Moon Bay
    0.17 - 0.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       se




    0.15 - 0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                . Sa




    0.13 - 0.14                                                                                                      Palo Alto/Mountain View
                                                                                                                                                                                    Santa Clara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /N
                                                                                                                                                                                                             itas




    0.11 - 0.12                                                                                                                                                Sunnyvale
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Milp



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Alum




    0.09 - 0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gilroy/Morgan Hill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ock/E




    0.07 - 0.08                                                                                                                                                                                    os
                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .




                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San




    0.05 - 0.06                                                                                                                                                                              n S North Valley/E. San Jose
                                                                                                                                                                                            w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jose




                                                                                                                                                                            n            to
                                                                                                                                 Cupertino/Los Gatos/Saratoga
    0.03 - 0.04                                                                                                                                                           ow
                                                                                                                                                   W. San Jose/ Campbell D
                                                                                                                  Watsonvill




    -0.01 - 0.00                                                                                                                                                                                rounds
                                                                                                                                                                                       len/Fairg
                                                                                                                                                                              Willow G                                      Evergreen/Silver Creek
                                                                                                                             e




                                                                                                                                                       Cambrian/Blossom Valley
                                                         Figure 5B: Quality of Life in and around Manhattan, 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Yonkers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mount Vernon/New Rochelle
                  awn

                                                                       Bergenfield/Dumont
            L
       Fair




                                                                                                                                                                        Rive
 ield/




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Williamsbridge/Baychester




                                                                                                                                                                             rdale
Garf




                                                                                                                                                                                 /Kin
                                                                                                                                                                                     gs b
                                                                                                                                                                                         ridg
                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                      Hackensack/Teaneck                                                                                                                                                                            Pelham Parkway
                                                                                                                                                                             Kingsbridge Hts./Mosholu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nt
                                                                                                                                                                  od




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Throgs Neck/Co-op
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tremo
                                                                                                                                                               ./Inwo
                                                                                                                                                            ton Hts




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Port W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ania/E
                                                                                                                                                                      University Hts./Fordham




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sou




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ashin
                                                                                                                                                             g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Morris
                                                                                                                                                      Washin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ndv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gton/G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ie




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w /P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                arkc
                                                                                                                                                              Highbridge/S. Concourse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              reat N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hes
                                                                       S. Bergen Co.
                   Rutherford/North Arlington




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      te r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ck    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Motts Haven/Hunts Point
                                                                                                                                                               Harlem




                                                                                              Morningside Hts./Hamilton Hts.
                                                                                                                                                             Central

                                                                                                                                                                                    rlem
                                                                                                                                                                            East Ha




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Flushing/Whitestone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bayside/Little Neck
                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                    est Sid



                                                                                                                                                                      ide
                                                                                                                                 Upper W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Astoria
                                                                                                                                                                 a st S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jackson Hts. (LGA)
                                                                                                                                                                 rE




       North Bergen/W. New York
                                                                                                                                                            Uppe
                                                                        Union City/Hoboken




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Elmhurst/Corona
                                                                                                                        helsea



                                                                                                                                                   ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hillcrest/Fresh Meadows
                                                                                                                                               n/Turtle B
                                                                                                                  West/C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 re s
Fraction of Income                                                                                                                                                                                 Sunnyside/Woodside                                                                                tH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ills
                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                          Midtow




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /R
                                                                                                                                           Stuy Tow




Willing to Pay to Live                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       eg
in Area, Relative to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Point




 National Average
                                                                                                          Greeewich Vlg./F




                                                                                                                                                                                                    rg/Green




                    County border                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Middle Vlg./Ridgewood                                                                ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ood                             Jamaica
                    0.27                             -N.0.28
                                                         Jersey City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n   s/W
                                                                                                                                                                                                        u




                                                                                                                             Lower E. Side/Chinatown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rde
                                                                                                                                                                                               Williamsb




                    0.23 - 0.24                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w Ga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ke
                                                                                                                in. District




                    0.21 - 0.22                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bushwick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      on




                    0.15 - 0.16                                                                                                                                                                              Bedford
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oz




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /S      tuyves
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E. N e w




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /S




                                                                                                                                       Brooklyn Hts./Ft. Greene                                                                                          Bro
                    0.13 - 0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ac




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Be




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nsv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  York/S




                                                S. Jersey City                                                                                                                                                                                                       ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rd




                    0.11 - 0.12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e/O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s.                                                                                                                                     Bellerose/Rosdale
                                                                                                                                                                                                              s/Prospect Ht                                                    ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ho




                                                                                                                                                                                                   N. Crown Ht                                                                    an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ta




                    0.09 - 0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rret Cit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                                     Park
                                                                                                                                          S         lope/C
                    0.07 - 0.08                                                                                                                                       arroll                                                        n Hts.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y




                                                                                                                                                                             Gard                                            w
                                                                                                                                                                                  ens                                 S. Cro
                    0.05 - 0.06
 Bayonne/Kearny




                    0.03 - 0.04                                                                                                                                                                                                             E. Flatbush

                    0.01 - 0.02                                                                                                            Sunset Park
                    -0.01 - 0.00
                    -0.03 - -0.02                                                                                                                                       Bo
                                                                                                                                                                           r                                          Flatbush
                                                                                                                                                                               ou
                                                                                                                                                                                 gh                                                                        Flatlands/Canarsie
                    -0.05 - -0.04                                                                                                                                                          Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                              rk
                    -0.07 - -0.06
                                                                                                                               Bay Ridge
                    -0.09 - -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ys
                       South Shore                                                                                                                                                                                        Shee                                                                                                                                          wa
                    -0.13 - -0.12                                                                                                                                           Bensonhurst                                       p             shead                                                                                                                    cka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bay/G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            raves                                                                                                 Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e    nd
                    -0.15 - -0.14
                                                                                             Mid-Island                                                                                                Coney Island
  Figure 5C: Quality of Life in Detroit and Southeast Michigan, 2000

                                   Townships ne

  Flint
                                                                                                                          Lapeer & St. Clair Co./Port Huron
                                       ar Flint




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ld Twps.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hesterfie
                    Outer Genesee & Shiawassee Cos.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Macomb
Fraction of Income
                                                                                                                                                                                              Shelby
Willing to Pay to Live
in Area, Relative to
                                                                                 Holly/Oxford
 National Average
     County border
     0.15 - 0.16
     0.05 - 0.06
     0.03 - 0.04
     0.01 - 0.02
     -0.01 - 0.00
                                                                                                Pontiac/Waterford
     -0.03 - -0.02                                                                                                                      Troy/Rochester Hills
     -0.05 - -0.04                                                                                                                                                                                           Clinton/Harrison
      Livingston Co./H




     -0.07 - -0.06                                                                                                                                                                     Sterling Heights

     -0.09 - -0.08
     -0.11 - -0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ille
                                                                                                West Bloomfield/Birmingham




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /Rosev
            owell/Brighton




     -0.13 - -0.12
                                                            Novi/White Lake                                                                                                                   Warren




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Shores
                                                                                                                                            Roy
     -0.15 - -0.14                                                                                                                              al   Oak
                                                                                                                                                           /Mad
                                                                                                                                                                  ison




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ir
     -0.17 - -0.16                                                                                                                                                     H   eigh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St. Cla
                                                                                                                                                                                  ts
     -0.19 - -0.18
                                                                                                    Farmington Hills/Southfield
     -0.22                                                                                                                                           Oak Park/Ferndale                                    Grosse Point/Hamtramck
                                                                                                                                                                                      N.E. Detroit (Burbank/Conner)
                                                                                                                                                              N. Detroit (Pershing/Davison)
                                                                                                                              W. N.W. Detroit (Palmer Park/Harmony Village
                                                                                                                                De
                                                                                                                                   troi
                                                                                                                                        t (R
                                                                                                                                             ose                                     East Riverfront/Jefferson East
                                                                                                                                                 dal           Dow
                                                                                                                                                     e)            ntow
                                                                                                                                                                        nD
                                                                                                     Livonia                                                               etro
                                                                                                                                                                                it/W
                                                                                                                                                                                    ood
                                                                                                                                               Dearborn                                 war
                                                                                                                                                                                            d


                             Ypsilanti/Saline/Pittsfield Twp.                                                  Dearborn/Dearborn Heights/RedfordS.W. Detroit (Chadsey/Condon/Vernor)


                                                                                                       Westland/Inkster
                                                                              Canton/Plymouth


                                                                                                                                        Lincoln Park/Wyandotte/River Rouge

                             Ann Arbor
                                                                                                                    Taylor/Romulus
                                                                                                                                             Southgate/Trenton
                                     Figure 5D: Quality of Life in and around Atlanta, 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Fraction of Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Willing to Pay to Live
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in Area, Relative to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           National Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               County border
                                                                                                                               Dawson, Forsyth, & Pickens Co.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hall Co.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.13 - 0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.07 - 0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.05 - 0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.03 - 0.04
  Paulding & Bartow Co.




                                                  Cherokee Co.                                                                                                                                                                 0.01 - 0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.01 - 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.03 - -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.05 - -0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.07 - -0.06
                                                                                                  Alpharetta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.09 - -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                      Sugar Hill/Buford


                                                  Sandy Plains
                                                                                                 ell
                                                                                             osw




                                                                                                                                    Duluth-Suwanee                                                                                            Athens
                                                                                                                                                                Lawrenceville
                                                                                           s- R
                                                                                              g
                                                                                          prin




                          Kennesaw          Marietta
                                                                                     dy S




                                                                                                              Dunwoody
                                                                                 San




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Barrow & Walton Co.
                                                                                                                                                    Lilburn
                                                                                                                                                                            Snellville
                                                             rna
                                                          Smy




                                                                                                                                           Tucker

                                                                             Buckhead
                                       Mableton                                                              Decatur
                                                                                                                                                     Stone Mountain


                                                        Center Hill-West Lake                                                             fee
                                                                                                                                     cA
                                                                    Downtown-Midtown Atlanta                                       -M
                                                                                                                             ld er
                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                         Ca                         S. DeKalb
Carroll & Douglas Co.                                                                        Po        int
                                                                                         ast
                                                                                  a rk/E
                                                                                 P
                                                                        e   ge
                                                                   Coll                                                                                                                    Newton & Rockdale Co.

                                                                                                       Forest Park
                                     S.W. Atlanta/Union City




                                                                                                             Jonesboro
                                                                                                                                                                Henry Co.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Putnam & Jasper Co.



                                                       Fayette, Coweta & Spalding Co.



                                                                                                                                                                                    Butte, Pike, Lamar, & Upson Co.




                                      Meriwether & Heard Co.
