                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE LINK BETWEEN MANUFACTURING GROWTH AND ACCELERATED SERVICES
                         GROWTH IN INDIA

                                         Rajeev H. Dehejia
                                         Arvind Panagariya

                                        Working Paper 19923
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19923


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




Previously circulated as "Trade Liberalization in Manufacturing and Accelerated Growth in Services
in India." Rajeev Dehejia and Arvind Panagariya acknowledge funding from the Franklin Templeton
Foundation. No data on human subjects were gathered for this paper, so no IRB approval was obtained.
The opinions expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
John Templeton Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Rajeev H. Dehejia and Arvind Panagariya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Link Between Manufacturing Growth and Accelerated Services Growth in India
Rajeev H. Dehejia and Arvind Panagariya
NBER Working Paper No. 19923
February 2014, Revised February 2016
JEL No. O14,P21

                                           ABSTRACT

The impact of trade liberalization on manufacturing growth has been widely studied in the literature.
What has gone unappreciated is that accelerated manufacturing growth has also been accompanied
by accelerated services growth. Using firm-level data from India, we find a positive spillover from
manufacturing growth to gross value added, wages, employment, and worker productivity in services,
especially large urban firms and in service sectors whose output is used as a manufacturing input.


Rajeev H. Dehejia
Robert F. Wagner Graduate School
of Public Service
New York University
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rajeev@dehejia.net

Arvind Panagariya
School of International & Public Affairs
Columbia University
Arvind.Panagariya@Columbia.Edu
1. Introduction

The critical role of manufacturing growth, especially in the labor-intensive sectors, in the early

stages of development in the labor-abundant economies is widely recognized (for example,

Kuznets 1957 and 1973 and Chenery 1960). Some of the more dramatic examples from recent

history are South Korea and Taiwan in the 1960s and 1970s, and India and China more recently,

which have grown at remarkable rates. Opening to the world economy in these countries at

different points in time was followed by accelerated growth. While there remains some

controversy over whether openness or industrial targeting is to be credited for the high growth

rates, the importance of manufacturing growth in the making of these miracles is rarely

questioned except in the case of India. And even in the latter case, the upward shift in the

growth rate has been accompanied by acceleration in the growth rate of manufacturing.

       A phenomenon that has received far less attention in the literature, however, is that

accelerated growth in manufacturing is often accompanied by an upward shift in the growth rate

of services as well. Table 1 documents this shift for three of the four countries just named: South

Korea, Taiwan, and India. In each case, the table shows that acceleration in growth in the GDP

is accompanied by acceleration in growth in not just in industry but services as well. In the first

two cases, which represent the conventional pattern, growth in industry far outstrips growth in

services but acceleration in both sectors in the second period is unmistakable. In the case of

India, the relative growth rates of industry and services are unconventional with the former

exhibiting slower growth but the acceleration in the second period is observed in both sectors

simultaneously.


                                                 1
        The question we wish to address in the present paper is why services growth also

accelerates alongside acceleration in industrial growth in the early stages of development.

Whether we credit openness or industrial targeting, the object of policy in the case of Taiwan and

South Korea was industry. Yet, services growth there also accelerated with industrial growth.

Likewise, in the case of India, evidence supports the view that liberalization enhanced industrial

growth (Natarj 2011 and Khandelwal and Topalova 2011), but while it is true that services

sectors such as banking and finance and telecommunications were themselves subject to

significant liberalizing reforms, it is also true that other services such as transportation,

education, and health that were not subject to any serious policy changes saw acceleration as

well. Why should that be the case?

        In this paper, we offer and test two hypotheses aimed at linking growth in manufacturing

to accelerated growth in services. First, we hypothesize that there is a spillover from

manufacturing growth to service sector growth. This spillover works through two channels. One,

there is the derived demand or direct channel whereby the manufacturing sector uses domestic

services such as transport, telecommunications, and business activities as inputs. And second,

there is an indirect channel whereby accelerated growth in manufactures increases incomes and

shifts relative prices, which in turn increase the demand for and equilibrium quantities of non-

traded services such as passenger travel, tourism, restaurant food, and real estate activity.1

        According to our second hypothesis, the efficiency of production in some traded and non-

traded services crucially depends on the availability of quality tools and equipment that become

more reliably available either from abroad or from improved domestic supply following the

1
 In Section 3.1, we sketch a model incorporating these two effects within a three-sector general-equilibrium model.
Also see also Kongsamut, Rebelo and Xie 1999 and Ngai and Pissaredes 2007 in this context.
                                                         2
reforms that lead to acceleration in manufacturing growth (see for example Goldberg,

Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova 2010). For example, business process outsourcing in India

needs access to state of the art computer hardware and software. Firms in the transport sector

need access to high-quality cars, buses, and trucks. Taxi and courier services cannot grow

without access to good, reliable means of transportation in the necessary volume.

        We test these hypotheses using two firm-level cross-sectional surveys of service sector

firms carried out in India in 2001-02 and 2006-07. As Table 1 shows, India saw its growth rate

in industry shift from 5.6 to 8 percent and that in services from 7.1 to 9.6 percent between

periods 1991-92 to 2002-03 and 2002-03 to 2011-12.2 Therefore, the first of these surveys was

conducted in the lower growth period and the second in the higher growth period. The surveys

that form the basis of our analysis are two independent, albeit nationally representative, cross-

sections. As such, we cannot form a panel of firms but we are able to distinguish each

observation according to the state in which the firm is located, whether the firm is urban or rural,

the service sub-sector to which it belongs, and the year of the survey.

        In our empirical analysis below, we do not relate reform variables such as tariffs or

abolition of import licensing directly to services growth. Instead, our strategy is to examine the

differential impact of the key variables of interest, most importantly growth in manufacturing, on

services in the post-reform 2006-2007 year relative to the base year of 2001-2002. Our first

hypothesis has two parts, one relating to the overall demand effect of increased manufacturing

output and the other to the use of services as inputs in manufacturing. We test the first part of the

hypothesis by estimating the effect of manufacturing growth on overall services growth in the

2
  Data in India are recorded according to the fiscal year, which begins on April 1 and ends on March 31. Therefore,
a year such as 1991-92 refers to the period from April 1, 1991 to March 31, 1992.
                                                         3
post-reform period over and above its impact in the pre-reform period. To test the second part of

the hypothesis, we use data from the input-output tables to create an index measuring the

intensity of use of each service as an input in manufacturing output. The greater the proportion

of a service sector’s output used in manufacturing as an input, the greater the value of the index.

Using the index, we test whether services used more intensively in manufacturing experienced

more rapid growth in the post-reform period.

       To test the second hypothesis, we assume that relatively capital-intensive services use

imported inputs more intensively and therefore stand to benefit from increased availability of the

latter. We then formally test whether capital-intensive services grew more rapidly than non-

capital-intensive service sectors in the post-reform period relative to the pre-reform period. We

also use a measure of state-level financial development, and interact it with capital intensity, to

examine whether capital-intensive service sectors grew more rapidly after economic reforms in

states where it was easier to access capital.

       Our approach faces two econometric challenges: omitted variable bias (there could be

time-, state- and service-sector-specific unobservable variables that drive both manufacturing

and services growth) and simultaneity (manufacturing and services growth could be jointly

determined and both affected by common shocks). We address the omitted variable bias problem

by including year, two-digit industry, and state fixed effects. While addressing unobservable

variables at the state, industry, and year level, we do remain exposed to unobservable variables

that vary along two or more of these dimensions, namely state × year, industry × year or state ×

year × industry.



                                                  4
       We use an instrumental variables strategy to deal with the remaining omitted variable

concerns and with simultaneity. In particular, we use state labor regulations interacted with the

1988 level of manufacturing as an instrumental variable for manufacturing growth in 1998.

State-level labor laws were enacted in the 1970s and early 1980s, long before it would have been

possible to anticipate economic reform and the surge in service growth twenty years later; as

such they are plausibly exogenous with respect to services growth. Although these laws relate

primarily to amendments to the Industrial Disputes Act, hence are mainly concerned with

manufacturing and prima facie excludable, we allow labor regulations to have a direct impact on

services, and rely on the excludability of labor regulations interacted with 1988 manufacturing.

The claim is that the economic boost from employer-friendly labor regulations in states, for

example, with a higher level of 1988 manufacturing affects manufacturing growth in 1998-99 but

does not directly affect services. The underlying assumption is that the effect of the instrument

on services (e.g., through factor markets) dissipates by 1998-99, whereas the effect on the slowly

evolving manufacturing sector persists. We discuss our empirical strategy in greater detail in

Section 3.2, and our instrumental variables approach and its limitations in Section 3.3.

       The use of this instrumental variables strategy leads to an important caveat regarding the

interpretation of our results. While our motivation in looking at spillovers from manufacturing to

services is the recent economic liberalization, the effect we identify is instead due to predating

variation in labor regulations. This is unavoidable, since there is no between-state variation in the

economic liberalization that took place in the early 2000s that provides a plausible instrument for

manufacturing growth. At the same time, we believe that the underlying spillover mechanism

that we investigate is potentially relevant in many contexts.

                                                 5
       Overall our paper makes three contributions to the literature. First and perhaps most

important, we take what is to our knowledge the first stab at explaining why services may

experience accelerated growth consequent to reforms that are largely aimed at stimulating

manufacturing growth. Within the specific context of the Indian experience, some reform critics

have argued that since reforms had been aimed at industry and it is services that have grown

faster, the link between reforms and growth is tenuous (see Panagariya 2008, Chapter 1 and

references cited therein). While part of the answer to this critique lies in the fact that Indian

reforms have encompassed not just industry but services as well, our analysis provides channels

through which services growth accelerated even in sectors that were not directly subject to the

reforms.

       Second, we add to two interrelated literatures on the role of inter-industry linkages. The

early literature on structural transformation (e.g., Kuznets 1957 and 1973; Chenery 1960)

notably did not find any significant shift in services with overall growth, whereas Kongsamut,

Rebelo and Xie (1999) and Eichengreen and Gupta (2009) find evidence supporting a positive

relationship. Our contribution here is an empirical one: to use an instrumental variables strategy

firmly to establish one direction of causality and the magnitude of the relationship in the context

of India in the early 2000s (while not ruling out bidirectional causality; see for example Bas

2013, who argues that services growth enhanced manufacturing growth). Our work also relates

to the literature that studies inter-industry spillovers and locational agglomeration (e.g., Hanlon

and Miscio 2013). In particular, our finding of an urban inter-industry spillover from

manufacturing to services sheds light on a specific mechanism through which urban

agglomeration could take place. We also complement the strand of the literature that has looked

                                                   6
at the role of agriculture in structural transformation (Bustos, Caprettini, and Ponticeli 2014 and

McCaig and Pavcnik 2013).

        Finally, the existing literature examining services growth in India relies on industry-level

data.3 In a break from this approach, we employ two large-scale firm-level cross-sections of the

service sector that allow us to distinguish between the effects of reforms on small versus large

firms and rural versus urban firms. In our view, this is crucial since large and urban firms are

likely to be better integrated with the part of the economy most impacted by the reforms. They

are also more likely to be impacted by shifts in manufacturing growth related to shifts in labor

market regulations. Also relevant in the context of our second hypothesis is access to credit,

which will be more readily available to larger and urban firms.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the

services surveys and other data. In Section 3, we discuss the theoretical and empirical

frameworks within which we test our two hypotheses. In Section 4, we report our main results,

and in Section 5 we consider an extension (examining whether firm size is an important

mediating variable for the growth of service sector firms) and robustness checks (excluding

service sectors that might have been directly affected by economic liberalization, presenting

results with additional time-varying controls, and bootstrapping standard errors). Section 6

concludes the paper.




3
  We hasten to add that several recent studies on the growth of Indian manufacturing do use firm-level data. These
include Khandelwal and Topalova (2011), Nataraj (2011), Harrison, Martin, and Nataraj (2013) and Hsieh and
Klenow (2009).
                                                         7
2. The Services Surveys and Additional Data Sources

We begin by describing the service sector surveys we use in our analysis. Further details are

available in a companion descriptive paper, Dehejia and Panagariya (2012).


2.1 National Sample Survey Services Data

In this paper we use data from two nationally representative repeated cross-sections of service

sector firms: round 57 (2001-02) and round 63 (2006-2007) of the National Sample Survey. The

surveys cover a broad range of service activities including hotels and restaurants; transport,

storage, and communications; real estate, renting, and business activities; education; health and

social work; and other community, social, and personal activities. The 63rd round includes

financial intermediation as well, but since these services are not included in the 57th round, we

exclude them from our analysis. Also excluded from both rounds of surveys are: the wholesale

and retail sector; public administration and defense; production activities of private households;

and extraterritorial organizations. Furthermore, no public sector enterprises are covered by the

two surveys.

   In our empirical work, below, we will also distinguish between more capital-intensive (such

as transport, computer services, and media) and less capital-intensive (such as restaurants,

property, education, health, and personal services) service sectors. Overall, the service data from

the NSS comprises approximately half of the economic activity captured by National Accounts

data for the service sector (see Dehejia and Panagariya 2012 for a more detailed discussion).

   We note one difference between the 2001-02 and 2006-07 survey designs, which is

potentially important. The former includes all establishment enterprises, whether large or small


                                                 8
in the main geographical sampling frame (the so-called “area frame”), whereas the latter

introduces a separate “list frame” for the largest enterprises in the corporate sector.4 This

difference between the two surveys raises the initial concern that the information on large

enterprises might have been better captured in the 63rd relative to the 57th round. But this

concern is counteracted by the fact that the 57th round paid special attention to large enterprises

in essence in the same way as did the list frame of the 63rd round. It surveyed all enterprises

with 200 or more workers, which provided essentially the same coverage to large enterprises as

the list frame in the 63rd round.5 Therefore, we conclude that despite the identification of a

separate list frame in the 63rd round, the two rounds are fully comparable.

    The 57th (2001-02) round surveyed a total 244,376 enterprises, with 37.85 percent in rural

areas and 62.15 percent in urban areas. The 63rd (2006-07) surveyed 189,844 enterprises (not

counting the 438 list frame units), with 43.82 percent in rural and 56.18 percent in urban areas.

For both rounds, we use the survey weights provided by the NSS to generate nationally

representative results.

    We convert nominal values in both rounds to constant 1999-2000 prices.6 We can see in

Table 2 that the average firm has a yearly gross value added (GVA) of Rupees 74,424 or


4
  It initially identified 998 large service sector companies distributed throughout India for this frame but after
exclusions for reasons of public ownership and registration under the Factories Act (1948), narrowed down the
relevant universe of eligible list frame enterprises to 626. For a variety of reasons, the survey was able to sample
only 438 of the 626 enterprises.
5
  To quote from Appendix B of the NSS (2003, p. B6) report on the 57th round, “After determining the boundaries of
the sample FSU [First Stage Unit], all big non-agricultural enterprises having 200 or more workers in the entire FSU
and having operated at least one day during the last 365 days preceding the day of survey (hereinafter to be called as
big enterprises for brevity) were listed. All the listed big enterprises constituted segment 9 of the selected FSU. All
big enterprises under coverage listed in segment 9 were surveyed separately in addition to the required number of
smaller enterprises under coverage in the other segments of the selected FSU as per normal procedure.”
6
 We use sectoral deflators constructed by the National Account Statistics to deflate service sector output to constant
1999-2000 prices.
                                                          9
approximately USD$1,650 at 2000 exchange rates. There are an average of 1.8 workers per firm,

although it is worth noting that the modal firm employs only one worker (namely the proprietor).

Yearly salaries are Rs. 28,486 (or approximately USD$633). Our fourth outcome of interest,

productivity is computed as yearly GVA per worker, and is Rupees 40,536 per worker. Across

columns (2) to (7), we see that there is a significant increase in GVA and salary across rounds,

although not employment, and that GVA is much higher in urban areas while employment is

only somewhat higher, implying that productivity is significantly higher in urban firms compared

to rural firms. Table 3 presents summary statistics by state and for the key dependent variables as

scaled in our subsequent tables (log yearly GVA, log total employment, log wages, and log

productivity).




2.2 Additional Data Sources

We supplement data from NSS rounds 57 and 63 with four additional sources. First we make use

of data on labor-market flexibility by state; originally proposed by Besley and Burgess (2004),

we use the further refined classification by Hasan, Mitra, and Ramaswamy (2007) summarized in

Table 3. Each state is categorized as having enacted employer-friendly labor regulations as

compared to the default of national legislation that heavily favors employees. De jure these

regulations affected with greater potency the manufacturing sector. Besley and Burgess (2004)

and Hasan, Mitra, and Ramaswamy (2007) demonstrate their positive effect on the

manufacturing sector; in this paper, we explore their impact on services.

       Second, we make use of a state-specific financial development index developed by De

and Ghosh (2004). Using factor analysis, these authors derive an index of financial-infrastructure
                                               10
development as a composite of the state level credit-to-deposit ratio in nationalized banks, a

state’s tax revenue as a proportion of the net state domestic product, and the number of post

offices per 10,000 individuals.7 This analysis assigns the largest weight to the credit-to-deposit

ratio in nationalized banks.

            Third, we use manufacturing growth by state from the National Accounts Statistics as our

measure of manufacturing activity at the state level. We use data from fiscal year 1998-99as this

is the best match between the timing of National Accounts data and the NSS rounds. We also use

the level of manufacturing activity by state in 1988-89 as part of our instrumental variable

strategy. State-level variables are summarized in Table 3, columns (5) to (8).

            Fourth, we use data from the 1998-99 input-output table (Government of India, 2005) to

create an index of reliance on manufacturing demand by service sectors at the two-digit level. In

particular, we sum the proportion of a 2-digit service sector's output that is used as an input in

manufacturing taken as a whole. Table 4 summarizes the service-sector-specific index of reliance

on manufacturing. This ranges from 0 for storage and warehousing, ownership of dwellings, and

education, to 0.22 for communication, 0.3 for other transport services, and 0.39 for trade

services.




7
    In India, small savings are held in post-office savings accounts.

                                                             11
3. Theoretical and Empirical Framework

3.1 Theoretical Framework

       In this section, we provide a formal theoretical model linking economic reform to

services output. While we frame our model in the context of a stylized trade liberalization, a

similar set of mechanisms would be a play in liberalizations or reforms that stimulate the

manufacturing sector.

       Imagine an economy producing three goods, 1, 2 and 3. Goods 1 and 2 are traded while

good 3, representing services, is non-traded. All three goods serve as final consumption goods

while goods 1 and 3 additionally serve as intermediate inputs. Good 1, the import-competing

good, which can be thought of as computers or cell phones, serves as an intermediate input in the

production of the services good, good 3. Good 3, on the other hand, is used as an intermediate

input in the exportable good, good 2, which may be thought of as manufactures. The economy is

small, so that the price ratio between goods 1 and 2 is given in the world markets, which we set

to unity. The price of good 3, which is non-traded, is determined endogenously.

       Imports of good 1 are subject to a per-unit tariff at rate t. With the world price of good 1

normalized at unity, t is also an ad valorem tariff and the domestic price of good is 1 + t. The

domestic price of good 2 is the same as the world price, 1. We denote the domestic price of good

3 by p3. Since our focus is on the supply side of the economy, we do not explicitly solve for p3,

however.

       Goods 1 and 2 are produced under constant returns to scale with the standard production

functions with the qualification that technology is fixed-coefficients-type with respect to

produced inputs. Good 3 is subject to external economies of scale, which allows us to preserve

                                                12
the perfect competition assumption (see, for example, Panagariya 1981 and Helpman 1984). This

form of scale economies considerably simplifies the analysis though our results could also be

derived assuming product differentiation and internal economies of scale as in Krugman (1979).

Imbedding the Melitz (2003) model within our three-good model would lead to richer results by

virtue of its distinction among firms by size but poses greater challenges.

       One further detail with respect to technology concerns the use of intermediate inputs in

goods 2 and 3. We assume a two-stage production function for these goods. First, a composite

input is produced using the primary inputs via a smooth twice-differentiable homogeneous

production function and this composite input is then combined in fixed proportions with the

other intermediate input (good 1 in the case of good 3 and good 3 in the case of good 2) to

produce the final good.



The Revenue Function

Our main hypothesis is that trade liberalization expands services through three channels: cheaper

imported inputs directly lower the production cost; expansion of manufactures that use services

as inputs increase the demand for services; and increased income increases the demand for

services. Our model tries to capture the first two effects through the assumptions that services

use the import good, good 1, which is liberalized, as an input and that the export good, good 2,

which expands upon trade liberalization, uses services as an input. The third effect comes from

increased income following trade liberalization and the expansion of the increasing returns good,

which is under-produced on account of the externality. We denote by β the amount of good 3

used per unit of good 2 and byγ the amount of good 1 used per unit of good 3.

                                                13
        To derive these and related effects, it is convenient to work with the GDP or revenue

function (Dixit and Norman 1980). For brevity, let Zi denote the vector of primary inputs used in

the production of good i (i = 1, 2, 3). Represent the production function of good 1 by X1 =

F1(Z1). Here F1(.) is linearly homogeneous in its arguments. Good 2, the export good, uses

services as an input. We assume a two-stage production function for it. First, a composite factor

of production V2 is produced using primary factors of production via the linear homogeneous

production function, V2 = F2(Z2).One unit of the composite factor V2 is then combined with β

units of good 3 to yield one unit of good 2. That is,

                                       X2 = min {V2, (M3/β)}.                                       (1)

Here M3 is the quantity of good 3 used as input in good 2. The assumption of free disposal leads

to X2 = V2andM3 = βX2.

        Good 3 is also produced via a two-stage production function with the qualification that

the production of the composite factor used in it is subject to economies of scale that are external

to the firm and internal to the industry. The standard way such external economies are captured

in the literature is to postulate the production function of firm j as

                                         V3j = G(V3) F3(Z3j).                                       (2)

In (2), V3j and Z3j denote the output of the composite factor used in good 3 by firm j and the

vector of primary inputs employed by it. F3(.) is linearly homogeneous in its arguments and V3

is the industry-level value added. The function G(.) captures the externality. Assuming G´(.) >

0, the externality is positive: the larger the industry-level output of the composite factor, the

larger the agglomeration externality, which can arise from diffusion of ideas and the creation of

skills that become available to all firms in larger volumes as the industry grows larger.

                                                  14
Aggregating over all firms, we obtain the industry-level production function of the composite

factor used in good 3, V3 = G(V3) F3(Z3). We impose the restriction that the elasticity ε =

V3G´/G< 1. This ensures that more output requires more input.

       We produce good 3 by combining one unit of the composite factor of production with γ

units of good 1. That is to say,

                                      X3 = min {V3, (M1/γ)}.                                      (7)

Here M1 is the amount of good 1 used as input in the production of good 3. Assuming free

disposal, X3 = V3and M1 = γX3.

       We can now represent the competitive equilibrium in the economy through the revenue-

maximization problem:

maxΨ = (1+t)F1(Z1) + (1 − βp3)F2(Z2) + [p3 – γ(1+t)] G(V3) F3(Z3) + λ[Z – (Z1 + Z2 + Z3)],        (4)

whereZ represents the vector of endowments of primary factors of production and λ the vector of

Lagrange multipliers associated with the full-employment constraints. The choice variables in

the problem are factor allocations Zi (i = 1, 2, 3) and the Lagrange multipliers λ. Recognizing

that 1 – βp3 and p3 – γ(1+t) represent the implicit prices of valued added in sectors 2 and 3,

equation (4) is equivalent to maximizing value added by primary factors valued at their implicit

prices in the domestic economy.

       The envelope function associated with the solution to the problem is the standard revenue

function and may be written as (see Panagariya 1988):

                            R = R(1+t, 1 – βp3, G(V3){p3 – γ(1+t)}; Z).                           (5)

The partial derivatives of R(.) with respect to the first three arguments yield the equilibrium

values of the Fi(.), which also equal the equilibrium values of the Xi for i = 1, 2 and X1 and
                                                 15
X3/G(X3) in the case of i = 3. Note that X1 and X3 represent the gross values of outputs of goods

1 and 3, respectively. Explicitly stated

                                              X1 = R1(.)                                       (6a)

                                              X2 = R2(.)                                       (6b)

                                             X3
                                                     = R3 (.)                                  (6c)
                                            G( X 3 )

The net outputs of goods 1 and 3 are given by partial derivatives of R(.) with respect to 1+t and

p3, respectively. Denoting by x1 and x3 the net outputs, we have:

                          x1 = R1+t(.) = R1(.)–γR3(.) = X1 – γX3 = X1 – M1                     (7a)

and

                     x3 = Rp (.) = – βR2(.) + G(X3)R3(.) = X3 – βX2 = X3 – M3                  (7b)
                            3




Liberalization

We are interested in computing the effect of a change in t on the gross output of good 3 (which is

what we use as the dependent variable in our empirical exercise as opposed to net output of

services). Totally differentiating (6c), we have

                   dX3 = G[(R31 – γGR33)dt + (–βR32 + GR33)dp3] + R3G!(.)dX3.

Dividing both sides by X3 and using a circumflex (^) to denote the proportionate change in a

variable, we can rewrite this equation as
                                   !                            !
                   1 − ! !! = −        !"!!! − !!" !" +              !!!! − !!!" !"! .          (8)
                                  !!                            !!




                                                   16
By convexity of the revenue function, R33 is non-negative. If we additionally assume

substitutability in production (this will be true, for example, if the Zi consisted of one sector-

specific factor and one factor common to all sectors), then Rik (i ≠ k) would be negative.

        Equation (8) allows us to identify three separate empirically identifiable effects of tariff

liberalization:

    (i) Input tariff effect: Consider first the term associated with the change in the tariff in (8).

            The first term within this term represents the effect arising due to the use of the

            imported input in good 3 and for a tariff reduction, it is unambiguously positive. The

            larger the value of β, the greater the contribution of the input to the cost of good 3 and

            the larger the effect of the reduction in t.

    (ii) The effect due to the use of services as an input in good 2: Next, consider the second

            term associated with the tariff reduction. The tariff reduction causes good 1 to shrink

            and releases resources for deployment into good 3 (and good 2) and thus leads to an

            expansion of good 3. To gain further insight into the effect, it is useful to explore this

            term a little further. We know that R3 is homogeneous of degree zero in its arguments.

            Therefore, we can have:

                        (1+t)R31 + (1 – βp3)R32 + G(V3){p3 – γ(1+t)}R33 = 0.                            (9)

            Substituting the value of R31 from (9) into the term in the parentheses associated with

            the change in t in (8), we can obtain:

                             γGR33 – R31 = [Gp3R33 + (1 – βp3)R32]/(1+t)                             (10)

            In this form, we can now see the effect the use of good 3 as input in good 2 has on the

            output of the former as we lower the tariff. To the extent that goods 2 and 3 are

                                                   17
           substitutes in production, the expansion of good 2 upon liberalization adversely

           impacts the expansion of good 3. But the greater the share good 3 as input in good 2

           (as captured by βp3), the smaller the adverse impact on the expansion of good 3 as a

           result of the good 2 expansion following the tariff reduction.

   (iii)   The income effect: Next consider the terms associated with the change in the price of

           good 3. In principle, this term can be positive or negative depending on which way p3

           moves. In turn, p3 is subject to two opposite forces. At constant p3, the reduction in

           the tariff increases the supply of good 3. But it also increases the demand for the

           good, increasing real income via a reduction in distortion in both consumption and

           production. The net result may be an excess supply of or excess demand for good 3.

           If the income elasticity of demand for services is sufficiently large, however, the

           demand effect will dominate and p3 will rise. In that case, the term associated with

           the price change in equation (8) will further add to the supply of good 3. This is

           essentially an income effect: reduced distortion raises real income of the consumer

           and leads to increased spending on good 3. With good 3 being non-traded, its supply

           must rise.



Output per Worker in Services

Up to this point, scale economies have not played a qualitative role in driving our results. Its

only role has been to magnify the output effect via the multiplicative term (1 –ε) on the left-hand

side of the equation. We now show that scale economies play a substantive, qualitative role in

driving another result. We first consider the impact on output per worker in services. This

                                                 18
requires restricting the model further by assuming that vector Z3 consists of only two factors: a

sector-specific factor called K3 and labor, which is used in all sectors. We denoted labor

employed in sector i by Li (i = 1, 2, 3). Under these restrictions, differentiating the industry-level

production function of the composite factor totally (V3 = G(V3) F3(Z3)), we can obtain:

                                        (1− ε )Vˆ3 = θ L L̂3 + θ K K̂ 3 .                             (11)
                                                         3         3




Here we use θL3 and θK3 to represent the cost shares of labor and capital in the composite factor

used on the production of good 3. Making use of free disposal (X3 = V3) and holding sector-

specific capital fixed, we can deduce from the industry-level production function derived from

(2):

                                                      "θ      %
                                                          L
                                         X̂ 3 − L̂3 = $ 3 −1' L̂3 .                                  (11!)
                                                      $#1− ε '&

It immediately follows from (11!), that as good 3 expands, output per-worker in the services

sector rises if θ L is greater than (1- ε) and falls if the opposite is true. θ L is more likely to exceed
                 3                                                            3




(1- ε) the larger the share of labor in value added and the greater the degree of increasing returns.

        To summarize, the predictions of the model are ambiguous: liberalization can lead to an

increase in services’ output through multiple channels: increased availability of imported and

domestically produced inputs, increased demand for services as inputs into manufactured goods,

and an income effect. But these implications rely on a sufficiently high income elasticity of

demand for services. Likewise, the model predicts an increase in worker productivity in services,

if there are sufficient scale economies in the service sector. The equivocal nature of the

predictions motivates our empirical work, which is outlined in the next subsection.

                                                      19
3.2 Identification Strategy

As outlined in the Introduction and in the model sketched in Section 3.1, we are interested in

examining the relationship between service sector growth and the growth in manufacturing

spanning the years 2001-02 and 2006-07. If we had a firm-level panel, then we could regress

growth at the firm level on manufacturing growth. Instead, with two repeated cross-sections, we

regress the firm-level outcome for each round on a round dummy, manufacturing growth, and

manufacturing growth interacted with the round dummy.

            Consider the following specification, which provides a useful starting point for our

discussion of identification, although it is not the one we will ultimately estimate:

                                         sijtf= α + βgi + γ It + δ (gi ×It) + εijtf                (12)

where i indexes states, j indexes the 2-digit service sectors, t = 2001-02 or 2006-07, and f = 1,…,

R1indexes firms in 2001-02 and f = R1+1,…, R2+R1 indexes firms in 2006-07 (i.e., we have a

repeated cross-section of firms). The variable sijtf is log gross value added (GVA) (or log wages,

log employment, or log GVA per worker) by firm, gi is the growth rate in manufacturing in state

i in 1998-99, It is an indicator variable for t = 2006-07 (i.e., It = 0 for 2001-02 and =1 for 2006-

07), and εijtf is an error term. With the presence of a year dummy, It, β estimates the

contemporaneous effect of manufacturing growth on services in 2001-02, and δ – our coefficient

of interest – estimates the differential effect of manufacturing growth on the growth of services

between 2006-07 and 2001-02.8



8
    More precisely, differencing equation (1) at time t and t+1, we obtain:
                                              sijt+1 f -sijtg= γ + δ gi + εijt+1f -εijtg,
                                                          1




                                                                     20
        There are two main concerns regarding this specification. First, state manufacturing

growth in 1998-99might be simultaneously determined with the distribution of GVA in services

across states in 2001-02: a positive shock to the state economy would have a positive effect on

both manufacturing and services, not only on levels in 1998-99, but also possibly on the growth

rate if it is persistent. Second, there are many omitted variables that are common to both

manufacturing and services at the state level; for example, a business-friendly environment

would benefit both services and manufacturing.

        We adopt three strategies for dealing with these concerns. First, we include year, state,

and two-digit industry fixed effects in the specification. Many of the omitted variable concerns

are either at the state or industry level, and fixed effects soak up these time invariant industry and

state unobservables.

        Second, state labor regulations can be used as an instrumental variable for manufacturing

growth. More precisely, we use labor regulations interacted with the level of manufacturing prior

to the period we examine as an instrument for manufacturing growth, allowing labor regulations

to have a direct impact on services growth. We use manufacturing by state in 1988-89, more than

a decade prior to and plausibly exogenous with respect to services growth in the period we

examine. Our specification takes the form:

                     gi×It = bIt + c(Li×mi 1988×It) + d(Li×It) + ei + lj + ωit                               (13)

                                                    
                                                  predicted

                         sijtf   = α + γ I t + δ (gi × I t ) + θ (L i ×I t ) + ηi + λ j + εijtf              (14)


where f indexes firms in round 1 and g firms in round 2. So δ measures the impact of manufacturing growth, gi, on
the change in services between rounds. Since our outcomes are in logs – ln(GVA), ln(wages), ln (total employment)
and ln(GVA per worker) – this corresponds to the effect of growth in manufacturing on the growth of services’
GVA, wages, employment and productivity. Note that since we do not observe the same firm across successive
rounds, the growth rate is identified by aggregating across firms within state and round.
                                                                 21
where Li are state-level labor regulations, mi 1988 is the value of state manufacturing in fiscal year

1988-89, the ηi are state fixed effects, and the λj are two-digit industry fixed effects. Note that

state fixed effects absorb the direct effect of labor regulations Li,mi 1988, and Li×mi 1988. We

discuss the plausibility of the instrumental variable strategy in Section 3.3.

       Third, rather than rely on the association between manufacturing and services growth at

the state level, we examine whether the growth in services comes precisely from those two-digit

service sectors that rely on manufacturing for derived demand, the mechanism discussed in

Section 3.1. Specifically, we interact growth in manufacturing with a measure of the proportion

of a service sector’s output that is used as an input in manufacturing, zj:

      gi×It = a + bIt + c(Li×mi 1988 ×It) + d(Li×mi 1988 ×zj ×It) + eXijt + fi + hj + νit                         (15)

       gi×zj×It = nIt + p(Li×mi 1988×It) + q(Li×mi 1988 ×zj ×It) + rXijt+ si + uj + ωit                           (16)

                                      
                                    predicted
                                                                       
                                                                       predicted

           sijtf   = α + γ I t + δ (gi × I t ) + θ (L i ×I t ) + ρ (gi × z j × I t ) + β Xij + ηi + λ j + εijtf   (17)

wherej indexes two-digit service sectors and zj is the proportion of output of service sector j used

as an input in manufacturing. In order to identify this model, we use Li×mi 1988 interacted with zj

as a second instrument. The direct effect of zj is absorbed by service-sector fixed effects; the

direct effects of Li, mi 1988, and Li×mi 1988 are absorbed by state fixed effects; and the remaining

interactions (Li ×zj and mi 1988 ×zj) are included in Xijt. We discuss the instruments at greater

length in the next section.

       We refer to ρas the direct effect of manufacturing, since this is the effect of

manufacturing growth on service sectors whose output is directly used as an input in

manufacturing. We refer toδ as the indirect effect of manufacturing, since this is the effect of


                                                                  22
manufacturing growth on service sectors in general, controlling for the direct use of services as

an input in the manufacturing sector; this subsumes the price, input, and income effects discussed

in Section 3.1. Given the inclusion of fixed effects, both of these reflect the average impact of

manufacturing on services growth within state and two-digit industry cells, controlling for

secular time effects with round fixed effects.

         In order to test our second hypothesis, regarding the effect of access to imported inputs,

capital intensity, and financial development on service sector growth, we will include an

indicator for capital-intensive service sectors, for financial development by state, and the

interaction of these two. We will treat these as plausibly exogenous variables (an assumption

supported by the prior literature on financial development and growth across Indian states; see

De and Ghosh 2004), and thus we do not instrument for them.

         Throughout the analysis we cluster standard errors at the state level.9



3.3 Plausibility of the Instrumental Variables Approach

State-level labor regulations have been extensively used in the literature as a source of

exogenous variation in manufacturing (see inter alia Besley and Burgess 2004 and Hasan, Mitra,

and Ramaswamy 2007). In this section, we argue that interaction of state labor regulations and

pre-period manufacturing levels are plausible instrumental variable for manufacturing when

regressed against services growth.




9
 Since employer-friendly labor laws are only coded for 15 states, a potential concern is that we have too few
clusters to trust clustered asymptotic standard errors. We present bootstrapped standard errors for our main results in
Section 5.4.
                                                          23
         The case for the exogeneity of these laws rests on the timing of their enactment in the

1960s, 1970s, and early1980s (with only Karnataka having enacted pro-employer legislation in

1988), which was10 or more years prior to serious economic reforms, more than 15 years prior to

the reforms we are considering, and long before the upsurge in services growth could have been

anticipated. The literature has also shown that state labor laws are significant predictors of

manufacturing growth (i.e., that the instruments are relevant). We will demonstrate this for our

data in Section 4.1 and that the instrument passes standard relevance and weak-instrument tests.

         The most challenging assumption to establish is the exclusion restriction, namely that

labor laws affect services only through manufacturing. The prima facie case for the validity of

the exclusion restrictions is that de jure these laws were primarily concerned with industrial (i.e.,

manufacturing) labor disputes.10 At the same time, one can imagine a variety of mechanisms

through which labor regulation could affect services growth directly. Some of these (e.g., a

business-friendly environment or macro trends) are picked up by state, two-digit industry, and

year fixed effects, but a direct spillover from labor regulations to services remains a concern.

         Thus, we allow for this direct effect rather than assume it away, and instead use the

interaction of labor regulations and the value of manufacturing by state in 1988-89 as our

instrument. The identifying assumption is that the boost to a state’s service growth between

2001-02 and 2006-2007 from employer-friendly labor regulations in states with high versus low

manufacturing output in 1988-89 is channeled only through the effect on manufacturing output.




10
  The labor market index is defined with respect to the Industrial Disputes Act (IDA) and modifications to it at the
state level. The focus of this index is primarily Chapter V.B of the IDA, which applies to manufacturing.

                                                         24
        The underlying assumption is that whatever direct impacts labor regulations in states with

high versus low levels of 1988-89 manufacturing output can have on services (e.g., through labor

markets) will be small in magnitude or would have dissipated by 2001, unlike the impact on

manufacturing, which will persist. The asymmetry is plausible since factor markets are flows

while the manufacturing base is a stock11; a decade is long enough for the former to dissipate a

shock, whereas the latter could be impacted permanently (e.g., Dumais, Ellison, and Glaeser

2002 and Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr 2010). Furthermore, it is worth recalling that organized-

sector manufacturing, which is the principal target of labor laws, employs a tiny fraction of the

labor force, so that any labor market spillover from labor laws in high versus low manufacturing

states to services should be relatively small.12 In Section 4.1, we use data from the NSS

Employment-Unemployment surveys to provide corroborative evidence that even in the short-

run there was no significant direct impact of labor regulations on wages in services.

        The other challenge to the validity of our instrumental variables approach is the existence

of state-specific time-varying trends or covariates that could be driving both manufacturing

growth and the adoption of employer-friendly labor laws. That is, while manufacturing and labor

laws are clearly pre-determined with respect to the outcomes we examine, they may still be

endogenous in the sense that they are driven by state-specific trends that also eventually affect

the service sector. We cannot fully address this concern, since with only two time periods we

cannot distinguish between state-specific time trends and time dummies and the latter would

fully absorb variation in our variable of interest. We can, however, examine the robustness of our
11
 This is particularly true in the Indian context where manufacturing firms adjust very slowly to external shocks.
12
  Employment in organized manufacturing (both private and public) was about 8 million in 1991 and in 2005. The
total non-agricultural labor force exceeded 200 million throughout these years.

                                                         25
results to the inclusion a time dummy interacted with baseline variables that might be correlated

with some of these time trends (such as gross state product, state population, or inter-state

migration). We present these results in Section 5.2 below.

       We also use manufacturing interacted with the service-sector-specific share of reliance on

manufacturing, zj, as an explanatory variable, which requires a second instrumental variable. For

this we use the further interaction of labor regulation, manufacturing in 1988-89, and zj. In

addition to the arguments outlined above, we also rely on the exogeneity of zj and the

excludability of the instrument. Exogeneity is plausible because our input-output data predate

our services data by two years; furthermore, zj is presumably determined primarily by

technology. The exclusion restriction is motivated similarly to above: just as the direct effect of

labor market regulations in high versus low manufacturing level states on services is likely to be

small, further variation of this effect with service-sector-specific manufacturing reliance should

be second order.

       Finally, in Section 5, we instrument for firm size using labor regulations interacted with

manufacturing in 1988-89 and average firm size by two-digit industry. Again, based on the

discussion above, we would argue that the direct impact of labor regulations on the service sector

should remain small even when interacted with firm size, especially when further interacted with

manufacturing levels by state. In order to avoid any simultaneity between firm size and services

growth, we use average firm size in the initial period in creating this interaction.




                                                 26
4. Results

We divide the discussion of our results into two sub-sections. We first present our results on the

relationship between manufacturing and services growth, and then present our results on capital

intensity, financial development, and services growth.




4.1 The Effect of Manufacturing Growth on Service-Sector Growth

In Table 5,we begin by presenting reduced-form estimates of the effect of labor regulations on

log yearly GVA in the service sector; although labor regulations will eventually (interacted with

1988-89 manufacturing) be used as an instrumental variable, the reduced-form estimates are a

useful starting point. The effect in the full sample, column (1), is positive and significant at the

one percent level. Since labor regulations most directly affect the manufacturing sector, which is

concentrated in urban areas and among larger firms, we expect the primary effect of labor

regulations to be on larger and urban service sector firms.

         Thus, in columns (2) to (5) of Table 5, we split the sample by urban and rural and by

small (four or less workers) and large (five or more workers) firms.13 As expected, we find the

smallest effect of labor regulations on small rural firms, and uniformly large effects on large and

urban service firms, with a 30 to 35 percent boost in service sector growth in employer-friendly

states. As we will split our subsequent results into the same four categories, it is important to

note an important qualification. In a repeated cross-section firm size is a potentially endogenous


13
  Note that we refer to firms with five or more workers as “large” relative to the size of firms in our sample: less
than 10 percent of firms in the overall sample have five or more workers. Even in the urban sample, the ninetieth
percentile firms in the firm-size distribution have five workers.

                                                          27
variable. Our motivation for using firm size dummies, rather than firm size, is precisely that it is

less likely that firms will grow between categories than simply grow in size. We believe that firm

size is a sufficiently important source of treatment effect heterogeneity that we, nonetheless,

present these results, bearing this caveat in mind.

         In columns (6) to (9) of Table 5, we add manufacturing growth variables. The direct

effect of manufacturing growth (i.e., the effect of manufacturing growth interacted with industry-

specific services demand, and hence the effect of manufacturing on services through the direct

demand channel) turns out to be positive and statistically significant for smaller firms, with the

effect of labor regulation preserved. The indirect effect of manufacturing growth (i.e., the main

effect of manufacturing growth and hence the indirect effect of manufacturing growth on service

sectors whose output is not used as an input in manufacturing) is positive and statistically

significant among large urban firms. In Appendix Tables 1 to 3, we present reduced-form results

for employment, wages, and productivity. Employer-friendly labor regulations have a negative

impact on employment and a positive effect on wages and productivity in large urban firms.

Manufacturing growth has a positive and statistically significant effect on productivity growth in

the service sector. Since manufacturing growth is simultaneously determined with services

growth, these results should not be interpreted causally.14 Hence, we proceed to use the

instrumental variables strategy outlined in Section 3.

         In Tables 6 to 10, we present instrumental variables estimates of the impact of

manufacturing on the service sector. In addition to instrumenting for manufacturing growth, we

14
  While it is tempting to interpret the significant effect of manufacturing on services, even after controlling for labor
regulations, as evidence for violation of the exclusion restriction, this is not a valid econometric test of the exclusion
restriction. Nonetheless, it does provide additional motivation for our strategy of allowing for a direct effect of labor
regulations on services, not channeled through manufacturing, and then instrumenting for manufacturing growth.
                                                           28
also instrument for the interaction between manufacturing growth and service-sector-specific

linkage to manufacturing. The instruments are labor regulations interacted with manufacturing

output value in 1988-89 and labor regulations interacted with manufacturing in 1988-89 and

service-sector-specific intensity of manufacturing. In Table 6, columns (1) and (2), we present

first-stage results for large urban firms, and see that these instruments are jointly significant at

the one-percent level; with F-statistics of 100 and 216 respectively, the relevance of these

instruments in predicting manufacturing growth is not in question.15 A concern with these results

is that we may be overstating the strength of the first stage because of within-state-and-industry

correlation among firms; although standard errors are clustered at the state level, with a small

number of states asymptotic standard errors may still be too low. In columns (3) and (4), we

present the first stages collapsed to the state-industry-round level, and continue to find that our

instruments retain their level of significance at all standard levels.

         While it is not possible within our data set to prove the validity of the exclusion

restriction, i.e., that labor regulations interacted with initial levels of manufacturing affect

services only through manufacturing, we can provide corroborative evidence using an additional

data source. In particular, we turn to rounds 38, 43, and 50 of the NSS Employment-

Unemployment Survey, the so-called “thick rounds” conducted in 1983, 1987-88 and 1993-94,

respectively, where we examine whether labor regulations affect wages in the service sector,

over and above their impact on manufacturing. Specifically, we regress real wages on: a set of

dummy variables for years since enactment of labor laws; state, year, and industry fixed effects;
15
  First stage results for the rural and small-firm samples are similar. In columns (5) to (8) we also confirm that these
instrumental variables pass more stringent weak- and under-identification tests. The minimum value of the Stock-
Yogo weak identification statistic is 24.6, exceeding suggested critical values (e.g., the commonly suggest rule of
thumb of 10). Likewise the Cragg-Donaladson statistic exceeds the critical value for under-identification.

                                                          29
and age, gender, and education dummies at the individual level. The results are summarized in

Figure 1, which depicts the estimated coefficients of the years-since-labor-law-enacted dummies.

After a few significant effects in the early years after the adoption of labor laws, the effects taper

off after five years and are both small in magnitude and not statistically significant at standard

levels. This corroborates the assumption that labor laws have a limited direct impact on the

service sector.

        In Table 6, columns (5) to (8), we examine our main hypothesis that there is a spillover

between manufacturing growth and service sector growth. The last of these columns considers

urban firms with five or more workers; we find that the direct effect of manufacturing growth is

positive and statistically significant at the one percent level. It shows that an additional one

percent growth in manufacturing leads to an 11.1 percent increase in the growth rate of urban

service firms in sectors whose reliance on manufacturing is 100 percent, or more realistically at

the average level of service-sector manufacturing reliance (0.2316) to a 2.58 percent increase in

overall services growth. Given the 38 percent growth in services observed between our data

rounds, this implies that approximately one quarter of service growth in GVA is explained by the

spillover from manufacturing. The indirect effect of manufacturing growth on large urban firms

(i.e., the main effect of manufacturing growth) has a positive sign but is not statistically

significant.

        The direct effect of manufacturing growth on small urban firms turns out to be negative

and statistically significant (Table 6, column (7)). This suggests that small and large firms are

substitutes; the jump in the growth rate of the latter comes partially at the expense of the former.

The direct effect of manufacturing growth on the growth in GVA of rural firms goes in the same

                                                  30
direction, although only the effect for larger firms is statistically significant. The indirect effects

are also not significant for rural firms.

        Continuing with the same specification, we examine the effect of manufacturing growth

on employment, wages, and worker productivity in Tables 7, 8, and 9, respectively. Similar to

GVA growth, in Table 7, for large urban firms, we find a positive direct effect of manufacturing

on employment growth,but an insignificant indirect effect. The magnitude of the former effect is

modest compared to the manufacturing effect on GVA. Relative to 10 percent between-round

employment growth, the manufacturing spillover accounts for about 8 percent of employment

growth. It is also worth noting that when we bootstrap standard errors in Section 5.4, this effect

is not statistically significant at standard levels.

        Consistent with an increased demand for labor, the direct effect on wages is positive and

statistically significant in large urban firms. Approximately 11 percent of the 18 percent

between-round wage growth is explained by the manufacturing spillover. Finally, both the direct

and indirect effects of manufacturing growth turn out to be positive and statistically significant

for gross value added per worker in large firms. This last result is particularly important as it

shows that manufacturing growth leads not only to size growth but also to productivity growth in

large urban services firms. Of the 28 percent between-round service growth, somewhat less than

half can be explained by the direct and indirect manufacturing effects.

        For smaller urban firms we find that the direct effect of manufacturing is a decrease in

employment, wages, and productivity, with the only positive effect being a positive indirect

effect on wages. For rural firms, whether large or small, the only significant effects are for



                                                       31
wages, which follow a similar pattern to urban firms (positive for larger firms, negative for

smaller firms).

        Overall, the results strongly support our hypothesis of a link between manufacturing and

services growth through the direct channel (of manufacturing growth affecting those service

sectors that rely on demand from manufacturing) and provide at best weak support for the

indirect channel (with a significant effect only for productivity). Our results are consistent with

our expectation that the growth of larger and urban firms is more likely to be linked to

manufacturing. There is also consistent evidence that as larger firms are growing and becoming

more productive smaller firms are contracting.



4.2 The Effect of Capital Intensity and Financial Development

Tables 6 to 9 also examine our second hypothesis regarding the growth in services, namely that

easier access to inputs in the post-liberalization period led to enhanced growth in capital

intensive services, which are expected to be more dependent on traded inputs. In column (6) of

Table 6, we see that the capital intensity variable has a positive and statistically significant effect

on services growth in large urban firms. The capital-intensity variable also turns up statistically

significantly with a positive sign in the gross value added equation for small-scale rural and

urban firms. It is statistically insignificant, although with a positive sign, in the case of large

rural firms. Interestingly, the positive effect of the capital-intensity variable carries over to gross

value added per worker across all categories of firms in Table 9. Assuming that our

hypothesized connection between capital intensity and the need for traded inputs is correct,

improved access to traded inputs has had a positive effect on services growth across the board.

                                                  32
        In Tables 6 and 9, the interaction of capital intensity and financial development is not

statistically significant for large urban firms. For small rural firms, it is negative and statistically

significant. This is consistent with better-developed financial markets channeling credit away

from rural firms, although given the imprecise and insignificant results for other firms it is

impossible to determine whether this credit is being channeled to larger or urban firms or away

from the service sector.

        The results for employment and wages in Tables 7 and 8 are inherently more difficult to

interpret. Access to capital could either be a substitute or a complement to labor demand.

Likewise an increase in employment driven by an outward shift in the demand curve would

increase wages for all workers, whereas skill-biased technological change could increase the

wages of high-skill workers while driving down the wages of low-skill workers (Verhoogen

2008). In Tables 7 and 8 we find some evidence for both of these. Capital intensity is associated

with wage growth among small and large urban firms, but a decrease in employment among

large firms and an increase in employment in smaller urban firms. Instead, financial

development, in those instances where it is significant, has a negative effect, hinting that growth

fueled by access to capital may be associated with reduced demand for workers.

        It is important to acknowledge a limitation to these results. Liberalization in access to

imported inputs predates the period we examine. Thus, it is possible that strongest direct effects

of improved access to imported inputs was experienced prior to the period we examine and that

we are simply picking up cross-sectional differences in industry growth trends.




                                                   33
5. An Extension and Robustness Checks


5.1 Is Firm Size a Mediator?

Our results in Section 4.1 suggest a large spillover effect from manufacturing to the service

sector. Since we see increases in productivity on the one hand and in size (total GVA and

employment) on the other, our results do not establish whether growth is due to firms increasing

in size or whether there is technological improvement, with firms becoming more productive at a

given size. This is inherently a difficult question in a repeated cross-section data set.

       Figures 2 to 4 provide circumstantial, if not causal, evidence by plotting the density of

productivity per worker in 2001-2 and 2006-07. In Figure 2 we see that the overall density of

worker productivity shifts right from 2001-02 to 2006-07. This pattern is accentuated in Figure 3

when we focus on firms with 5 or more workers. Even when we focus on very large firms (with

20 or more workers in Figure 4) we detect a rightward shift in the upper tail of productivity.

Thus, the results suggest that, even controlling for firm size, firms have become more productive.

       Table 10 presents a more formal test of this hypothesis by controlling for log employment

in our instrumental variables specification (equations (4) to (6)). As with manufacturing growth,

the econometric challenge is the simultaneity of firm size and our measures of firm behavior

such as GVA, wages, and productivity. Extending the strategy used in Tables 6 to 9 we

instrument for firm size by interacting average firm size in 2001-2 within two-digit sector with

employer-friendly labor regulations. We continue to instrument for the direct effect of

manufacturing growth on services growth and the interaction of manufacturing growth and

service-sector-specific manufacturing reliance; industry fixed effects pick up the direct effect of

average firm size by sector in 2001-02.
                                                  34
         The results in Table 10 suggest that of the two mechanisms—an increase in firm size and

an increase in productivity conditional on firm size—the latter is more important. Even after

controlling for firm size, we continue to find positive and statistically significant effects of

manufacturing on services. For log GVA we find that both indirect and direct manufacturing

effects are significant at the one percent level. The coefficient of the direct effect, which was

statistically significant in Table 6 as well, is essentially unchanged in value. For log wages, the

indirect effect remains insignificant but the direct effect of manufacturing through the demand

for service-sector output is now positive and statistically significant. For productivity, both

coefficients remain positive and statistically significant, and slightly larger in value than their

counterparts in Table 9 (although the difference is not statistically significant). The coefficient on

firm size is positive, albeit not statistically significant, for GVA, wages, and productivity.

         Thus our results suggest that the impact of manufacturing growth on services growth is

not only a story of firms growing larger, but also of firms growing more productive conditional

on size.16



5.2 Additional Time-Varying Controls

In this section, we examine the robustness of our results to the inclusion of additional time-vary

controls. Since our empirical strategy outlined in Sections 3.2 includes time and state fixed

effects, the primary concern is (trends in) time-varying covariates that could be correlated with

16
  Rather than use labor regulations interacted with average firm size by two-digit industry to instrument for firm
size, we can instead estimate the reference model in equations (15) to (17) and in Tables 6 to 9 using three
instruments and test for the validity of the over-identifying restrictions (using Hansen’s J-statistic; see Baum,
Schaffer and Stillman 2010). We fail to reject the null hypothesis of valid instruments at a 5 percent level of
significance or higher.


                                                         35
the adoption of labor regulations and/or levels of manufacturing in 1988, the interaction of which

is our key instrumental variable. Since we have only two time periods in our data, it is not

possible to distinguish time trends from the time dummies that we already include.

       We can, however, examine the robustness of our results to including the interaction of a

range of initial conditions that could be correlated both with labor laws and manufacturing with a

time dummy. The results for large urban firms are presented in Table 11, where we interact gross

state product, state population, and inter-state migration with a time-dummy (and where the

direct effect of these variables is absorbed by the state dummies). The results are very similar to

those presented in Tables 6 to 9. Indeed, the only notable difference is that for productivity, in

column (4), the main effect of manufacturing is no longer statistically significant, although the

interaction with industry-specific manufacturing demand remains statistically significant at

standard levels and comparable in magnitude to Table 9, column (4).



5.3 Excluding Liberalized Service Sectors

Although the bulk of liberalization that occurred in the period we study was focused on

manufacturing, there is a lingering concern that some of the services growth we are picking up

could be due to direct reforms in the service sector. In this section we address this issue by

excluding from the analysis those services sectors that were affected by liberalizing reforms:

passenger and cargo air travel, courier services, and telecommunications. We also exclude all

business services, which were largely made possible by the liberalization of the

telecommunication sector, and travel agents, whose services were a direct outgrowth of the



                                                 36
increasing options for passenger air travel. Banking is excluded in any case since it does not

appear in round 57.

          For brevity, we present results only for urban firms in Table 12. The pattern of the results

is similar to the relevant columns in Tables 6 to 9, although magnitudes are somewhat smaller.

We continue to find a statistically significant and positive spillover from manufacturing to large

urban service firms for those service sectors that provide inputs to manufacturing. Overall Table

12 confirms that our main results are not being driven by direct deregulation of the service

sector.



5.4 Bootstrapped Standard Errors

A concern with our results is that clustered standard errors, which are appropriate given the state-

level variation of our treatment of interest, could understate estimation uncertainty because the

small number of states (15) might make asymptotic approximations unreliable. Following

Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) and Cameron and Miller (2013), we use the wild cluster

bootstrap to approximate the small-sample distribution of our key parameters of interest. The

results are presented in Appendix Table 4. The coefficient on manufacturing growth interacted

with industry-specific manufacturing demand remains statistically significant at standard levels

for GVA, wages, and productivity; for employment the bootstrapped p-value is 0.126. The main

effect of manufacturing growth remains significant at standard levels for productivity. Thus, with

the exception of total employment, our findings remain unchanged.17


17
  It is not entirely surprising that the employment effect is the least statistically significant of our results. Qualitative
evidence presented in Dehejia and Panagariya (2012) points to relatively small employment growth in absolute
magnitude over this period.
                                                             37
6. Concluding Remarks

Recent growth in India has been unconventional: while manufacturing growth has accelerated

following trade liberalization and other pro-market reforms, services growth has accelerated far

more. The result has been that the share of manufacturing in GDP has remained constant while

that of services has expanded significantly.

       The literature to date (Besley and Burgess 2004, Aghion, Burgess, Redding, and Zilibotti

2008, and Hasan, Mitra, and Ramaswamy 2007) has been exclusively devoted to explaining the

growth in manufacturing. This is natural since at least some of the earlier reforms, such as tariff

reductions and the end to industrial and import licensing, had been aimed at industry. Yet, the

observed pattern of growth raises the question: why have services grown rapidly?

       In this paper, we have taken a first stab at trying to explain the unusually high growth in

services. A novel feature of our analysis, not present in the previous studies of services cited

above, is the use of micro, firm-level data. This approach allows us to distinguish between the

response to the reforms by small versus large and rural versus urban firms. In so far as it is large

and urban firms that are more likely to be integrated into the market economy, reforms are more

likely to impact those firms.

       In our preferred specification that uses an instrumental variable for identification, we find

evidence for the positive and statistically significant direct effect of manufacturing growth (i.e.,

the effect operating through the use of services by manufacturing) on the growth of GVA in large

urban services firms. We also find that the direct effect on smaller urban firms is negative and


                                                 38
statistically significant suggesting that large and small firms are substitutes.18The indirect effect

of manufacturing growth on services is typically not statistically significant.

         For large urban firms, we also find a positive direct effect of growth in manufacturing on

employment growth and an insignificant indirect effect. Both the direct and indirect effects of

manufacturing growth on gross value added per worker in large urban firms turn out to be

positive and statistically significant. This last result is particularly important as it shows that

manufacturing growth leads not only to size growth but also to productivity growth in large

urban services firms.

         In the context of our theoretical model, our results are consistent with the direct spillover

from manufacturing to services, but do not provide support for significant indirect effect, either

through income or general equilibrium price effects. Increased worker productivity in services is

consistent with the positive scale economies built into our model. At the same time the pattern of

results comparing urban to rural and larger to smaller firms suggests the possibility of a richer

model incorporating heterogeneity within the service sector. In particular, the contrast of the

positive spillover of manufacturing on larger service firms with the negative effect on smaller

service firms suggests several possibilities: that more productive firms are expanding while less

productive firms are contracting; that smaller and larger firms produce a different range of

services, with growth opportunities centered on the latter; or that worker human capital is being

sorted by firm size, with growth opportunities favoring highly skilled workers. While it is

beyond the purview of the present paper, this suggests an interesting agenda for future work.

18
  This effect is similar to one of the results in Sundaram, Ahsan and Mitra (2012). These authors find
substitutability between organized and unorganized sector manufacturing firms in states with less restrictive labor
laws.

                                                         39
                                            References

Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen J. Redding, Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2008. “The Unequal

       Effects of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India.”

       American Economic Review 98 (4), 1397–1412.

Baum, C.F, Schaffer M.E., and S. Stillman. 2010. “ivreg2: Stata Module for Extended

       Instrumental Variables/ 2SLS, GMM, and AC/HAC, LIML, and k-class regression.”

       Manuscript at http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s425401.html.

Bas, Maria. 2013. “Does Services Liberalization Affect Manufacturing Firms’ Export

       Performance.” Working Paper No. 2013-17, Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et

       d’Informations Internationales, Paris, France.

Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. 2004. “Can Regulation Hinder Economic Performance?

       Evidence from India.”The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1), 91–134.

Bustos, P., B. Caprettini, and J. Ponticelli. 2014. “Agricultural Productivity and Structural

       Transformation: Evidence from Brazil.” Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 14-07,

       University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Buera, Francisco, and Joesph Kaboski. 2012. “The Rise of the Service Economy.” American

       Economic Review 102(6), 2540-69.

Cameron, Collin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for

       Inference with Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 414-427.

Cameron, Collin, and Douglas Miller. 2013. “A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust

       Inference.” Forthcoming Journal of Human Resources.



                                                 40
Chenery, Hollis. 1960. “Patterns of Industrial Growth.” American Economic Review 50(4) , 624–

       654.

Ghosh, B. and P. De. 2004. “How Do Different Categories of Infrastructure Affect

       Development? Evidence from Indian States.” Economic and Political Weekly, October

       16, 2004, 4645–4657.

Dehejia, Rajeev, and Arvind Panagariya. 2012. “Services Growth in India: A Look Inside the

       Black Box.” In Reforms and Economic Transformation in India, ed. Jagdish Bhagwati

       and Arvind Panagariya. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 86–118.

Dixit, Avinash, and Victor Norman. 1980. Theory of International Trade: A Dual, General

       Equilibrium Approach, Cambridge University Press.

Dumais, Guy, Glenn Ellison, and Edward L. Glaeser,. 2002. “Geographic Concentration as a

       Dynamic Process.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 84(2), 193–204.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Poonam Gupta. 2009. “Two Waves of Services Growth.” National

       Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 14968, National Bureau of Economic

       Research, Cambridge, MA.

Frank, Charles R., Jr., Kwang Suk Kim and Larry E. Westphal. 1975. Foreign Trade Regimes

       and Economic Development: South Korea. New York: National Bureau of Economic

       Research.

Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr. 2010. “What Causes Industry

       Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns.” American Economic Review

       100, Number 3, 1195-1213.



                                             41
Goldberg, P., A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova. 2010. “Imported Intermediate Inputs

       and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       125, Number 4, 1727-1767.

Government of India. 2005. “Input-Output Transaction Table, 1998-99.” Central Statistical

       Organization, Department of Statistics, Ministry of Statistics and Program

       Implementation.

Gupta, P., R. Hasan, and U. Kumar. 2008. “Big Reforms but Small Payoffs: Explaining the

       Weak Record of Growth in Indian Manufacturing.” India Policy Forum 5, 59–123.

Hanlon, W. Walker, and Antonio Miscio. 2013. “Agglomeration: A Dynamic Approach.”

       manuscript.

Harrison, Ann, Leslie Martin, and Shanthi Nataraj. 2013. “Learning versus Stealing: How

       Important Are Market-Share Reallocations to India’s Productivity Growth?” World Bank

       Economic Review 27(2), 202-228.

Hasan, R., D. Mitra, and K.V. Ramaswamy. 2007. “Trade reforms, labor regulations, and labor

       demand elasticities: Empirical evidence from India.”Review of Economics and Statistics,

       89(3), 466–81.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1984. “Increasing returns, imperfect markets, and trade theory.” In

       Handbook of International Economics, Volume 1,ed. R. W. Jones and P. B. Kenen.

       London: Elsevier, 325–365.

Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Ákos Valentinyi. 2011. “Growth and Structural

       Transformation.” Manuscript.



                                              42
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and

       India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1403-1448.

Khandelwal, Amit, and Petia Topalova. 2011. “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The

       Case of India.” Review of Economic Studies 93(3), 995-1009.

Kongsamut, Piyabha, Sergio Rebelo and Danyang Xie. 1999. “Beyond Balanced Growth.”

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6159, National Bureau of

       Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Krugman, P. R. 1979. “Increasing returns, monopolistic competition and international

       trade.” Journal of International Economics 9, 469–479.

Kuznets, Simon. 1957. “Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations: II, Industrial

       Distribution of National Product and Labor Force.” Economic Development and Cultural

       Change 5(4), supplement, 1–111.

Kuznets, Simon. 1973. “Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections.” American

       Economic Review 63(3), 247–258.

Kuznets, Simon. 1979. “Growth and Structural Shifts.” In Economic Growth and Structural

       Change in Taiwan: The Postwar Experience of the Republic of China, ed. Walter

       Galenson. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 15-131.

Marc J. Melitz. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate

       Industry Productivity.” Econometrica 71(6), 1695–1725.

McCaig, B., and N. Pavcnik. 2013. “Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Vietnam.”

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19616, National Bureau of

       Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

                                              43
Nataraj, Shanti. 2011. “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity: Evidence from

       India’s Formal and Informal Manufacturing Sectors.” Journal of International Economics

       85(2), 292-301.

Ngai, Rachel, and Christopher Pissarides. 2007. “Structural Change in a Multisector Model of

       Growth.” American Economic Review 97(1), 429–443.

Panagariya, Arvind. 1981. “Variable returns to scale in production and patterns of

       specialization.”American Economic Review 71 (1), 221–30.

Panagariya, Arvind. 1988. “A Theoretical Explanation of Some Stylized Facts of Economic

       Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103(3), 509–526.

Panagariya, Arvind. 2008. India: The Emerging Giant. New York: Oxford University Press.

Reserve Bank of India. 2013. Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy. At

       http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/AnnualPublications.aspx?head=Handbook%20of%20Statist

       ics%20on%20Indian%20Economy (accessed on October 30, 2013).

Sundaram, Asha, Reshad N. Ahsan and Devashish Mitra. 2012. “Complementarity between

       Organized and Unorganized Manufacturing in India: The Role of Policies and

       Institutions.” Working Paper 2012–1, Columbia Program on Indian Economic Policies,

       Columbia University, New York, NY.

Verhoogen, Eric. 2008. “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican

       Manufacturing Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2), 489–530.

Yoo, Jungho. 1997. “Neoclassical Versus Revisionist View of Korean Economic Growth”,

       Harvard Institute for International Development, Development Discussion Paper No. 588,

       Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

                                               44
45
                                               Figure 1


               .4                   Effect of labor laws on services
As a proportion of mean wages
    -.2        0
               -.4     .2




                                0         5                       10         15
                                      Years since enactment of labor laws

                                              Labor law effect on services
                                              +/- 2 se




                                                   46
Figure 2




  47
Figure 3




  48
Figure 4




  49
Table 1: Average annual growth in agriculture, industry and services in selected developing countries
Country and period     GDP       Agriculture      Industry     Services
South Korea
1954-62                   4.2           2.6           11.6            4.4
1963-72                   9.5           4.7           17.3            10
Taiwan
1951-53 to 1961-63         7            4.9           11.5             7.6
1961-63 to 1971-73        10            4.4           15.3            10.3
India
1991-92 to 2002-03        5.6           2.3            5.6            7.1
2003-04 to 2011-11        8.4           4.1             8             9.7
Sources: Frank, Kim and Westphal (1975, Table 2-4, p. 11) for South Korea,
Kuznets (1979, Tables 1.8 and 1.10) for Taiwan, and the authors' calculations
using the data in the Reserve Bank of India Handbook, 2013 (Table 3) for
Table 2: Summary statistics by round
                                           Round 57    Round 63      Round 57        Round 57        Round 63          Round 63
Sample                       Full sample                              Rural           Urban           Rural             Urban

Variables                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)

Yearly GVA                     74424         46895      101368          31186          70311            33606           192599
                             (24117384)    (713495)   (33918092)      (242525)       (1085954)        (188323)        (51954497)

ln(yearly GVA)                  10.02        9.998        10.04        9.771           10.34            9.782            10.38
                               (1.117)      (1.052)      (1.177)      (1.007)         (1.025)          (1.076)          (1.219)

ln(wage per worker)             8.092        8.851        7.698        8.719           8.958            7.232            8.187
                               (1.554)      (0.866)      (1.681)      (0.891)         (0.831)          (1.654)          (1.566)

Total workers employed          1.836        1.827        1.844        1.643           2.102            1.541            2.254
                               (27.16)      (3.806)      (37.98)      (2.537)         (5.135)          (2.080)          (58.20)

ln(total workers employed)      0.340        0.351        0.330        0.305           0.419            0.263            0.421
                               (0.559)      (0.562)      (0.555)      (0.501)         (0.635)          (0.468)          (0.644)

ln(GVA per worker)              9.677        9.646        9.706        9.465           9.915            9.518            9.960
                               (0.977)      (0.914)      (1.034)      (0.933)         (0.814)          (1.028)          (0.988)

Observations                  446,883    301,995    144,888           117,081         184,914          61,069            83,819
Weight observations          26,914,341 13,275,528 13,638,813        7,945,199       5,330,330       7,842,158         5,796,655

Notes: Mean coefficients; standard deviation in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS.
Table 3: Summary statistics by state
                                                             By firm                                                                       By state
                                                            ln(total         ln(wage per        ln(GVA per        Pro-employer Financial develop- Manufacturing Manufacturing,
Variable            ln(yearly GVA) Total employment       employment)          worker)            worker)       labor regulations ment dummy          growth    Rs 10 billion
Sample              Rounds 57, 63   Rounds 57, 63        Rounds 57, 63      Rounds 57, 63      Rounds 57, 63                                        1998-1999 1988-1989

States                   (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)              (6)              (7)             (8)            (9)

Andhra Pradesh          9.763              1.939             0.414               7.207             9.347               1                1             7.800          1.586
                      (0.00507)           (0.127)          (0.00258)           (0.0118)          (0.00441)
Assam                   9.978              1.464             0.205               7.949             9.774               0                0             10.30          0.210
                      (0.00858)           (0.216)          (0.00439)           (0.0218)          (0.00747)
Bihar                   9.961              1.507             0.279               8.025             9.682               0                0             3.500          1.727
                      (0.00585)           (0.147)          (0.00299)           (0.0154)          (0.00510)
Gujarat                 10.52              2.033             0.354               8.885             10.16               1                1             15.10          2.846
                      (0.00757)           (0.191)          (0.00387)           (0.0185)          (0.00659)
Haryana                 10.44              1.862             0.342               8.173             10.09               0                1             9.200          1.018
                       (0.0114)           (0.285)          (0.00578)           (0.0236)          (0.00992)
Karnataka               9.958              2.148             0.392               8.147             9.567               1                1             7.600          1.451
                      (0.00723)           (0.182)          (0.00370)           (0.0158)          (0.00630)
Kerala                  10.44              2.024             0.377               8.577             10.05               0                1             6.200          0.676
                      (0.00719)           (0.179)          (0.00364)           (0.0135)          (0.00626)
Madhya Pradesh          9.964              2.143              0.43                8.05             9.534               0                0             -1.800         1.267
                      (0.00888)           (0.223)          (0.00453)           (0.0188)          (0.00773)
Maharashtra              10.4              2.148             0.422               8.558             9.974               1                1             10.60          6.146
                      (0.00527)           (0.133)          (0.00269)           (0.0112)          (0.00459)
Orissa                  9.435              1.811             0.354               8.334             9.082               0                0             26.30          0.663
                      (0.00796)           (0.200)          (0.00405)           (0.0224)          (0.00693)
Punjab                  10.42              1.797             0.275                8.59             10.14               0                0             6.700          1.074
                      (0.00936)           (0.235)          (0.00477)           (0.0236)          (0.00815)
Rajasthan               10.25              1.905             0.377              9.001              9.874               1                0             6.700          0.762
                      (0.00792)           (0.196)          (0.00398)           (0.0199)          (0.00690)
Tamil Nadu              10.26              2.152              0.48              8.495              9.776               1                1             10.30          2.882
                      (0.00593)           (0.149)          (0.00302)           (0.0132)          (0.00516)
Uttar Pradesh           9.818              1.722             0.325              7.816               9.49               0                0             5.800          3.149
                      (0.00391)          (0.0973)          (0.00198)           (0.0102)          (0.00340)
West Bengal             9.766              1.441             0.172              7.328              9.595               0                0             6.400          2.493
                      (0.00449)           (0.113)          (0.00229)           (0.0120)          (0.00391)

Observations           442,659           446,877            446,877            142,926            442,659             15               15              15             15

Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS.
Table 4: Share of service sector output used as input in manufacturing
  Sector                          Share used as input in manufacturing
  Other transport services                        0.30
  Storage and warehousing                         0.00
  Communication                                   0.23
  Trade                                           0.39
  Hotels and restaurants                          0.01
  Banking                                         0.45
  Insurance                                       0.43
  Ownership of dwellings                          0.00
  Education and research                          0.00
  Medical and health                              0.00
  Other services                                  0.34
  Note: Uses shares from Matrix 3 of 1998-1999 input-output tables.
Table 5: The effect of manufacturing on ln(yearly GVA) in services, fixed effect estimates
Sample                                                                    Full sample      < 5 workers      < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      < 5 workers       < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers
                                                                                              Rural            Urban            Rural            Urban            Rural             Urban            Rural            Urban

Variables                                                                     (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)


Labor regulations x 1(Year=2005-6)                                          0.412***         0.154***         0.349***         0.340***         0.301***         0.383***         0.359***         0.351***         0.278***
                                                                             [0.016]          [0.014]          [0.012]          [0.032]          [0.007]          [0.120]          [0.088]          [0.032]          [0.012]
Manufacturing growth                                                                                                                                               0.002            0.007            0.005          0.010**
                                                                                                                                                                  [0.011]          [0.008]          [0.020]          [0.004]
Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services                                                                                                         0.065**          -0.043**           0.063            0.026
                                                                                                                                                                  [0.025]          [0.018]          [0.052]          [0.037]

Observations                                                                345,482         122,374         190,292          7,329             25,487           122,374          190,292             7,329            25,487
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Table 6: The effect of manufacturing on ln(yearly GVA) in services, IV Estimates
                                                                                                             Manufacturing growth                         Manufacturing growth
                                                                                                              x industry-specific       Manufacturing       x industry-specific
Dependent variable                                                                      Manufacturing growth        demand                  growth                demand          log(GVA)        log(GVA)        log(GVA)        log(GVA)
Specification                                                                               First stage           First stage             First stage           First stage           IV              IV              IV              IV
                                                                                        NIC, state, and year NIC, state, and year       NIC, state, and    NIC, state, and year NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and
                                                                                                 FE                   FE                   year FE                  FE             year FE         year FE         year FE         year FE
Sample                                                                                      ≥ 5 workers           ≥ 5 workers            ≥ 5 workers            ≥ 5 workers      < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers     < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers
                                                                                               Urban                 Urban                  Urban                  Urban            Rural           Rural           Urban           Urban
                                                                                                                                      Aggregated to state- Aggregated to state-
                                                                                             Micro sample           Micro sample         sector-round          sector-round

Variables                                                                                         (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)                 (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)

Manufacturing growth                                                                                                                                                                   -0.098           -0.008           -0.020            0.009
                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.068]          [0.064]          [0.023]          [0.009]
Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services                                                                                                                               -0.041           0.121*          -0.076***        0.111***
                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.066]          [0.066]          [0.023]          [0.034]
Capital intensive sector                                                                                                                                                              0.637***           0.151          1.044***         0.626***
                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.084]          [0.374]          [0.098]          [0.139]
Capital intensive sector x Financial development dummy                                                                                                                                  0.002          -0.395***         -0.140           -0.156
                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.181]          [0.106]          [0.095]          [0.134]
Labor regulations x 1988 State manufacturing                                                   0.770***                -0.032               0.851***               -0.033
                                                                                                [0.070]                [0.025]               [0.044]               [0.029]
Labor regulations x 1988 State manufacturing x manufacturing demand for services                -0.126                1.768***                0.073               2.152***
                                                                                                [0.109]                [0.089]               [0.072]               [0.141]

Observations                                                                                    25,648                 25,648                 229                   229               122,374           7,329           190,292           25,487
F-test for IV                                                                                    100                    216                   191                   122
Under-id LM test                                                                                                                                                                        973              41.9             6500             1053
Weak-id test                                                                                                                                                                            600              30.3             4547             777

Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Instruments for Manufacturing growth and Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services are Labor regulations x 1988 Manufacturing and Labor regulation x manufacturing demand for services.
Table 7: The effect of manufacturing on ln(total employment) in services, IV estimates
Specification                                                                        IV              IV              IV              IV
                                                                               NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and
                                                                                  year FE         year FE         year FE         year FE
Sample                                                                          < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers     < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers
                                                                                   Rural           Rural           Urban           Urban

Variables                                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)

Manufacturing growth                                                                -0.007           -0.008            0.000           -0.004
                                                                                    [0.007]          [0.021]          [0.002]          [0.005]
Manufacturing growth x industry-specific manufacturing demand                       -0.009            0.055          -0.021***        0.033***
                                                                                    [0.008]          [0.058]          [0.007]          [0.010]
Capital intensive sector                                                             0.028         -0.391***          0.125**         -0.244**
                                                                                    [0.094]          [0.100]          [0.048]          [0.097]
Capital intensive sector x Financial development dummy                             -0.113**         -0.131**          -0.073           -0.079
                                                                                    [0.038]          [0.050]          [0.045]          [0.078]

Observations                                                                       123,648           7,417           192,023           25,645
Under-id LM test                                                                     953              44.5            6472              996
Weak-id test                                                                         582              33.8            4522              719
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All
specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Instruments for Manufacturing growth and
Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services are Labor regulations x 1988 Manufacturing and Labor regulation x manufacturing
demand for services.
Table 8: The effect of manufacturing on ln(wage per worker) in services, IV estimates
Specification                                                         IV              IV              IV              IV
                                                                NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and
                                                                   year FE         year FE         year FE         year FE
Sample                                                           < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers     < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers
                                                                     Rural           Rural          Urban           Urban

Variables                                                             (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)

Manufacturing growth                                            0.050                 -0.062           0.045*            -0.011
                                                               [0.062]                [0.063]          [0.025]          [0.018]
Manufacturing growth x industry-specific manufacturing demand -0.171**                0.096*         -0.447***          0.083*
                                                               [0.060]                [0.046]          [0.056]          [0.043]
Capital intensive sector                                       -0.105                  0.034          0.375***         0.468***
                                                               [0.215]                [0.232]          [0.089]          [0.093]
Capital intensive sector x Financial development dummy        -0.517***              -0.196**        -0.348***          -0.082
                                                               [0.095]                [0.089]          [0.091]          [0.109]

Observations                                                          30,159            7,128           55,718           25,168
Under-id LM test                                                        227              43.7            1148             987
Weak-id test                                                            142              33.4            955              725
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the
NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Instruments for
Manufacturing growth and Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services are Labor regulations x 1988
Manufacturing and Labor regulation x manufacturing demand for services.
Table 9: The effect of manufacturing on ln(GVA per worker) in services, IV estimates
Specification                                                              IV              IV              IV              IV
                                                                     NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and NIC, state, and
                                                                        year FE         year FE         year FE         year FE
Sample                                                                < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers     < 5 workers     ≥ 5 workers
                                                                          Rural           Rural          Urban           Urban

Variables                                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)

Manufacturing growth                                                      -0.090           -0.003           -0.020          0.013**
                                                                          [0.063]         [0.045]           [0.022]          [0.005]
Manufacturing growth x industry-specific manufacturing demand             -0.035           0.066           -0.055**         0.078**
                                                                          [0.066]         [0.064]           [0.022]          [0.026]
Capital intensive sector                                                 0.608***         0.542*           0.919***         0.871***
                                                                          [0.114]         [0.285]           [0.061]          [0.082]
Capital intensive sector x Financial development dummy                     0.117          -0.256*           -0.067           -0.077
                                                                          [0.200]         [0.121]           [0.085]          [0.079]

Observations                                                                 122,374          7,329           190,292         25,487
Under-id LM test                                                               945             44.5             6414           1001
Weak-id test                                                                   574             33.9             4469           731
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All
specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Instruments for Manufacturing
growth and Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services are Labor regulations x 1988 Manufacturing and Labor
regulation x manufacturing demand for services.
Table 10: The effect of manufacturing on services controlling for size, IV estimates
Dependent variable                                              ln(GVA)      ln(wage per worker) ln(GVA per worker)
Specification                                                      IV                 IV                  IV
                                                             NIC, state, and NIC, state, and year  NIC, state, and
                                                                year FE               FE               year FE
Sample                                                        ≥ 5 workers        ≥ 5 workers         ≥ 5 workers
                                                                 Urban              Urban               Urban

Variables                                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)

Manufacturing growth                                            0.021**               0.012              0.023**
                                                                 [0.008]             [0.011]              [0.008]
Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services        0.090**               0.100              0.091**
                                                                 [0.035]             [0.058]              [0.034]
Growth in ln(employment) between round 57 to 63                   1.404               2.959                1.281
                                                                 [1.149]             [1.887]              [0.924]
Capital intensive sector                                        0.908***            0.602***             0.934***
                                                                 [0.093]             [0.100]              [0.092]
Capital intensive sector x Financial development dummy           -0.063              -0.081               -0.065
                                                                 [0.066]             [0.074]              [0.062]

Observations                                                        25,487                25,168              25,487
Under-id LM test                                                      28.2                 26.8                28.2
Weak-id test                                                          5.90                 5.75                5.90
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by
the NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Instruments for Manufacturing growth, Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services, and growth in
ln(employment) are Labor regulations x 1988 Manufacturing, Labor regulation x manufacturing demand for services,
and Labor regulation x average-firm-size by two-digit industry.
Table 11: Including additional time-varying covariates
                                                                         (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
Dependent variable                                                    ln(GVA)     ln(total employment) ln(wage per worker) ln(GVA per worker)
Specification                                                            IV                  IV                 IV                  IV
Sample                                                              ≥ 5 workers        ≥ 5 workers         ≥ 5 workers         ≥ 5 workers
                                                                       urban               urban              urban               urban
VARIABLES                                                          NIC & state FE    NIC & state FE       NIC & state FE     NIC & state FE

Manufacturing growth                                                    0.138               0.085                 0.055             0.052
                                                                       [0.098]             [0.062]               [0.050]           [0.038]
Manufacturing growth x industry-specific manufacturing demand         0.109***            0.032***               0.082*            0.077**
                                                                       [0.034]             [0.010]               [0.043]           [0.027]
Capital intensive sector x Financial development dummy                 -0.164              -0.084                -0.075            -0.079
                                                                       [0.136]             [0.079]               [0.108]           [0.080]
Manufacturing in 1988 x 1(Year=2005/6)                                 -0.432              -0.269                -0.168            -0.162
                                                                       [0.274]             [0.187]               [0.124]           [0.097]
Gross state product 1999-2000 x 1(Year=2005/6)                         -0.000              -0.000                 0.000             0.000
                                                                       [0.001]             [0.001]               [0.001]           [0.001]
State population 1991 x 1(Year=2005/6)                                0.000024            0.000017               [0.043]           [0.027]
                                                                       [0.000]             [0.000]              0.000005          0.000007
Inter-state migration flows 1991-2001 x 1(Year=2005/6)                0.000380            0.000273               [0.000]           [0.000]
                                                                       [0.000]             [0.000]              0.000047          0.000104

Observations                                                              25,487              25,645               25,168          25,487
Hansen J-stat p-val                                                        0.064              0.094                  0.13           0.29
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the
NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Instruments
for Manufacturing growth and Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services are Labor regulations x 1988
Manufacturing, Labor regulation x manufacturing demand for services, and Labor regulation x average-firm-size by two-digit
industry.
Table 12:Dropping deregulated service sectors
                                                                           (1)                (2)                    (3)                  (4)
Dependent variable                                                      ln(GVA)     ln(total employment)     ln(wages per worker) ln(GVA per worker)
Specification                                                              IV                  IV                     IV                   IV
Sample                                                                ≥ 5 workers         ≥ 5 workers            ≥ 5 workers          ≥ 5 workers
                                                                         urban               urban                  urban                urban
VARIABLES                                                            NIC & state FE     NIC & state FE          NIC & state FE      NIC & state FE

Manufacturing growth                                                      0.006              -0.004                  -0.026                  0.010
                                                                         [0.009]             [0.005]                 [0.020]               [0.006]
Manufacturing growth x industry-specific manufacturing demand           0.137***             0.026**                0.101***               0.110***
                                                                         [0.042]             [0.011]                 [0.023]               [0.031]
Capital intensive sector x Financial development dummy                   -0.168              -0.081                  -0.042                 -0.085
                                                                         [0.120]             [0.082]                 [0.079]               [0.068]

Observations
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results 22,625
                                                                            are weighted using22,769                  22,326
                                                                                                survey weights provided                     22,625
                                                                                                                          by the NSS. All specifications
include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects and exclude the following sectors: business services, air cargo services, renting of air
transport equipment, air transport support services, and travel agencies, courier services, telecom services, . *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Instruments for Manufacturing growth and Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services are Labor regulations x 1988 Manufacturing
Appendix Table 1: The effect of manufacturing on ln(total employment) in services, fixed effect estimates
Sample                                                                    Full sample      < 5 workers      < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      < 5 workers       < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers
                                                                                              Rural            Urban            Rural            Urban            Rural             Urban            Rural            Urban

Variables                                                                     (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)


Labor regulations x 1(Year=2005-6)                                          0.048***         0.043***         0.057***         -0.070***        -0.096***        0.048***         0.055***         -0.067***        -0.100***
                                                                             [0.005]          [0.007]          [0.003]          [0.008]          [0.015]          [0.009]          [0.006]          [0.008]          [0.015]
Manufacturing growth                                                                                                                                               0.002            0.002           -0.008           -0.002
                                                                                                                                                                  [0.002]          [0.001]          [0.006]          [0.003]
Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services                                                                                                          -0.004          -0.023**           0.008           -0.001
                                                                                                                                                                  [0.010]          [0.008]          [0.016]          [0.015]

Observations                                                                345,482          122,374          190,292           7,329            25,487          122,374          192,023            7,329           25,487
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Appendix Table 2: The effect of manufacturing on ln(wage per worker) in services, fixed effect estimates
Sample                                                                     Full sample      < 5 workers      < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      < 5 workers       < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers
                                                                                               Rural            Urban            Rural            Urban            Rural             Urban            Rural            Urban

Variables                                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)               (9)


Labor regulations x 1(Year=2005-6)                                          0.339***         0.245***          0.283***         0.239***         0.289***          -0.237*           0.102           0.237***         0.309***
                                                                             [0.011]          [0.029]           [0.028]          [0.015]          [0.022]          [0.124]          [0.141]           [0.030]          [0.032]
Manufacturing growth                                                                                                                                                 0.021          0.045**           -0.000            0.007
                                                                                                                                                                   [0.017]          [0.017]           [0.017]          [0.005]
Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services                                                                                                            -0.022         -0.287**            0.043            0.036
                                                                                                                                                                   [0.088]          [0.120]           [0.030]          [0.034]

Observations                                                                 118,173         30,159           55,718          7,128             25,168            30,159           55,718              7,128            25,168
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Appendix Table 3: The effect of manufacturing on ln(GVA per worker) in services, fixed effect estimates
Sample                                                                    Full sample      < 5 workers      < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      < 5 workers       < 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers      ≥ 5 workers
                                                                                              Rural            Urban            Rural            Urban            Rural             Urban            Rural            Urban

Variables                                                                     (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)


Labor regulations x 1(Year=2005-6)                                          0.409***         0.185***         0.351***         0.348***         0.301***         0.426***         0.369***         0.359***         0.394***
                                                                             [0.013]          [0.014]          [0.011]          [0.029]          [0.026]          [0.117]          [0.084]          [0.029]          [0.009]
Manufacturing growth                                                                                                                                               0.001            0.004            0.013          0.012***
                                                                                                                                                                  [0.012]          [0.009]          [0.015]          [0.003]
Manufacturing growth x manufacturing demand for services                                                                                                         0.068***          -0.020            0.055            0.028
                                                                                                                                                                  [0.022]          [0.015]          [0.043]          [0.026]

Observations                                                                345,482          122,374          190,292           7,329            25,487          122,374          190,292            7,329           25,487
Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All specifications include state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Table A4: The effect of manufacturing on services, IV estimates, bootstrapped standard errors
Specification                                                                IV                   IV                    IV                     IV
                                                                      NIC, state, and   NIC, state, and year   NIC, state, and year   NIC, state, and year
                                                                          year FE                 FE                    FE                     FE
Sample                                                                  < 5 workers          ≥ 5 workers           < 5 workers            ≥ 5 workers
                                                                           Rural                 Rural                Urban                  Urban
Outcome                                                               ln(Yearly GVA)    ln(total employment)   ln(wage per worker)    ln(GVA per worker)

Variables                                                                   (1)                  (2)                    (3)                    (4)

Manufacturing growth                                                      0.009                -0.004                 -0.011                 0.013
  p-value from asymptotic standard error                                  0.327                 0.53                  0.529                  0.028
  p-value from bootstrapped standard error                                0.284                 0.60                  0.904                  0.002

Manufacturing growth x industry-specific manufacturing demand             0.111                 0.033                  0.083                 0.078
  p-value from asymptotic standard error                                  0.006                 0.005                  0.072                 0.021
  p-value from bootstrapped standard error                                0.082                 0.126                  0.062                 0.098

Observations                                                             122,374                7,329                190,292                 25,487

Notes: Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses. All results are weighted using survey weights provided by the NSS. All specifications include
state, year, and two-digit industry fixed effects. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Instruments for Manufacturing growth and Manufacturing growth x
manufacturing demand for services are Labor regulations x 1988 Manufacturing and Labor regulation x manufacturing demand for services.
