NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTIVENESS OF MANDATORY MORTGAGE COUNSELING:
CAN ONE DISSUADE BORROWERS FROM CHOOSING RISKY MORTGAGES?
Sumit Agarwal
Gene Amromin
Itzhak Ben-David
Souphala Chomsisengphet
Douglas Evanoff
Working Paper 19920
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19920
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014
We thank Edward Zhong and Robert McMenamin for outstanding research assistance; and Dan Aaronson,
Tom Davidoff, Mark Garmaise, David Laibson, Chris Mayer, Olivia Mitchell, Anthony Murphy, Jonah
Rockoff, Philipp Schnabl, Sophie Shive, Johannes Stroebel, Peter Tufano, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, CEPR/Gerzensee Summer Symposium, AEA
meetings, EFA meetings, Bocconi University, Columbia University, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC), Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Chicago and Cleveland, Tel-Aviv University,
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Ohio State University, University of California Berkeley,
University of California San Diego, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign,
Vanderbilt University , University of Minnesota, Penn State University, Financial Intermediation Research
Society Conference, SUERF/Bank of Finland Conference, and the 16th Mitsui Financial Symposium
at the University of Michigan for helpful comments. The authors thank the FDIC; Paolo Baffi Centre
at Bocconi University; and the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University
for supporting this research. Ben-David acknowledges the support from the Neil Klatskin Chair in
Finance and Real Estate. The views in this paper are those of the authors and may not reflect those
of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19920.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
Evanoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effectiveness of Mandatory Mortgage Counseling: Can One Dissuade Borrowers from
Choosing Risky Mortgages?
Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
Evanoff
NBER Working Paper No. 19920
February 2014
JEL No. D14,D18,L85,R21
ABSTRACT
We explore the effects of mandatory third-party review of mortgage contracts on consumer choice—including
the terms and demand for mortgage credit. Our study is based on a legislative pilot carried out by the
State of Illinois in a selected set of zip codes in 2006. Mortgage applicants with low FICO scores were
required to attend loan reviews by financial counselors. Applicants with high FICO scores had to attend
counseling only if they chose “risky mortgages.” We find that low-FICO applicants for whom counselor
review was mandatory did not materially change their contract choice. Conversely, applicants who
could avoid counseling by choosing less risky mortgages did so. Ironically, the ultimate goals of the
legislation (e.g., better loan terms for borrowers) were only achieved among the population that was
not counseled. We also find significant adjustments in lender behavior as a result of the counseling
program.
Sumit Agarwal
Associate Professor of Finance and Real Estate
NUS Business School
Mochtar Raidy Building, BIZ1
15 Kent Ridge Road
Singapore, 119245
ushakri@yahoo.com
Gene Amromin
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
gamromin@frbchi.org
Itzhak Ben-David
Associate professor of finance and
Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

Souphala Chomsisengphet
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
Department of Treasury
Washington, DC.
souphala.chomsisengphet@occ.treas.gov
Douglas Evanoff
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
devanoff@frbchi.org

1.

Introduction
In the wake of the subprime mortgage crisis, policymakers have been urged to increase

their intervention in credit markets—see, for example, Sheila Bair’s (2007) testimony to the
House Financial Services Committee. In particular, the leading policy initiatives include
tightening oversight of lenders (Federal Truth in Lending Act, Regulation Z) and providing
mandatory financial counseling to borrowers (President Obama’s Homeownership Affordability
and Stability Plan of 2009). Although it has been shown that these programs may disrupt market
activity (Bates and Van Zandt, 2007; Agarwal et al., 2013), their effects on mortgage choice and
their effectiveness in reducing mortgage repayment problems are still debated.
In this paper, we study the effects of a legislative mandate for third-party review of
mortgage contracts implemented in a pilot program in Cook County, Illinois, on mortgage
choice. The program required “low-credit-quality” applicants and applicants for “risky”
mortgage products to submit their loan offers from state-licensed lenders for review by financial
counselors. Similar to most regulatory initiatives, the mandate created numerous conflicting
incentives for all parties—lenders, borrowers, and external reviewers. However, the empirical
setting of this legislative experiment offers a number of unique opportunities to disentangle those
effects. As described in greater detail below, the fact that the pilot applied only in certain areas at
certain times, only to certain combinations of borrowers and mortgage contracts, and only to a
specific set of lenders allows us to parse out the effects of incentives and education on mortgage
choice. The study draws on detailed loan-level data from public and proprietary sources, as well
as data provided by one of the largest counseling agencies.
The pilot program that we analyze was initiated in September 2006, and was restricted to
mortgages originated by state-licensed lenders and secured by properties in ten contiguous zip
codes on the South Side of Chicago. The program required mortgage applicants with FICO credit
scores below 621 to attend a loan review session with a counselor certified by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) irrespective of their mortgage choice.
Applicants with higher FICO scores had to attend a loan review session only if they chose “risky
2

mortgages” (as defined by the statute). The mandate required lenders to pay the $300 counseling
fee. Following a loan review, a counselor provided nonbinding recommendations regarding the
affordability of the loan, its riskiness, and its pricing. Both lenders and counselors had to record
loan details and recommendations in a state-administered database. The counseling requirement
was tightly monitored through the Cook County Recorder of Deeds: mortgages in the pilot area
could not be recorded unless borrowers provided a certificate of counseling or exemption. The
pilot program was originally intended to last for four years, but bowing to pressure from
community groups and mortgage brokers, it was discontinued in January 2007. Overall, over
1,200 mortgage applicants were counseled within a 20-week period.
Our empirical analysis utilizes a classic difference-in-differences approach that contrasts
changes in choices and outcomes in the treated sample with those in a control sample. Since
borrowers may respond to regulation in various ways, we pay particular attention to endogenous
selection of agents out of treatment, conditioning the analysis on lenders that remained active in
the pilot area.
The heterogeneity in mandate applicability within pilot zip codes allows us to sharpen the
identification of treatment effects further. In particular, we highlight the differences in treatment
effects on borrowers who could not avoid counseling and those who could. Finally, we exploit
differences in incentives of state-regulated and exempt lenders to actively steer borrowers from
risky products and, as a result, from counselor review. This allows us to differentiate between
borrowers acting on acquired information and lenders/borrowers responding to the threat of
external review.
The legislation resulted in substantial reduction in lending activity. The lenders that
remained in the treated zip codes continued offering “risky mortgages” to prospective clients.
However, we show that borrowers’ choices changed substantially, as those who could avoid
counseling by selecting less risky products did so. Put differently, the designation of certain
contracts as triggers for counseling concentrated such contracts in borrower populations exempt
from the counseling requirement. The designation of a mortgage type as being “risky” could
3

arguably signal the undesirability of that type to borrowers throughout the county. Yet, we find
that avoidance of risky contracts was concentrated in treated zip codes, in which their choice was
linked to tangible costs from counseling.
Overall, our results suggest that borrowers view counseling as a burden: applicants
altered their mortgage choice to avoid counseling, shopping for additional quotes declined, and
the pilot itself was halted because of pressure from community interest groups. Somewhat
surprisingly, the legislation does not appear to have modified mortgage choice for those
borrowers who actually attended the counseling sessions.
Our paper contributes to the literature studying the role of financial counseling and, more
broadly, financial education in enabling more informed choices by households. Evidence from
mortgage market research suggest that households may borrow too much at high rates without
realizing future consequences (Agarwal et al., 2007) or may have a hard time recalling the terms
of their mortgage contracts (Bucks and Pence, 2008). Moore (2003) and Lusardi and Tufano
(2009) find that respondents with poor financial literacy are more likely to have high-cost
mortgages. There is consensus that household financial literacy is inadequate and that the
mistakes resulting from this inadequacy have serious negative consequences for borrowers.
However, there is less agreement on whether long-term financial education, short-term
counseling, or regulation that seeks to correct behavioral biases are effective at addressing this
issue.1 Collins and O’Rourke (2009) review the recent literature on this subject. In our previous
work (Agarwal et al., 2013) we used this experiment to test the effects of predatory lending on
borrower default. The pilot program resulted in an exit of small lenders with predatory
characteristics and brought greater scrutiny to the lending process. Our results show that the exit
of such lenders led to lower default rates within the treated group. The current study contributes
to the literature from a different angle. Here the focus is squarely on the actions of borrowers
1

For instance, Bernheim, Garrett, and Maki (2001) and Cole and Shastry (2008) study the effect of high school
financial education programs and reach opposite conclusions. Barr, Mullainathan, and Shafir (2008) argue that
information disclosure and product restrictions are insufficient to prevent bad mortgage choices and provide an
extensive outline of designing mortgage regulation to correct known behavioral biases. Agarwal et al. (2010)
evaluate the effects of a long-term voluntary financial education program aimed at prospective homebuyers.

4

within the pilot area – and on which aspect of the program (incentives or information) meant to
discourage take up of risky mortgage contracts worked and which did not?
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the counseling
mandate in detail. Next, we summarize the data and outline our methodology in Section 3. Then,
we detail the mandate’s effect on mortgage market activity in Section 4 focusing on specific
channels for borrower and lender responses. We discuss policy implications of our findings in
the final section.

2.

Illinois Predatory Lending Database Pilot Program (HB 4050)

2.1.

Description of the Pilot Program
The Illinois legislature passed a 2005 bill designed to curb predatory lending. Although

the state had a number of anti-predatory provisions in place, they were based on loan
characteristics, in line with prevailing practices elsewhere in the country. Some political leaders
in Illinois became concerned about the ease with which the trigger criteria for anti-predatory
programs could be avoided by creative loan packaging. For example, when regulators targeted
balloon mortgages, lenders began to push adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) with short, fixedrate periods and steep rate reset slopes (the so-called 2/28 and 3/27 hybrid ARMs).2 Thus, the
legislature began to shift the focus from regulating loan issuers to educating borrowers.
To that effect, the legislation sponsored by the Illinois House Speaker Michael Madigan
mandated counselor review of mortgage offers for “high-risk borrowers,” defined as applicants
with sufficiently low credit scores or sufficiently risky product choices. The legislation set the
FICO score threshold for mandatory counseling at 620, with an additional provision that
borrowers with FICO scores in the 621–650 range be subject to counseling if they chose certain
high-risk mortgage products. Such mortgages included interest-only loans, loans with interest
rate adjustments within three years, loans underwritten on the basis of stated income (low-

2

For a detailed analysis of the impact of the state anti-predatory lending laws on the type of mortgage products used
in the market, see Bostic et al. (2008).

5

documentation loans), and repeat refinancings within a 12-month period. Regardless of the
borrowers’ FICO scores, they were required to submit to counseling if they took out loans that
allowed negative amortization, had prepayment penalties, or had closing costs in excess of 5%.
Illinois legislators were quite optimistic about the potential for the program, which was modeled
on a 1970s Federal Housing Administration (FHA) program (Merrick, 2007).
The program was meant to run as a four-year pilot in select parts of Cook County, which
covers the metropolitan Chicago area, after which its coverage could be expanded. In spite of
vocal opposition from community-based groups and affected lenders, Illinois politicians
clamored to have their districts included in the pilot (Merrick, 2007). This choice on the part of
the politicians looked particularly ironic in retrospect, given the eventual response of their
constituents in the pilot areas. In the end, the bill (titled HB 4050) was passed on the last day of
the 2005 legislative session.
HB 4050 mandated that each of the affected borrowers attend a counseling session with
one of the HUD-certified counseling agencies. The determination of the need for such a session
was made on the day of the application, and the borrower had 10 days to contact the agency to
schedule it. During the one- to two-hour session, the counselor was supposed to discuss the terms
of the specific offer for a home purchase loan or refinancing and explain their meaning and
consequences to the prospective borrower. The goal was not to advise borrowers about the best
mortgage option in the sense of Campbell and Cocco (2003), but rather to caution the borrower
against common pitfalls. In addition, the counselor verified the loan application information
about the borrower (e.g., income and expenses). Afterward, the counselor recorded loan-related
information from the session such as whether the fees were thought to be excessive, the interest
rate was in excess of the market rate, the borrower understood the terms of the transaction and/or
could afford the loan, etc., in a state-administered database.
Both the interview and the independent collection of data on borrower income and
expenses allowed the counselor to form an assessment of a borrower’s creditworthiness that
potentially went beyond what was conveyed by the lender. Effectively, the counselor was able to
6

elicit private information that was not necessarily used by the lender to make approval and/or
pricing decisions and to furnish it to state regulators. The potential for this information to be
formally documented may well have induced lenders to screen better prior to referring approved
applications to counseling for the fear of a regulatory response (e.g., license revocation) or legal
response (e.g., class action lawsuits). It should be noted that none of the counseling
recommendations were binding in the sense that borrowers could always choose to proceed with
the loan offer at hand.
A report by the non-profit coalition Housing Action Illinois (2007) summarized the
counselors’ assessment of HB 4050. During the pilot, 41 HUD-certified counselors reviewed
loan offers for approximately 1,200 borrowers. Indications of fraud were found in 9% of the
cases.3 Counselors advised about half of the borrowers that they could not afford the loan or
were on the cusp of not being able to do so. For 22% of the borrowers, loan rates were found to
be more than 300 basis points above the market rate. Counselors also found a discrepancy
between the loan documentation and the verbal description of the mortgage for 9% of the
borrowers. Alarmingly, the vast majority of borrowers with adjustable-rate loan offers did not
understand that their mortgage payment was not fixed over the life of the loan.
HB 4050 stipulated that the $300 cost of the session be borne by the mortgage lender, not
the borrower.4 However, even if lenders did bear the cost of the counseling sessions, HB 4050
still imposed other time and psychological costs on borrowers. Additionally, by lengthening the
expected time until closing, HB 4050 could force borrowers to pay for longer credit lock periods,
again raising loan costs.
HB 4050 imposed a substantial compliance burden on lenders as well. In addition to the
cost of counseling (assuming it was not recovered through other loan charges), lenders had to

3

For a literature review and analysis of the existence of mortgage fraud see Ben-David (2011).

4

There is substantial anecdotal evidence that brokers and lenders attempted to pass the $300 counseling fee to
borrowers in the form of higher closing costs or administrative charges (Bates and Van Zandt, 2007, and personal
communication with a number of mortgage counselors).

7

make sure that the certification requirements of HB 4050 were fully implemented.5 Otherwise,
lenders could potentially lose the right to foreclose on the property. Finally, lenders reportedly
feared losing some of their ability to steer borrowers toward high-margin products.
As mentioned earlier, only loans offered by state-licensed mortgage lenders were subject
to the requirements of HB 4050, as the state lacks legal authority to regulate any federally
chartered institutions and generally exempts such institutions and state-chartered banks from
mortgage licensing. However, much of the lending in disadvantaged neighborhoods has been
done through state-licensed mortgage bankers that presented themselves as a local and nimble
alternative to the more traditional bank lenders.6 As a result, HB 4050 was expected to increase
the regulatory burden on institutions that were providing credit in the selected pilot areas. Many
observers voiced concerns about the possibility that the legislation could result in credit
rationing, negatively affecting housing values in the selected zip codes.
The geographical focus of the legislation differed substantially from typical regulatory
approaches that required counseling for certain loan types (Bates and Van Zandt, 2007). This
feature of the legislation generated considerable opposition from community activists and
residents and prompted several lawsuits. Since the selected pilot areas were overwhelmingly
populated by Hispanic and African-American residents (82%), the selection prompted heated
accusations of discriminatory intent on the part of lawmakers. As mortgage bankers threatened to
withdraw from the pilot zip codes en masse and as the tide of concerns about subprime
mortgages began to rise, the opposition to HB 4050 reached fever pitch.7 The pilot program was
suspended indefinitely on January 17, 2007, after only 20 weeks of operation.

5

Under HB 4050, title companies did not receive a “safe harbor” provision for “good faith compliance with the
law.” As a result, any clerical errors at any point in the loan application process could potentially invalidate the title,
resulting in the loss of the lender’s right to foreclose on a nonperforming loan. According to the Cook County
Recorder of Deeds, even federally regulated lenders had to procure a certificate of exemption from HB 4050 to
obtain a clean title. Consequently, all lenders were affected to at least some degree by the legislation.
6
Using the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data described in Section 3, we estimate that state-licensed
mortgage bankers accounted for 64% of mortgage loan originations in HB 4050 zip codes during 2005.
7

The record of a public hearing held on November 27, 2006, provides a good illustration of the acrimony
surrounding HB 4050 (it is available at www.idfpr.com/newsrls/032107HB4050PublicMeeting112706.pdf).

8

2.2.

How Was the Pilot Program Area Selected?
HB 4050 required the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation

(IDFPR), the state regulatory body, to specify a pilot area on the basis of “the high rate of
foreclosure on residential home mortgages that is primarily the result of predatory lending
practices.” In February 2006, IDFPR announced the pilot area, comprising 10 contiguous zip
codes in southwest Chicago (the solid shaded areas in Figure 1).8 Four of these zip codes were in
Illinois House Speaker Madigan’s district.
Table 1 presents key demographic and mortgage characteristics for the pilot area and the
rest of the City of Chicago. We obtain our mortgage data from the First American CoreLogic
LoanPerformance database on securitized nonprime mortgages (henceforth, the LP data, which
are described in greater detail below). As can be seen in Panel B of the table, IDFPR’s decision
at the time was based on the fact that these zip codes had substantially higher loan delinquency
and default rates (Column (1)) compared with the rest of the city (Column (3)). The pilot zip
codes are also predominantly populated by minorities and have much higher rates of
unemployment and poverty (Panel A). A simple comparison of population counts and the total
number of loans (Panel A) and FICO scores (Panel B) strongly suggests that the HB 4050 area
had a disproportional share of subprime and Alt-A mortgages.

3.

Data and Selection of Control Groups

3.1.

Data sources
This study combines a number of complementary data sources covering the calendar

years 2005–2007. First, we rely on data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA), which includes information on mortgage applications, rejection rates, etc., to examine
elements of credit supply and demand. When possible, we augment that information with loan
8

The HB 4050 zip codes are: 60620, 60621, 60623, 60628, 60629, 60632, 60636, 60638, 60643, and 60652.

9

application and counseling data collected by HB 4050 counselors. We use information from
HUD and hand-collected data to differentiate between lenders who specialize in prime and
subprime loans, as well as between lenders licensed by Illinois and those exempt from licensing.
The legislation was likely to most acutely affect state-licensed subprime lenders; thus, we use
this list to refine our analysis. We also use the HMDA data to evaluate how HB 4050 affected
the credit supply along the extensive margin, identifying lenders that left the market altogether.
Finally, we use U.S. Census and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) data to control for income and
population composition at the zip code level.
We also use the LP data to assess the effect of HB 4050 on the composition and
performance of mortgages originated in the treated zip codes. This loan-level database covered
over 90% of securitized subprime mortgages as of 2006, and it includes detailed borrower and
loan information, such as FICO scores9, debt-service-to-income (DTI) ratios, and loan-to-value
(LTV) ratios, as well as mortgage terms, including maturity, product type (e.g., fixed- or
adjustable-rate mortgage), interest rate, and interest rate spread. It also provides information on
whether a given loan has a prepayment penalty, allows negative amortization, or had full
documentation in underwriting. These and other characteristics of the LP data are summarized in
Table 1, Panel C. FICO scores are used by lenders to assess borrower creditworthiness and set
appropriate loan terms. FICO scores also allow us to determine which borrowers in the treated
zip codes were automatically or conditionally subject to loan counseling (see the discussion in
Section 2.1 for details).
Finally, we received a sample of counseling data from one of the agencies that provided
counseling services during the period when HB 4050 was in effect. This data set is part of the
state sponsored database constructed under the HB 4050 legislation and includes rather detailed
information on original mortgage offers reviewed in 191 counseling sessions. We matched these
9

The FICO score is intended to measure a borrower’s creditworthiness. Scores range from 300 to 850 with scores
above 800 considered very good and scores below 620 considered poor. As reported on the Fair Isaac Corporation
website (www.myfico.com), in June 2009 borrowers with FICO scores above 760 were able to take out 30-year
fixed-rate mortgages at interest rates that were 160 basis points lower, on average, than those available for borrowers
with scores in the 620–639 range. See Rosen (2011).

10

data to the Cook County Recorder of Deeds and LP data to identify which mortgages were
originated and on what terms. We use these counseling data in additional analysis to gauge the
direct effect of counseling on mortgage choice.

3.2.

Constructing a Zip-Code-Based Control Group Sample
As discussed in Section 2.2, the selection of treated zip codes was driven by their

characteristics as well as political considerations. In fact, the chosen set of pilot zip codes is far
from unique in satisfying HB 4050 selection guidelines. We use this fact in constructing our
control group that is meant to resemble the HB 4050 zip codes in terms of their pre-treatment
socioeconomic characteristics and housing market conditions. Such areas could plausibly be
expected to experience the same changes in outcome variables as the HB 4050 zip codes in the
absence of intervention. To construct our control group, we move beyond the univariate metric
of foreclosure rates, as required by the legislation, to a set of measures identifying economically
disadvantaged inner-city neighborhoods.
In particular, we use 2005 IRS zip-code-level income statistics, the 2000 U.S. Census
shares of minority population, shares of the population living below the poverty level, and the
unemployment rate to identify zip codes within the City of Chicago limits that have the smallest
geometric distance from the HB 4050 zip codes. The resulting 12-zip-code area has
approximately the same number of residents as the treatment area and is summarized in Column
(2), Panel A of Table 1. The statistics in Panel B of Table 1 indicate that the control group’s zip
codes are similar to the treated area in terms of their high default and delinquency rates, low
borrower FICO scores, and disproportionate reliance on subprime mortgage products.10 Based on
the spirit and the letter of the stated legislative guidelines, we conclude that the areas in our
10

In an earlier version of the paper, we used the reverse sequence for constructing the control sample. That is, we
built up the set of control zip codes by minimizing the distance in observed mortgage characteristics in the pre-HB
4050 LP data. Afterward we checked for similarity on socioeconomic characteristics of treatment and control areas.
All of the reported results reported below are robust to the definition of the control area and are available upon
request.

11

control group (shown by the striped area in Figure 1) could have plausibly been selected for HB
4050 treatment.11

3.3.

Constructing a Synthetic Sample (Matched Sample)
To further establish the empirical robustness of our analysis, we construct a synthetic HB

4050-like ‘area' in the spirit of Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003).12 Rather than choosing a similar
but untreated set of zip codes, we build a comparison sample loan by loan, matching each based
on observable loan characteristics. Specifically, for each loan issued in the HB 4050 zip codes,
we look for the loan most similar to it that was originated in the same month elsewhere within
the City of Chicago. Our metric for similarity is the geometric distance in terms of standardized
values of the borrower’s FICO score, the loan’s DTI and LTV ratios, the log of home value, and
the loan’s intended purpose (purchase or refinancing). When a loan is matched to an HB 4050area loan, we remove it from the set of potential matches and repeat the process for the next HB
4050-area loan. The resulting synthetic HB 4050-like ‘area’ comprises observations from 42 out
of 43 non-HB 4050 Chicago zip codes. Not surprisingly, more than 50% of the observations in
this synthetic sample come from the 12 control zip codes that we identified on the basis of their
socioeconomic characteristics.
In the subsequent analysis, we will refer to the comparable zip codes and the synthetic
area counterfactuals as the control sample and the matched sample, respectively.

3.4.

Design of Tests: Micro-Level Analysis
Our empirical analysis is designed to exploit cross-sectional and temporal variation in a

difference-in-differences framework. Specifically, our tests measure the difference in response of
11

The control area includes the following zip codes: 60609, 60617, 60619, 60624, 60633, 60637, 60639, 60644,
60649, 60651, 60655, and 60827.
12
It would be ideal to look at transactions that lie on either side of the border between HB 4050 and control zip
codes to tease out the effect of the counseling mandate. Unfortunately, the LP data do not contain street addresses.

12

a number of variables (such as contract choice) as a function of whether the loan was originated
in a zip code subject to HB 4050. As in a classic difference-in-differences analysis, our
regressions include both time controls and cross-sectional controls. For example, when we study
whether borrowers who attend counseling sessions altered their mortgage choices, we compare
the choice of risky products by borrowers who were forced to attend counseling sessions under
HB 4050 and the choice by those with similar characteristics in the control areas.
Our basic regression specifications have the following form:
Responseijt = α + β Treatmentjt + γ Time dummiest + δ Zip code dummiesj +θ Controlsijt

(1)

+ εijt,
where Responseijt is the loan-level response variable, such as contract choice of loan i originated
at time t in zip j; Treatmentjt is a dummy variable that receives the value of 1 if zip code j is
subject to mandatory counseling in month t and 0 otherwise; Time and Zip code dummies capture
fixed time and location effects; and εijt is a well behaved error term. We cluster errors at the zip
code level in all regressions.13 For each loan, the response is evaluated at only one point in time
(e.g., interest rate at origination). Thus, our data set is made up of a series of monthly crosssections. The set of controls varies with the underlying data source, but it includes variables such
as the LTV ratio at origination, borrower FICO score, and loan interest rate.

3.5.

Addressing Endogenous Selection Out of Treatment
In our empirical analysis, we need to make sure that differences vis-à-vis the control

group are due to treatment and not changes in lender or borrower composition. This is done
primarily through the choice of comparison groups and by controlling for observable borrower
characteristics.14
13

Clustering allows for an arbitrary covariance structure of error terms over time within each zip code and thus
adjusts standard error estimates for serial correlation, potentially correcting a serious inference problem (Bertrand,
Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004). Depending on the sample, there are 22 or 53 zip codes in our regressions.
14
We are also rather comfortable that the FICO scores are indeed indicative of borrower quality in that they cannot
be manipulated in the short term; see Keys, et al. (2010).

13

We address the problem of lender selection by estimating two sets of regressions: those
conducted on loans originated by all lenders, and on those originated by lenders that remained
active in the HB 4050 zip codes during the treatment period. We call the latter the “Active
Lenders” sample. To be considered an active lender in a given geographic area, a HMDA
reporting institution must originate an average of at least one loan per week over a given fivemonth period, with at least one origination in every month.15 This ‘Active Lender’ sample holds
the population of lenders constant, allowing for the identification of treatment effects unrelated
to changes in lender composition.
We deal with borrower selection in two ways. Our more direct method accounts for
changes in borrower population by controlling for a number of key observable variables such as
FICO score and LTV ratio. In addition, our second control sample—the synthetic matched
sample—shuts down the effects of entry and exit (at least based on observables) as it is based on
a loan-by-loan matching. That is, for each mortgage originated in the treated zip codes before,
during, or after the treatment period, we find a matched mortgage based on FICO score,
mortgage size, and leverage. The advantage of this method is that it forces the control sample to
mirror changes in these observables in the treatment sample.

3.6.

Dealing with Non-Random Treatment Sample Choice
An additional potential complication lies in the quasi-experimental design of our analysis.

In particular, the set of HB 4050 zip codes is patently non-random, as it concentrates on lowincome neighborhoods in which foreclosure rates were high at the outset. The problem with
analyzing such zip codes is that there is a possibility that they have different resilience to
economic shocks unrelated to treatment. For example, it is possible that mortgage choice was
15

The five-month period is chosen to match the duration of HB 4050. None of the patterns depend on the choice of
the threshold level or geographic area. The “every month” condition is intended to eliminate lenders that withdraw
from HB 4050 zip codes during the fall of 2006 after working off their backlog of earlier applications. We have nine
state-licensed subprime lenders funding loans and filing HMDA reports that satisfy this definition. According to the
Housing Action Illinois (2007) report, these lenders were represented by more than 300 mortgage brokers.

14

more sensitive to economic conditions in low-income areas and more sensitive to the general
decline in house prices following the market peak around November 2006.
We offer two solutions for this treatment zip code selection concern. First, we use the
design of the pilot project and separate the effect of treatment across low-, mid-, and high-FICOscore groups. Recall that all of the low-FICO borrowers (those with FICO scores < 620) were
subject to counseling, while the mid-FICO (those with scores in the 621–650 range) and the
high-FICO borrowers (those with scores > 650) were counseled conditional on their mortgage
contract choice. This approach retains the structure of standard difference-in-differences analysis
while also exploiting the within-zip-code heterogeneity in treatment.16 We further interact time
dummies with the log of the average income of a zip code, as reported annually by the IRS. This
allows the effects of unobservable shocks to vary with the level of economic resources available
to households in each particular zip code, further alleviating some of the selection concerns.17
The regression specification that we therefore estimate is:
(2) Responseijt = α + β1 (Treatmentjt × Low-FICOijt) + β2 (Treatmentjt ×Mid-FICOijt)
+ β3 (Treatmentjt × High-FICOijt)+
+ γ (Time dummiest) + δ (Zip code dummiesj) +
+ η (Time dummiest × log IRS incomejt) +θ Controlsijt + εijt.
In all of our analysis we are evaluating the characteristics of securitized subprime and Alt-A
mortgages contained in the LP data.

16

The FICO-score-only partitioning of borrowers in treated zip codes has the advantage of being based on a
characteristic that is exogenous to the treatment regime. As shown in Section 4, the mandate caused a sizable move
away from mortgage contracts that triggered counseling for mid- and high-FICO-score borrowers.

17

For robustness, we also evaluate a specification with a full set of time and zip code interactions. In this case,
identification derives strictly from within-zip-code variation across borrower categories at a point in time. The main
results remain qualitatively the same.

15

4.

Mortgage Counseling and Contract Choice
The design of the HB 4050 program allows for an interesting inspection of the effects of

both information and incentives on borrower decisions.18 First, to investigate the effects of
information provided in counseling sessions, we exploit the fact that low-FICO applicants (those
with FICO scores below 621) had no choice but to attend counseling. Thus, we can test the
effects of mandated counseling on mortgage contract selection by comparing the borrowing
choices of this group under the mandate with the borrowing choices made in the pre-HB 4050
period or by a similar group in the control zip codes.
Second, we explore the effects of incentives by examining the contract choices of midand high-FICO applicants. These applicants could eschew counseling by avoiding mortgages that
were specified as risky by the legislation. Again, we compare the change in mortgage choices
over time and relative to those of similar groups in control zip codes. By segmenting our sample
and accounting for different counseling requirements across product choice, we are able to
distinguish between the effects of new information from the counseling process and new
incentives resulting from restrictions in the law.

4.1.

Multivariate Evidence on Borrower Contract Choice
From interviews with a number of counselors involved with HB 4050, we know that

borrowers were typically warned about the risks associated with hybrid ARM loans or loans
carrying prepayment penalties. If the information effect is at work, we would expect counseled
low-FICO borrowers to shift away from such products.
However, information pertaining to broad product choices was provided not only through
counseling sessions, but also by the mere designation of certain products as risky (i.e., their

18

Our purpose here is to evaluate adjustments in consumer choice resulting from the HB 4050 program. However,
Agarwal et al. (2013) also found there was significant reaction by mortgage lenders, which swiftly withdrew credit
availability in the affected markets. Thus, mortgage supply was also significantly affected by the new program.
Table 3A provides summary statistics on lender participation in mortgage lending in treatment and control areas.

16

selection triggered counseling). These designations were known to everyone in the state and may
have constituted a credible signal to potential borrowers to avoid such mortgage products. If this
signaling effect is at work, we would expect the incidence of risky product choices to decline for
all borrowers in both the treated and control samples. If the signal was salient only in the affected
areas, we would expect the incidence of risky product choices to decline for all FICO groups in
the treated zip codes.
That said, product choice may have been affected by the borrowers’ desire to avoid costly
counseling sessions. In this case, members of a given FICO group would avoid products that
trigger counseling for their particular group. That is, we would expect fewer interest-only loans
by mid-FICO households, but not for high-FICO households. Similarly, we would expect both
mid- and high-FICO households (but not low-FICO ones) to choose fewer negative amortization
loans and mortgages with a prepayment penalty.
Table 2 presents the results of difference-in-differences regressions of borrower contract
choice, as outlined in equation (2). These regressions control for the borrower’s FICO score,
house value, LTV ratio, property type, and refinancing status, and they include a set of zip code
and month dummies, as well as time dummies interacted with the log of the average income of a
zip code.
The first set of regressions focuses on choices that subject only the mid-FICO borrowers
to counseling—namely, choices to take out hybrid ARMs, interest-only loans, and lowdocumentation (low-doc) loans. These choices are labeled as Category I Risk Products.
Similarly, Category II Risk Products denotes choices that trigger counseling for both mid- and
high-FICO borrowers—loans with prepayment penalty, negative amortization or closing costs
exceeding 5% of the loan size. For either product category, we find little evidence consistent
with the information-driven effects. In particular, we find no statistical evidence that low-FICO

17

borrowers in the treatment areas pulled back from either category of risky products from lenders
that remained active during the pilot period (Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) of Table 2).19
The estimates are also inconsistent with the signaling effect of risky product designation,
which would be manifested in either no significant difference-in-differences estimates or in
significant differences across all FICO groups. Instead, we find that changes in contract choice
are closely associated with FICO-group-specific triggers for counseling sessions. In particular,
mid-FICO borrowers in treated areas have a much lower propensity to choose Category I
products than those in the control areas. Looking at the constant set of lenders (Active Lenders),
we estimate a decrease of 6 to 7 percentage points in the propensity to choose Category I loans
for the treated group, relative to that for the control group. However, high-FICO borrowers in
treated areas are not any more likely to shy away from these products, which do not trigger the
counseling requirement for them. Although taking a Category II loan leads to counseling for all
borrowers, only high-FICO borrowers in HB 4050 zip codes reduce their use of such products
On net, the evidence on product choice is consistent with the hypothesis that the
counseling requirement constituted a costly burden that was aggressively avoided by those
borrowers who were not automatically subject to it. The law led to a change in the product mix
(whether initiated by borrowers or lenders) by the mere threat of counseling and not, apparently,
by the content of that counseling.

4.2. Lender Response and Contract Menu Options
One could argue that the evidence presented above is consistent with lenders simply
removing products that trigger counseling from their menu of choices. Because lenders tend not
to specialize in either mid- or high-FICO borrowers, the FICO-group-specific pattern of changes
casts some doubt on this hypothesis. Nevertheless, we can also conduct a direct test of mortgage

19

A contrast of HB 4050 × Low FICO coefficients between Columns (1)–(2) and (3)–(4) in Table 2 suggests that
changes in contract choice of treated low-FICO borrowers derived largely from the exit of lenders that made such
risky loans.

18

menu options of lenders that remained active in HB 4050 areas. The results are summarized in
Table 3, Panel B.
The table looks at the population of active lenders and reports the fraction that offered
products deemed “risky” by the legislation. A lender is considered to have a certain product type
on its menu if it originated at least 20 such loans over a given five-month period, with at least
one origination in every month. The main finding is that while the share of lenders willing to
offer interest-only mortgages or hybrid ARMs in HB 4050 areas declined a bit during the
mandate period, a strong majority (89%) retained such products on their menus. Yet, the
likelihood of originating such loans declined markedly, as shown in Table 2.20
However, the legislation did appear to influence the availability of one subset of
mortgages—low-doc loans. Table 4 repeats the analysis of Section 4.1, concentrating exclusively
on low-doc loans. We find a substantially lower likelihood of low-doc mortgages for both lowand mid-FICO treated borrowers. Even though low-FICO borrowers were subject to counseling
regardless of contract choice, lenders appear to have lost much of their appetite for low-doc loans
because applicants had to bring income and asset documentation to the meeting with the
counselor.21 The fact that this information was entered into the state-administered database
potentially subjected lenders to legal risk and further decreased the appeal of low-doc loan
underwriting. A similar effect may have been in play for the mid-FICO borrowers.

4.3. Mortgage Terms
An additional way to evaluate the hypothesis that loan review provided actionable
information to borrowers is through an analysis of the mortgage terms. According to Housing
20

Panel B of Table 3 also shows that Risk Category II loans (loans with negative amortization, prepayment penalties
or high closing costs) were pitched primarily to high quality borrowers served by lenders exempt from state
licensing requirements.
21
Comparing Columns (1)–(2) and (3)–(4) of Table 4 indicates that some of the decline in the take-up of low-doc
loans by low-FICO borrowers is due to the exit of lenders that offered many of these loans in the pre-HB 4050
period.

19

Action Illinois (2007), counselors commonly observed that applicants took on too much debt at
high interest rates. One would thus expect that treated borrowers were advised to reduce their
leverage and negotiate better loan terms.22 If such information translated into greater borrower
bargaining power, one would expect lower LTV ratios and interest rates among counseled
borrowers.
Panel A of Table 5 presents evidence of changes in some of the key contract terms of
loans originated during the treatment period. For each dependent variable, we estimate the
difference-in-differences specification in equation (2) for the samples described earlier. We find
a marginally significant decrease in the LTV ratio for the low-FICO borrowers (Columns (1)(2)).23 These relative improvements translate to a decrease in debt levels of about $1,500 for an
average borrower. Turning to interest rate spreads, we find no identifiable effects of HB 4050
when the sample is restricted to lenders that remained active during the treatment period
(Columns (5)-(6)).24 For the broader sample (Columns (3)-(4)), it is the mid- and high-FICO
groups that show statistically significant, if small, improvements in spreads. This suggests that
lenders that exited HB 4050 areas were charging higher interest spreads than those that remained
active.
In Panel B of Table 5, we explore measures of loan affordability by looking at the debtservice-to-income ratio that captures borrowers’ ability to service their loan obligation (Columns
(1)–(2)) and the ratio of the annual mortgage payment to the original loan size (Columns (3)–
(6)). For either of these measures, we fail to detect any effect of the treatment on the low-FICOscore population. Somewhat surprisingly, we find slightly higher mortgage payments for midand high-FICO-score borrowers in the HB 4050 areas. However, the magnitude of the estimated
effect is very small, never exceeding 20 basis points.
22

However, being able to negotiate less leverage would only be possible if the borrower had resources to put a
larger down payment down.
23

Note that for LTV and DTI ratio regressions, we do not present matched sample results because LTV and DTI
ratios were used in the matching.
24
For ARMs, the LP data provide the relevant data. For fixed-rate mortgages, loan spread is calculated as the
difference between the contract interest rate and the rate of the matching-maturity Treasury.

20

4.4.

Direct Evidence for the Effects of Counseling Advice
In an attempt to further evaluate the potential informational effect of counselor loan

review, we turn to an analysis of the actual counselor recommendations. At this point in the
origination process, the avoidance of counseling sessions through contract choice or market exit
is irrelevant. Instead, we can evaluate the correspondence between counselor suggestions and
subsequent borrower actions. To do so, we obtained detailed counseling session data from one of
the agencies providing services under HB 4050. For each of the 191 sessions, we compared the
original loan offer terms (as recorded by the counseling agency) to mortgage details in the LP
data set.25 The top panel of Table 6 presents a breakdown of these mortgage offers organized by
counselor recommendation.
We find that about 19% of the initial mortgage offers were abandoned by the borrowers,
with the rejection rates substantially higher among borrowers who were told that their loans were
either “unaffordable” or “fraudulent.” The majority of the reviewed offers that proceeded to
closing (101 out of 155) received a “no issues” entry, indicating that the counselor had no
concerns about the loan’s affordability, the borrower’s understanding of the terms, or the original
offer’s disclosures. Yet, about half of these “no issues” loans were modified after counseling,
with slightly over 40% of renegotiated loans resulting in lower monthly payments. Loans
deemed “unaffordable” or “fraudulent” were renegotiated at a similar rate, but a substantially
higher fraction of such renegotiations yielded lower monthly payments. Similarly, loans with
above-market rates were typically modified following counseling, resulting in lower monthly
payments.

25

To match counseling records with those in the LP database, we first use the property address and counseling date
to obtain the amount of originated loan in the Illinois Recorder of Deeds database. If there is no record of a
mortgage transaction in the month following the counseling session, the loan offer is considered to have been
abandoned. For matched properties, we use the Illinois Recorder of Deeds data set values on loan amount and loan
recording dates, along with the agency’s data on the counseling date and applicant’s FICO score, to find a matching
loan in the LP data.

21

We next conduct a more formal analysis of borrower’s response to counselor
recommendations. The Probit regression results presented in Panel B of Table 6 confirm that
counselor recommendations were systematically related to loan and borrower characteristics. For
example, we found the debt-service-to-income ratio (DTI) and initial interest rate to be strongly
associated with a greater likelihood of the “unaffordable” classification. Similarly, a “no issues”
assessment was much less likely for loans deemed as risky or for borrowers with high DTI ratios.
Looking more closely into the specifics of renegotiated problem loans highlights some of
the complexities in establishing a direct mapping between counseling recommendations and the
eventual loan choice. Some contract changes appear incongruous with the recommendation. For
example, some unaffordable loans were renegotiated to loans with shorter amortization periods
or longer resets. These changes may have made the loans less risky, but they also likely made
them less affordable at the time of origination. Although counselors commonly recommended
fixed-rate mortgages as the best means to lessen the risk of mortgage obligations, few borrowers
switched away from their original ARM offers. In fact, as many borrowers went from fixed-rate
mortgages to ARMs as changed from ARMs to fixed-rate contracts. Among those renegotiating
their ARM deals, extending reset periods (by switching from, say, 2/28 to 3/27 loans) was also
nearly as common as shortening the terms. Thus, it may not be surprising that, on average,
counseling did not appear to significantly change the debt burden and interest costs of originated
mortgages.
An open question then is whether the evidence in this small sample of treated borrowers
is consistent with direct information effects of counseling. On the one hand, we find higher
borrower rejection rates of fraudulent loans and a prevalence of lower payments for renegotiated
unaffordable loans. On the other hand, about half of all problematic loans that were eventually
originated did so without any changes. Moreover, if we assume that recorded recommendations
reflect relevant information provided by counselors, the fact that many loan changes do not seem
to align with such recommendations weakens the hypothesis that information has a direct
positive effect on subsequent borrower actions.
22

4.5.

Borrower Rejection of Loan Offers
HB 4050 required additional counseling sessions for each mortgage offer from a new

lender or a renegotiated offer from the original lender that worsened the initial terms. Hence, if
counseling is regarded as more of a burden than a source of valuable information, we would
anticipate fewer rejections of loan offers to counseled borrowers—regardless of the counselor’s
recommendation. Conversely, if counseling is informative, we would expect to see a spike in
rejections by better informed borrowers if they cannot favorably renegotiate their loan terms.
Table 7 presents a test of these hypotheses, using HMDA application data.26 The
regressions are run at the loan level, with borrower rejection of a loan offer as the dependent
variable. The table shows that in the sample of active lenders, rates of mortgage rejection by
borrowers did not increase during the HB 4050 period either among prime or subprime lenders.
In fact, borrower rejection rates actually declined during the HB 4050 period by about 5
percentage points in the full sample of subprime lenders (Columns (1)-(2)), again suggesting a
difference between lenders that exited the market and those that remained active.
This finding is rather remarkable given that the majority of the counseled were advised
that they could not afford the loan and/or that they should seek alternative mortgage offers. Since
we find little evidence of significant improvement in loan terms after counseling (e.g., narrower
loan spreads as shown in Table 5), a likely explanation for the lack of change in the rejection rate
is that borrowers preferred to accept the offer at hand and not to return for further counseling
with offers from alternative lenders.27
In the process of collecting data on the actual counseling recommendations, we noticed
that many sessions, especially those involving cash-out refinance loans, took place only a few
days prior to scheduled closings. In such cases, rejecting an offer would mean a significant delay
in obtaining funds that may have been critical in satisfying a borrower’s other obligations. For
26

These are loans in HMDA classified as “approved, but not taken.”
This result also allays concerns that counselors’ incentives led them to convince borrowers to reject loans,
ultimately leading to low origination volumes.

27

23

such borrowers, the attendant costs associated with searching for an alternative loan likely far
outweighed the expected benefits of new offers.
In sum, our analysis in Section 4 contains only marginal evidence for the beneficial
effects of information obtained in counseling sessions. Although debt burdens improve
somewhat for counseled borrowers, the economic magnitude of these effects is fairly small. Flat
borrower loan rejection rates, the inability of counseled borrowers to negotiate lower loan
spreads, and the short time span between the loan review sessions and the scheduled closings all
suggest limited bargaining power on the part of borrowers. In contrast, the pattern of changes in
product choices is broadly consistent with borrowers’ (and lenders’) desire to avoid oversight
when possible.

5.

Conclusion
Regulators are considering the use of policy tools such as mandated financial counseling

and increased oversight of lenders in the wake of the housing market crisis.28 Both strategies
limit free contracting between borrowers and lenders. As such, they are likely to shrink access to
credit markets, particularly for the financially disadvantaged segments of society.
In this paper, we evaluate the impact of one such policy tool: a mortgage market
counseling program implemented in Chicago in 2006. The program combined lender oversight
and counseling of high-risk borrowers, with both aspects of the program being administered
through HUD-certified financial counseling agencies. The pilot program’s design allows us to

28

In 2009, President Obama announced a proposal to create a new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to
safeguard consumers from unfair, deceptive, and abusive practices in financial markets. Included in this was an
educational function that was to consider increasing consumer access to financial counseling. On July 21, 2010, the
Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act became law and introduced the new Bureau, which,
among other things, was to provide information and educational programs to financial consumers, assist borrowers
during the mortgage application process, and consider the potential benefits of counseling in the mortgage
application process—for example, see Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2013). The entirety of the Dodd–
Frank Act (Public Law 111–203) is available at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ203/pdf/PLAW111publ203.pdf. For a discussion of the Dodd–Frank Act and the role of the new Bureau, see Evanoff and Moeller
(2013).

24

disentangle the effects of the informational content of counseling from those of lender oversight
and compliance costs.
We present two main results. First, we find that mortgage applicants responded to
incentives to attend (or, rather, avoid) counseling, but were less influenced by information
provided by counselors. Borrowers often altered their mortgage contract choice to minimize
interaction with counselors. Specifically, those borrowers who could eschew counseling by
choosing less risky products did so. However, those who went through a counseling session did
not appear, on average, to follow the counselor’s advice, and seemed to have only limited
bargaining power in renegotiations. They tended not to walk away from the original offer
following counseling, nor to reapply for a different mortgage; either of which would have
required another counseling session.29
Second, the legislation had material effects on the market composition of both lenders
and borrowers, as well as on borrower and lender behavior. Apparently, incentives matter. As
indicated above, borrowers adjusted their borrowing to avoid having to be subject to counseling.
Similarly, as shown in our earlier work (Agarwal et al., 2013) lenders with predatory
characteristics exited the market to avoid the potential scrutiny from both regulators and the
marketplace. This finding is reinforced by the fact that lenders relatively quickly returned to the
market once the counseling requirement was rescinded.
Our results suggest several policy recommendations. First, blunt policy interventions can
lead to severe market disruptions. Indeed, the details of policy design matter a great deal. For
instance, offering “safe harbor” provisions would likely have mitigated lender exit, while
requiring counseling sessions to take place prior to scheduling a closing would likely have
improved borrower bargaining power. Third, one-off counseling sessions late in the mortgage
origination process may be suboptimal. They may be perceived as a burden by borrowers, who

29

In ongoing work, we are evaluating the effects of the follow-up program that expanded the counseling
requirement on the basis of product choice to the entirety of Cook County. This will allow us to address the
questions of external validity of the pilot study.

25

would then either stay away from the market altogether or switch to mortgages that do not
require such counseling. At that point, borrowers may overweight the current costs of counseling
and overly discount future benefits stemming from more informed contract choice, à la Laibson
(1997). Fourth, gains from the informational content of counseling are tempered by the limited
negotiating power of borrowers. It is likely that even after the counseling session, mortgage
applicants are not in a position to effectively negotiate with mortgage brokers. Instead, the
brokers may attempt to steer borrowers between products, without generating any real
improvement in loan terms. Finally, in spite of our findings that lenders and borrowers attempt to
avoid regulatory constraints via contract choice and decisions to exit the affected markets, such
regulation may be somewhat effective in that the mere presence of the regulator in the
marketplace seems to have a significant effect on the quality of originated mortgages.

26

References
Abadie, Alberto, and Javier Gardeazabal, 2003, The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the Basque
Country, American Economic Review, 93(1), 113-132.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas Evanoff, 2010,
Learning to Cope: Voluntary Financial Education Programs and the Housing Crisis, American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 100(2), 495-500.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas Evanoff, 2013,
Predatory Lending and the Subprime Crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson, 2007, The Age of Reason: Financial
Decisions over the Lifecycle, NBER Working Paper #13191.
Bair, Sheila C., 2007, Improving Federal Consumer Protection in Financial Services, Statement before the
Financial Services Committee, U.S. House of Representatives, June 13.
Bates, Lisa K. and Shannon Van Zandt, 2007, Illinois’ New Approach to Regulating Predatory Lending:
Unintended Consequences of Borrower Triggers and Spatial Targeting, University of Illinois, Spatial
Policy Analysis Research Consortium, working paper 2007-02.
Barr, Michael S., Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir, 2008, Behaviorally Informed Home Mortgage Credit
Regulation in “Borrowing to Live: Consumer and Mortgage Credit Revisited”, eds. Nicolas P. Retsinas
and Eric S. Belsky, Brookings Institution Press.
Ben-David, Itzhak, 2011, Financial Constraints and Inflated Home Prices during the Real-Estate Boom,
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3), 55-78.
Bernheim, Douglas B., Daniel M. Garrett, and Dean H. Maki, 2001, Education and Saving: The Long-Term
Effects of High School Financial Curriculum Mandates, Journal of Public Economics, 80(3), 435-465.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, How Much Should We Trust Difference in
Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-275.
Bostic, Raphael, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Kathleen C. Engel, Patricia A. McCoy, Anthony PenningtonCross, and Susan Wachter, 2008, Mortgage Product Substitution and State Anti-Predatory Lending Laws:
Better Loans and Better Borrowers?, Working Paper.
Bucks, Brian K., and Karen M. Pence, 2008, Do Borrowers Know their Mortgage Terms?, Journal of Urban
Economics, 64, 218-233.
Campbell, John Y., and Joao F. Cocco, 2003, Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage Choice,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1449-1494.
Cole, Shawn, and Gauri Kartini Shastry, 2008, Smart Money: The Effects of Education, Financial Literacy and
Cognitive Ability on Financial Market Participation, Working Paper.
Collins, J. Michael, and Collin M. O’Rourke, 2009, Evaluating Financial Education and Counseling: A Review
of the Literature, Working Paper.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), 2013, “High-Cost Mortgage and Homeownership Counseling
Amendments to the Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z) and Homeownership Counseling Amendments to
the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (Regulation X).” September. Washington, DC. Available at
http://www.consumerfinance.gov/regulations/high-cost-mortgage-and-homeownership-counselingamendments-to-regulation-z-and-homeownership-counseling-amendments-to-regulation-x/ .

27

Evanoff, Douglas, and William Moeller, 2013, Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act:
Purpose, Critique, Implementation Status and Policy Issues, NOW Publishers, Inc., Boston.
Housing Action Illinois, 2007, Findings from the HB 4050 Predatory Lending Database Pilot Program.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did Securitization Lead to Lax
Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1), 307-362.
Laibson, David, 1997, Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2):
443-477.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano, 2009, Debt Literacy, Financial Experience and Over-indebtedness,
Dartmouth College and Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Merrick, Ann, 2007, Illinois Tries New Tack Against Predatory Loans, Wall Street Journal, August 22.
Moore, Danna, 2003, Survey of Financial Literacy in Washington State: Knowledge, Behavior, Attitudes, and
Experiences, Technical Report n. 03-39, Washington State University.
Rosen, Richard J., 2011, Competition in mortgage markets: The effect of lender type on loan characteristics,
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, First Quarter, 2-21.

28

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Panel A: Construction of a Control Sample on the Basis of Pre-Treatment Socioeconomic
Characteristics (based on 2005 IRS and 2000 Census data)
HB 4050 zip codes
(10 zip codes)

Control ZIP codes
(12 zip codes)

all non-HB4050
Chicago zip codes
(43 zip codes)

729,980
259,884

713,155
244,326

2,181,267
888,354

0.813
0.200

0.863
0.245

0.505
0.174

$31,579
0.823

$30,844
0.837

$56,976
0.720

0.141

0.151

0.101

Total population
Total number of 2005 tax returns
Share of minority households*
Share of households below poverty level*
#

Average taxable income in 2005
Share of households with income < $50,000 in 2005
Unemployment rate (2000 Census)*
* population-weighted averages
#

weighted by number of 2005 IRS tax returns

Panel B: Pre-Treatment Mortgage and Borrower Characteristics of HB 4050 and Control
Zip Codes (Loan Performance data, January 2005 - December 2005)

Share defaulting within 18 months (x 100)
FICO
LTV (%)
Debt Service-to-Income (%)
log(Valuation)

HB 4050 zip codes
(n=15,216)
14.01
627.68
84.14
39.94
12.12

Control ZIP codes
(n=12,925)
13.69
628.64
82.92
40.28
12.22

all non-HB4050
Chicago zip codes
(n=28,060)
9.06
648.77
81.85
40.20
12.47

Panel C: Key Variable Means in LoanPerformance Data (1/2005-12/2007)
1/2005-8/2006
9/2006-12/2007
HB 4050
Control
Matched HB 4050
Control
Matched
Zip Codes Sample
Sample Zip Codes Sample
Sample
n = 24,014 n = 20,686 n = 24,014 n = 2,802 n = 4,445 n = 2,802
Share defaulting within 18 months (x 100)
17.36
17.29
15.03
21.66
25.47
20.92
Fraction of low-FICO Borrowers
44.14
44.21
40.69
35.58
42.32
36.54
Fraction of mid-FICO Borrowers
19.93
19.57
20.79
20.91
20.13
20.74
Fraction of high-FICO Borrowers
35.93
36.22
38.52
43.50
37.55
42.73
FICO score
629.66
629.92
634.19
641.19
632.39
639.90
Share od Risky Products Category I
88.39
88.43
91.36
81.66
84.52
86.23
Share of Risky Products Category II
20.34
20.10
18.05
13.20
15.84
15.15
Share of low-documentation loans (x 100)
44.66
45.62
49.94
46.57
48.03
51.90
Loan Margin (%)
4.69
4.70
4.77
4.33
4.57
4.54
Annual Mortgage Payment/Loan Size (%)
8.55
8.49
8.34
8.66
8.58
8.42
Loan-to-Value (%)
84.20
83.01
83.91
83.32
82.67
83.66
Debt-Service-to-Income (%)
40.46
40.85
41.07
40.32
41.28
41.02
log(House Value ($))
12.15
12.23
12.33
12.29
12.37
12.32

29

Table 2. Mortgage Product Choice (Source: LoanPerformance)
The table examines the effects of counseling on mortgage contract choice. The table reports results using
OLS regression to test for changes in choice of contracts deemed risky by HB 4050. Risk Products
Category I refers to mortgages that subject only the mid-FICO borrowers to counseling (hybrid ARMs,
low-doc and interest-only loans, and properties refinanced within 12 months). Risk Products Category II
denotes contracts that trigger counseling for both mid- and high-FICO borrowers (loans with prepayment
penalties, negative amortization or high closing costs). The list of controls includes measures of
borrower’s FICO score, house value, LTV, property type, and refinancing status, as well as a number of
time and location fixed effects. All standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. *, **, *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

HB 4050 x Low FICO
HB 4050 x Mid FICO
HB 4050 x High FICO

I(Risky Products: Category I) x 100
Control Matched Control Matched
Active Active
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-2.90** -3.04**
-2.04
-1.36
(1.36)
(1.44)
(1.59)
(1.56)
-5.28*** -5.07*** -6.67*** -5.80***
(1.27)
(1.24)
(1.44)
(1.28)
0.37
0.87
-0.99
0.39
(1.15)
(1.20)
(1.31)
(1.27)

I(Risky Products: Category II) x 100
Control Matched Control Matched
Active Active
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.40
-1.91
-1.67
-2.31
(1.79)
(1.86)
(1.79)
(1.85)
-0.15
-1.57
-1.04
-1.47
(1.27)
(1.42)
(1.14)
(1.22)
-3.95*** -5.76*** -4.37*** -5.17***
(1.34)
(1.44)
(1.26)
(1.30)

Borrower Controls
Contract Terms Controls
Property Type Controls
Month FE, Zip Code FE
Month FE * log(Avg Income)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
2
Adj. R

55,600
0.20

57,619
0.19

40,041
0.20

41,891
0.19

55,600
0.03

57,619
0.03

40,041
0.05

41,891
0.06

30

Table 3. Effects of HB 4050 on Credit Supply
The table summarizes the number (Panel A) and characteristics (Panel B) of lenders in the HB 4050 and
in the zip code-based control sample.

Panel A: Supply of Credit – Total number of active lenders (Source: HMDA)
State-Licensed Lenders
Specializing in Subprime loans
HB 4050
Control

All Other Lenders
HB 4050
Control

Before HB 4050 (9/05 - 8/06)

31

30

83

76

During HB 4050 (9/06 - 1/07)

9

23

56

65

After HB 4050 (2/07 - 6/07)

13

15

66

66

Panel B: Contract Choice Menu Under the Mandate (Source: LoanPerformance)
Share of lenders originating Risk Category I or Risk Category II loans (definitions provided in Table 2)
State-Licensed Lenders
Specializing in Subprime loans
HB 4050
Control

All Other Lenders
HB 4050
Control

Before HB 4050 (9/05 - 8/06)

1.00/0.18

0.93/0.14

1.00/1.00

1.00/0.67

During HB 4050 (9/06 - 1/07)

0.89/0.06

0.86/0.18

1.00/0.50

1.00/0.75

After HB 4050 (2/07 - 6/07)

0.96/0.13

0.95/0.11

1.00/0.75

1.00/0.75

* Shares are taken with respect to the total number of active lenders in Panel A present in LoanPerformance data

31

Table 4. Availability of Low-Doc Loans (Source: LoanPerformance)
The table presents results using an OLS framework to examine the likelihood of taking low-doc loans in
HB 4050 treatment zip codes. All standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. *, **, *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

HB 4050 x Low FICO
HB 4050 x Mid FICO
HB 4050 x High FICO
Borrower Controls
Contract Terms Controls
Property Type Controls
Month FE, Zip Code FE
Month FE * log(Avg Income)
Observations
2
Adj. R

I(Low Doc) x 100
Control Matched Control Matched
Active Active
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-5.48*** -7.55*** -4.03** -5.23**
(1.76)
(1.99)
(1.89)
(2.04)
-7.26*** -8.61*** -7.17*** -8.03***
(2.24)
(2.27)
(2.41)
(2.48)
0.72
1.98
1.12
3.26*
(1.36)
(1.43)
(1.58)
(1.71)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

55600
0.20

57619
0.18

40041
0.20

40425
0.18

32

Table 5. Effects of HB 4050 on Mortgage Leverage and Interest Rate Spread
The table presents results from an examination of the effects of the mandate on key mortgage terms. Panel
A presents results using OLS regression to test whether leverage and loan margin are different for the
population with mandatory counseling. Panel B examines proxies for mortgage affordability. The set of
controls not shown in the table include: borrower characteristics (FICO score and FICO score ranges,
investor and second mortgage flags); contract terms (LTV (only for margin and mortgage payment
regressions) and log of appraised value); and property type (flags for single family residence, townhouse,
or condominium). All standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. *, **, *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Key Mortgage Terms (Source: LoanPerformance)

HB 4050 x Low FICO
HB 4050 x Mid FICO
HB 4050 x High FICO
Borrower Controls
Contract Controls
Property Type Controls
Month FE, Zip Code FE
Month FE * log(Avg Income)
Observations
2
Adj. R

Loan-to-Value (%)
Control Control
Active
(1)
(2)
-0.75*
-0.81*
(0.41)
(0.42)
-0.12
-0.24
(0.37)
(0.38)
-0.02
0.13
(0.37)
(0.41)

Loan Margin (bp)
Matched Control
Active
(3)
(4)
(5)
-7.64**
-2.49
-3.06
(3.01)
(3.35)
(3.16)
-13.53*** -11.37*** -4.71
(4.04)
(3.75)
(4.64)
-16.92*** -15.55*** -5.60
(4.23)
(4.20)
(4.32)
Control

Matched
Active
(6)
5.10
(3.16)
0.22
(3.95)
-2.87
(4.45)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

55,600
0.26

40,041
0.26

55,600
0.22

57,619
0.21

40,041
0.22

40,425
0.21

Panel B: Mortgage Affordability (Source: LoanPerformance)

HB 4050 x Low FICO
HB 4050 x Mid FICO
HB 4050 x High FICO
Borrower Controls
Contract Controls
Property Type Controls
Month FE, Zip Code FE
Month FE * log(Avg Income)
Observations
2

Adj. R

Debt-Service-toIncome (%)
Control Control
Active
(1)
(2)
-0.49
-0.31
(0.41)
(0.42)
-0.34
-0.41
(0.71)
(0.74)
-0.05
0.07
(0.40)
(0.38)

Annual Mortgage Payment (%)
Control Matched Control Matched
Active
Active
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.04
0.08
0.02
0.02
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
0.13*
0.16**
0.13*
0.13*
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.08)
0.07** 0.17***
0.06*
0.12***
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

40,024

26,604

55,600

57,619

40,041

40,425

0.07

0.08

0.22

0.24

0.22

0.23

33

Table 6. Effects of Counseling on Borrower Behavior
The table examines the effects of counseling on borrower propensity to renegotiate or reject loan offers.
The data used is provided by a counseling agency. The top panel of the table compares pre-counseling
and post-counseling mortgage characteristics. The bottom panel presents marginal effects from Probit
regressions of counselor recommendations on key borrower and loan characteristics.

Panel A: Summary of Recommendations
Counselor recommendation

No issues
117
17

Cannot afford
or close to it
39
10

Indicia of
fraud
25
8

Loan above
market rate /
Seek another bid
10
1

14

7

3

4

0

Share of loans not pursued after counseling

19%

15%

26%

32%

10%

Loans originated after counseling
Total matched originations

155
148

101
96

28
27

17
17

9
8

49
47
49%

14
13
48%

8
9
53%

2
6
75%

Lower monthly payments
(percent of all changed loans)

20
43%

10
77%

5
56%

5
83%

Switch from ARM to fixed
(percent of all changed loans)

8
17%

5
38%

4
44%

1
17%

Switch from fixed to ARM
(percent of all changed loans)

12
26%

3
23%

1
11%

2
33%

Lower interest rate

23
49%

11
85%

5
56%

5
83%

Data summary
Number of counseling sessions
Loans not pursued after counseling
memo: abandoned loans re-originated after HB 4050

Total
Sessions
191
36

Comparison of loan terms before and after counseling sessions
No changes at all
Loans with changes post counseling
(percent with changes)

73
75

(percent of all changed loans)

Panel B: Recommendations and Loan/Borrower Characteristics

"Risky mortgage" flag
Debt-to-Income ratio (DTI)
Loan-to-Vaue ratio (LTV)
Initial interest rate
FICO score
log(Mortgage)

Counselor recommendation (0/1)
No issues
Unaffordable
-0.259***
0.017
(0.082)
(0.060)
-0.025***
0.010***
(0.005)
(0.002)
0.001
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.001)
0.001
0.047**
(0.030)
(0.020)
0.000
-0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.246*
0.021
(0.137)
(0.071)

Observations

191

191

Pseudo R2

0.32

0.23

34

Table 7. Loan Offers Rejected by Borrowers
This table provides OLS results from evaluating whether borrowers in HB 4050 treatment zip codes are
more likely to have rejected loan offers. All standard errors are clustered at the zip code level. *, **, ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

HB 4050
log(Mortgage)
log(Income)
Month FE, Zip Code FE
Month FE * log(Income)
Observations

Adj. R2

Dependent: I(Applicant Rejects Offer) x 100
State-Licensed Lenders (Subprime)
All Other Lenders
Control Matched Control Matched
Control Matched Control
Active
Active
Active
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
-5.38*** -4.75***
-0.85
-0.43
-1.68**
-0.98
0.17
(0.68)
(0.73)
(0.77)
(1.00)
(0.60)
(0.65)
(0.72)
0.64*
0.35
0.03
-0.28
2.54*** 2.20*** 2.16***
(0.36)
(0.38)
(0.56)
(0.52)
(0.35)
(0.29)
(0.25)
2.44*** 2.79*** 1.01***
0.54*
1.00*** 0.64***
0.04
(0.29)
(0.30)
(0.22)
(0.28)
(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.19)

Matched
Active
(8)
0.04
(0.69)
1.89***
(0.24)
-0.22
(0.18)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

158,307
0.02

168,789
0.01

56,900
0.04

61,929
0.04

236,007
0.01

269,138
0.01

155,002
0.01

179,842
0.01

35

Figure 1. HB 4050 Treatment and Control Zip Codes
This figure maps the HB 4050 treatment area (shaded) and the control zip codes (striped). As described in
Section 3.3, we construct the 12–zip code control area to resemble the treatment area in regard to pretreatment socioeconomic characteristics and housing market conditions. The socioeconomic variables
used for selection include 2005 Internal Revenue Service (IRS) zip code–level income statistics and
information from the 2000 Census about shares of minority population and those living below the poverty
level as well as the unemployment rate. Housing market metrics include default rates on mortgages
originated in 2005, as well as zip code–level means of FICO scores, LTV and DTI ratios, and housing
values. All of the control zip codes lie within the City of Chicago limits. The 12-zip control area has
approximately the same number of residents as the treatment area.

36

