NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADJUSTING BODY MASS FOR MEASUREMENT ERROR WITH INVALID VALIDATION
DATA
Charles Courtemanche
Joshua C. Pinkston
Jay Stewart
Working Paper 19928
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19928
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

We thank John Cawley and participants at the 2013 Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting
for helpful comments. All mistakes are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Charles Courtemanche, Joshua C. Pinkston, and Jay Stewart. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Adjusting Body Mass for Measurement Error with Invalid Validation Data
Charles Courtemanche, Joshua C. Pinkston, and Jay Stewart
NBER Working Paper No. 19928
February 2014, Revised July 2014
JEL No. C18,I1
ABSTRACT
We propose a new method for using validation data to correct self-reported weight and height in surveys
that do not measure respondents. The standard correction in prior research regresses actual measures
on reported values using an external validation dataset, and then uses the estimated coefficients to
predict actual measures in the primary dataset. This approach requires the strong assumption that the
expectations of measured weight and height conditional on the reported values are the same in both
datasets. In contrast, we use percentile ranks rather than levels of reported weight and height. Our
approach requires the weaker assumption that the conditional expectations of actual measures are
increasingin reported values in both samples. This makes our correction more robust to differences
in measurementerror across surveys as long as both surveys represent the same population. We
examinethree nationallyrepresentative datasets and find that misreporting appears to be sensitive to
differences in survey context. When we compare predicted BMI distributions using the two validation
approaches, we find that the standard correction is affected by differences in misreporting while our
correction is not. Finally, we present several examples that demonstrate the potential importance of
our correction for future econometric analyses and estimates of obesity rates.
Charles Courtemanche
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu
Joshua C. Pinkston
Economics Department
College of Business
University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292
josh.pinkston@louisville.edu

Jay Stewart
Bureau of Labor Statistics
2 Massachusetts Avenue, NE
Washington, DC 20212-0002
Stewart.Jay@bls.gov

1

Introduction

Obesity, defined as having a body mass index (BMI) of at least 30, is associated with heart
disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, stroke, and other health problems (Strum, 2002).1 The
obesity rate among U.S. adults rose from 13% in 1960 to 34% in 2008, with obesity’s annual
costs reaching 112,000 lives and $190 billion in medical expenses (Flegal et al., 1998; Flegal et
al., 2005; Ogden and Carroll, 2010; Cawley and Meyerhoefer, 2012). This sharp increase has
prompted a large literature examining its causes and consequences.
Obtaining accurate data on weight and height has long been problematic for researchers.
Medically measured weight and height are obviously ideal, but they are expensive to collect in
large samples. For this reason, only one large-scale U.S. government health dataset – the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES) – contains measured weights
and heights. However, the NHANES has several limitations. Though large enough to produce
national-level descriptive statistics, it is often too small for more sophisticated estimation.
Moreover, the NHANES consists of repeated cross-sections so it does not allow for the use of
panel data methods. Finally, although the NHANES contains excellent health information, it
includes a limited number of economic and demographic variables.
Other datasets include respondents’ self-reported weight and height, often obtained through
telephone surveys (e.g. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)). The use of selfreported data permits a larger sample size and broader geographic coverage, but is limited by the
fact that self-reports are often subject to considerable measurement error. Some respondents may
not know their current weight, while others might misreport their weight and height in an effort

1

BMI=weight in kilograms divided by height in squared meters.

1

to adhere to social norms. Cawley (2002) finds that underweight people tend to overreport their
weight while those who are heavier tend to underreport. Rowland (1990) finds similar results for
weight and also documents a tendency to exaggerate height that is more pronounced among the
overweight. For both sexes, these results imply that the distribution of self-reported weight is
more compressed than the distribution of measured weight, and obesity rates computed from
self-reported weight and height are understated. Moreover, the systematic, non-classical nature
of the measurement error suggests that bias in regression estimates is possible regardless of
whether BMI is an independent or dependent variable, and that the direction of the bias is
unclear.
Two papers by Cawley (2002; 2004) were the first to attempt to correct for the misreporting
of height and weight. Since the NHANES was not a suitable dataset for the topic of either paper,
Cawley used the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, which contains selfreported weight and height.2 He attempted to correct measurement error in these variables by
using the NHANES as a validation sample for the NLSY79 and applying a procedure developed
by Lee and Sepanski (1995). For each race and gender group, Cawley regressed measured weight
and height on the corresponding self-reports and their squares in NHANES, and then used the
resulting regression estimates to predict the NLSY79 respondents’ actual weights and heights.
This correction is now common in the economics-of-obesity literature. Several recent papers
have used this correction when studying the impacts of obesity on labor market outcomes (e.g.,

2

The first paper, Cawley (2002), tests for rational addiction in caloric intake, which requires panel data. The second,
Cawley (2004), examines the impact of obesity on wages, and wages are not available in the NHANES.

2

Cawley and Danzinger, 2005; Gregory, 2010; Gregory and Ruhm, 2011; Majumder, 2013). It has
also been used in a number of papers that examine potential economic determinants of obesity.3
Unfortunately, the standard validation method may not be appropriate if the amount or type
of measurement error differs between the primary and validation samples. This potential problem
is acknowledged in Cawley (2004) and Cawley and Burhauser (2006). As Han et al. (2009) point
out, NHANES respondents should expect to be measured when they report their height and
weight, while respondents in the NLSY cohorts and other commonly used datasets do not.
Furthermore, Pinkston (2014) notes that interview mode (in-person vs. telephone) affects selfreported values of respondents in the NLSY cohorts—even though in-person interviewees do not
expect to be measured.
Our paper develops an alternative correction for self-reported weight and height that relies
on weaker assumptions about the relationship between measured and reported values in the
primary and validation datasets. Instead of using the reported values, we predict actual measures
using the percentile rank of reported values in their respective distributions. Our method is robust
to differences across samples in the severity (or type) of measurement error as long as the
rankings of respondents based on reported values resemble the rankings based on actual
measures in both datasets, and both datasets represent the same population (e.g., nationally
representative samples).

3

Potential determinates of obesity studied using Cawley’s correction include age (Baum and Ruhm, 2009), income
(Cawley et al., 2010), unemployment rate (Ruhm, 2005), childhood socioeconomic status (Baum and Ruhm, 2009),
food prices (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002; Chou et al., 2004; Courtemanche et al., forthcoming; Goldman et al.,
2011), cigarette prices (Chou et al., 2004; Baum, 2009), alcohol prices (Chou et al., 2004), food stamps (Fan, 2010;
Baum, 2011), restaurant density (Chou et al., 2004), on-the-job physical activity (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002),
smoking bans (Chou et al., 2004), urban sprawl (Plantinga and Bernell, 2007; Eid et al., 2008), and time preference
(Courtemanche et al., forthcoming).

3

We illustrate our method using data from the BRFSS and the American Time Use Survey
(ATUS), and show that our rank-based method produces distributions of predicted BMI that are
consistent across datasets, and close to the distribution of measured BMI in the population. We
also show that the standard validation approach is sensitive to the differences in misreporting
between the primary and validation datasets.
Finally, we illustrate how the corrections can influence regressions coefficients and
estimates of the prevalence of obesity. We consider basic regressions that include BMI or obesity
as either a dependent or an independent variable, and compare estimates that use our adjustment
to analogous estimates that use either no correction or the standard correction. Although our
correction generally does not affect the signs of coefficient estimates or statistical significance, it
can lead to important differences in the magnitudes of the estimates. We then revisit the Centers
for Disease Control’s (CDC’s) well-known map of obesity rates by state and demonstrate that
correcting the BRFSS data for measurement error dramatically increases the estimated
prevalence for most states.

2

The Problem of Transportability and an Alternative Approach
Let b denote the true measures of height or weight in the population, and

reported value in sample j, where
reported values,

,

denote the

indicates the primary or validation dataset. The

, are allowed to have arbitrary (potentially nonclassical) measurement error.

4

The standard validation approach is based on work by Lee and Sepanski (1995) (L&S in
what follows) and others in the statistics literature.4 We can distill two conditions from this
literature that must be met when using validation data to correct for measurement error:
C1. There must be a surrogate for b. A variable,
of y given

,

, is a surrogate for b if the distribution

is the same as the distribution of y given b.5 In cases where b is a

dependent variable that is measured with error,

is a surrogate if its distribution

depends only on the true response (Carroll et al., 2006).
C2. The surrogate,

, must satisfy some form of transportability across datasets.

Transportability is usually described as the distribution of b conditional on

being

the same in both datasets; however, L&S use a weaker form of transportability,
which requires

|

|

.6

The first condition simply states that a surrogate for b contains no information about the
dependent variable that is not also contained in b (and possibly other observed covariates). This
condition is easily satisfied by the reported values,

.

The second condition, transportability, is essential if the procedure used to generate
predicted values in the validation dataset is to be applied to the primary dataset. C2 requires that
researchers make additional assumptions about the characteristics of the primary and validation
datasets. Carroll et al. (2006) note that validation data are ideally drawn from a random

4

See Bound et al. (2001) for a brief survey of this work, and Carroll et al. (2006) for more depth.
In addition to L&S, see Carroll et al. (2006).
6
See Bound et al. (2001) or Carroll et al. (2006) for examples of the stronger version of transportability. Strictly
speaking, L&S assume that the expectation of y conditional on is the same in both datasets, but that reduces to
|
|
in the current context.
5

5

subsample of the primary data, and warn that transportability may not be satisfied when the
validation data are drawn from external sources.
Bound et al. (2001) point out that misreporting in survey data often varies with the context
of the survey. This means that in transportability may not hold when the validation data are
drawn from an external source. As Cawley and Burkhauser (2006) note, the NHANES surveys
collect self-reported height and weight during face-to-face interviews, while surveys used in the
social sciences often collect at least some data by telephone. For example, the BRFSS, ATUS
and PSID surveys are conducted by telephone. Both the 1979 and 1997 cohorts of the NLSY
combine in-person and telephone interviews.7
Bound et al. (2001) also note that transportability requires both datasets to be
representative of the same population. There is ample evidence in the literature suggesting that
different populations misreport height and weight differently.8 Therefore, we want to stress that
neither the method we develop nor the standard validation approach is appropriate if the
validation data are not representative of the same population as the primary data. As in previous
work on obesity, we use datasets that are weighted to be nationally representative. Furthermore,
we explicitly assume that the distribution of b,

, does not vary across samples.

The rest of this section compares the standard validation approach and our rank-based
alternative. In section 2.1, we focus on the assumptions required for the standard approach to
satisfy transportability, and discuss when those assumptions are unlikely to hold. In section 2.2,
7

The use of telephone surveys is clearly described under the heading “Interview Methods” in the documentation for
each cohort. Pinkston (2014) notes that the reported weight of white women is especially sensitive to interview
methods.
8
This is why predictions have been made separately by race and gender group since Cawley (2002, 2004). Cawley
(2004) also notes that misreporting varies by body mass. Maclean and Sikora (2014) discuss the importance of both
samples having the same age distribution. Cawley and Choi (2014) find that the misreporting of height, weight and
other variables differs by education group. Cawley and Burkhauser (2006) and Courtemanche et al. (2014) note that
misreporting can vary across time periods.

6

we develop an alternative surrogate that satisfies the transportability condition under weaker
assumptions.

2.1 The Standard Validation Method
Consider the regression of some dependent variable y on b and other covariates. Assume
we only observe the self-reported values,

, in the primary data set. In the standard approach,

we would estimate
(1)
using the validation sample, and then use
̂
in place of b as an independent variable in our primary sample.9
This approach assumes that

is a surrogate for , and that it is transportable. In this

case, transportability is satisfied under the following assumption:
A1. The expected value of the true measure conditional on the reported value is the same
in both the primary and validation datasets; i.e.,

if

.10

We would expect this assumption to hold when an internal validation sample is drawn at random
from the primary sample. But when the validation data are drawn from an external dataset,
transportability is satisfied only if the reporting error in

is the same in the two data sources.

Transportability is more likely to be satisfied when the external validation sample is more similar

9

In Cawley (2004) and other papers in the obesity literature, the dependent variable is actually regressed on a
nonlinear function of the predicted values, BMI. As we discuss later, L&S argue that it would be preferable to
predict the nonlinear function directly.
10
This is the weaker form of transportability used by L&S.

7

to the primary sample. Assumption A1 is very strong, and is less likely to hold, when there are
differences in interview modes (in-person vs. telephone) or other differences between the data
sources. In any case, the required assumptions should be spelled out carefully and, whenever
possible, evaluated empirically.

2.2 An Alternative Method Based on Percentile Rank
The theory supporting the use of validation data does not require us to only use the
reported measures,

, as surrogates for b. Any surrogate for

that satisfies transportability can

be used. We exploit this fact and propose an alternative surrogate that can satisfy transportability
in cases where the reported values themselves do not.
As before, we assume that the
the

are functions of

are surrogates for b. Following the previous literature,

and a random error term that is not correlated with .11 This implies

that the percentile rank of

, given by the distribution function

same random error. Therefore,

, is a function of b and the

is also a surrogate for the true value, b, satisfying C1.

Our approach uses the percentile rank of the report,

, to generate predicted values of b.

The advantage of using percentiles over using levels of the self-reports is that it requires a
weaker assumption about the relationship between

and the true values, b. Specifically, we

assume:

Following equation (1),
. describes how reported values differ from what
, where
respondents believe the actual measure is. Although is not correlated with , it could be correlated with .
11

8

A2. The expected value of the true measure conditional on the reported value is
monotonically increasing in the reported value; i.e., ″ > ′, implies that
| ″ > E | ′ .12
In other words, given any two people who report their weight, the person who reports the higher
weight is expected to actually weigh more. A2 is a much weaker assumption than A1. If A2 does
not hold, then it is hard to see how respondent reports convey any useful information about
actual height and weight. Assumption A2 is unaffected by differences in measurement error
across samples, as long as reported values still allow a relevant (expected) ranking of
respondents in each sample. Finally, note that the monotonicity described by A2 is testable in the
validation sample but not in the primary samples.13
Now consider the unconditional distribution of true values,
samples are representative of the same populations,
and

. As long as both

does not vary between datasets. Both

are continuous, monotonically increasing functions with ranges in the

interval 0, 1 . This implies that for every value of

there is a

such that

.
In general,

; however, taking the inverse of

∙ , we have:
,

which maps reported values into the true values of .
12

This is akin to the assumptions made in the principal-agent literature to allow the use of the first-order approach to
solving maximization programs (see Milgrom, 1981, and Rogerson, 1985). A sufficient, but not necessary, condition
for this assumption is the first-order stochastic dominance of
| ″ over
| ′ .
13
We test A2 for each race and gender group in NHANES using nonparametric regressions of actual height and
weight on their reported values. We cannot reject monotonicity in any case.

9

∙ does not depend on which sample the reported values,

Note that

, are drawn

from. It simply takes the percentile rank associated with a reported value in sample and returns
the measured value that has the same position in the distribution of measured values. As a result,
|

|

. This implies that the percentile ranks,

, satisfy

transportability, even when the reported values do not. Therefore, the percentile rank approach
satisfies both of the conditions required for the use of validation data.

3

Data and the Transportability of Self-Reported Measures

This section begins with a brief introduction to the data sets we use in our analysis. We then
show that self-reported height and weight do not appear to satisfy transportability between these
datasets.

3.1 Three Data Sets
We use two primary datasets: the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and the
American Time Use Survey (ATUS). The BRFSS is a telephone survey conducted by the
Centers for Disease Control in conjunction with state health departments. It focuses on health
and risky behaviors, but also contains a wide variety of demographic variables. The primary
advantage of the BRFSS for obesity studies is its size. With over 300,000 respondents per year in
the later waves, the BRFSS is large enough to compute reliable state-level descriptive statistics.
Additionally, the large sample size makes it popular among economists seeking to identify causal
effects using inherently inefficient estimation techniques such as instrumental variables.
The ATUS was designed to measure how people spend their time rather than to study
health outcomes. It is a telephone survey that asks respondents to sequentially report what they

10

did on the day prior to the interview. ATUS respondents are selected from households that have
completed their final month of participation in the Current Population Survey (CPS). In addition
to the time diary, the ATUS includes demographic information about respondents and members
of the respondent’s household, and employment status information for the respondent and the
respondent’s spouse. In 2006, 2007, and 2008, the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Economic
Research Service (ERS) sponsored Eating and Health Module, which collects information about
the respondent’s health, including weight and height, and additional information on time spent
eating and drinking.
Following the previous literature, our external validation data are drawn from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). NHANES is collected by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention with the goal of assessing the health status and
behaviors of children and adults in the United States. Respondents are asked their weight and
height during the initial face-to-face interview administered in the respondent’s home. Weight
and height is then measured during a physical examination that may take place up to several
weeks after the in-home interview. Respondents are told about other components of the survey
before they consent to the initial interview, and they are compensated for participating.14 We use
data on race, gender, and age from the demographic background files of the 2007-2008 wave;
reported values of height and weight from the Weight History questionnaire; and measures of
actual height and weight from the physical examination.
For consistency, we restrict the samples from all three data sets to 2007 and 2008. We
also focus on respondents between the ages of 19 and 64 who identify themselves as Caucasian,

14

In contrast, BRFSS respondents are not compensated at all for participation. ATUS respondents are offered a
small incentive only if their household did not provide a valid phone number when they participated in the CPS.

11

African-American or any other racial or ethnic group.15 All estimation is weighted to ensure that
each sample is representative of the same population.
Table 1 presents basic summary statistics for the three datasets. Even with all race and
gender groups pooled together, average reported weight is higher in the NHANES (180 lbs)
sample than either BRFSS (178.6) or ATUS (178). Average measured weight is roughly two
pounds heavier than reported weight for the full NHANES sample.
The demographic variables in Table 1 are very similar across samples, which is
consistent with the samples being representative of the same populations. The one notable
exception is that black respondents appear to be underrepresented in the BRFSS. Such
differences may point to shortcomings in the sample weights used; however, any shortcomings in
BRFSS sample weights would affect both of the correction methods we compare. Therefore, we
ignore this difference in the work that follows.

3.2 The Transportability of Self-Reported Height and Weight
The most relevant difference in methodology between the surveys is that respondents in
the BRFSS and ATUS are interviewed by telephone, while respondents in the NHANES are
interviewed in person and should expect to be measured in the near future.16 It seems natural to
expect misreporting to be more severe in telephone surveys than in face-to-face surveys
conducted in the weeks leading up to a medical examination. Pinkston (2014) points out that
phone interviews in the NLSY cohorts are associated with lower reported weights for white

15

All respondents who identify as Hispanic are included in the “other” category. We did not divide this category
further due to the sample size in NHANES. For the sake of convenience, we refer to these groups as though they are
defined by race, even though that is not strictly correct.
16
See the online documentation for NHANES for more detail. Although respondents are told about the physical
examinations before the initial interview, any effect of that knowledge may be lessened by the amount of time
between the in-home interviews and the physical examinations.

12

women than in-person interviews, even though NLSY respondents have no reason to believe
they will be measured in either case.
Comparing differences in misreporting between our datasets is straightforward. We
expect the distribution of actual height and weight to be the same in all three datasets because
they are all representative samples of the same population.17 If the distributions of a reported
value are not the same in two samples that have the same distribution of actual measures, the
relationships between actual and reported measures are also not the same. Therefore, a
comparison of reported height and weight across samples should be sufficient to evaluate
whether the use of reported values in levels is transportable.
Figures 1A compare the densities of reported weight and height across samples for white,
black and other women. The results cast substantial doubt on the transportability of reported
weight for women in these samples. Relative to white women in NHANES, white women in both
BRFSS and ATUS report weights between 120 and 150 pounds more frequently and report
higher weights less frequently. The comparison of reported weight produces a similar picture for
women of other races. We only see a difference in the reported weights of black women in the
upper half of their distributions; however, self-reported height appears more sensitive to context
for black women than for white or other women.
Figures 1B make analogous comparisons for men. Differences in reported weight are less
pronounced for men than for women; but differences in height appear to be larger, especially for
black and other men. In contrast to the results for women, black men and men from other races

17

The distributions of measured height or weight would only differ between samples if the surveys did not all
represent the population they claim to represent, or if the measurements were somehow affected by differences in
data collection. Either of these scenarios would make any use of NHANES as a validation sample suspect, and
neither scenario can be ruled out because we do not observe measured values in the BRFSS or ATUS data.

13

appear more likely to report higher weights when interviewed on the phone than when
interviewed in person.
Tables 2A and 2B compare the self-reported measures in BRFSS and ATUS,
respectively, to those from NHANES. Each table presents averages of reported height and
weight, followed by the medians, 75th and 90th percentiles. The final column of each table
presents nonparametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for the equality of distributions between
samples.
In both tables, we see that women reported lower weights in the telephone surveys than in
the NHANES, with the difference being larger for black and white women than for women of
other races. The differences in average reported weight are driven more by the upper tail for
black and (to a lesser degree) other women than for white women.
The differences in reported distributions are again less pronounced for men. We only see
differences in reported weight for black men and men of other races, and again they appear to
report higher weights when they cannot be observed by the interviewer. There are small
differences in reported height, but they are less obvious in the summary statistics than the kernel
densities.
The only cases in which Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests cannot reject the equality across
samples of either measure are for white and black men in BRFSS compared to NHANES;
however, we can reject the equality of reported BMI distributions (not shown) for black men.
Overall, these results suggest that transportability is likely not satisfied in most cases when selfreported weight and height are used as surrogates for measured weight and height.

14

Finally, it is worth noting that some differences in the results for BRFSS and ATUS
should be expected. Although both are conducted over the telephone, they have different focuses.
Differences in reporting error could be caused by something as simple as differences in the
preceding questions or in the surveys’ introductions. This could explain why our results cast
doubt on the use of the NHANES as a validation sample for white men in the ATUS, but not in
the BRFSS. It is possible that the misreporting of white men is sensitive to the focus of previous
questions on health-related topics.

4

Comparing Methods for Predicting BMI

As noted earlier, the standard method for correcting BMI is to regress measured height and
weight in NHANES on reported values, and then use the estimated coefficients to predict the
measured values in the primary dataset. Specifically, for each race and gender category, we
regress measured height (or weight) on cubic polynomials in age and reported height (or weight).
We then predict actual height and weight, and use those values to calculate predicted BMI.18
Our method is similar, but uses the percentile rank of the reports and a more flexible
functional form. Consistent with the fact that percentile ranks are (roughly) uniformly distributed
between zero and one, while reported (and actual) measures are not, we found that regressing the
actual measures on simple polynomials of the percentile ranks resulted in predicted values in

18

L&S argue that constructing a nonlinear function of mismeasured variables from predicted values of those
variables may provide a useful approximation, but predicting the nonlinear function directly is preferable. In the
case of BMI, this means that researchers who are interested in BMI should predict BMI directly instead of
constructing it from predicted height and weight; however, we find that the mean squared error associated with the
prediction of BMI is higher in NHANES when BMI is predicted directly than when it is constructed from predicted
height and weight. Furthermore, predicting height and weight is more consistent with the previous obesity literature.
Therefore, we do not follow the advice of L&S in this particular case.

15

NHANES that were poor fits for the actual measures.19 Instead, we regressed the measured
values on cubic basis splines (b-splines) in the percentile ranks, which resulted in a fit that was
comparable to that achieved when using simple polynomials in the standard method.20
The fact that measured height and weight can be accurately predicted with simpler
functions of the reported values themselves than they can be predicted with percentiles is an
advantage of the standard validation approach. Researchers who have access to an appropriate
internal validation sample, for example, should use the standard method because nothing will be
gained by transforming mismeasured variables into percentiles only to use a more complicated
functional form to fit the actual measurements. In what follows, we will compare predictions
using cubic b-splines of the percentiles to predictions using cubic polynomials of reported levels.
We do not show predictions using splines of the reported values because those predictions are
indistinguishable from the simpler predictions that are common in the literature.21
Figures 2A through 2F compare kernel densities of predicted BMI using our percentile
method to predictions using the standard validation approach for each race and gender group.
Each figure contains four graphs, one for each prediction method and primary data set. Each
graph compares predicted BMI from a primary data set to the analogous prediction from
NHANES, as well as measured BMI from NHANES. At the bottom of each figure, we include
results for Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of the differences observed in each graph.

19

The distributions of percentile ranks differ from uniform distributions only because of clustering in the selfreports, typically around multiples of five pounds.
20
The details of our estimation are included in the Appendix.
21
The
for all of the regressions used to predict height and weight are over 0.9. When measured values are
regressed on self-reported levels, there is little for a spline function to explain that is not already explained by a
polynomial.

16

Figure 2A shows that the standard method can produce values of predicted BMI that
differ significantly between samples. These differences follow the differences between samples
in reported weight, and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests strongly reject the hypothesis that the
standard method produces predicted values in ATUS or BRFSS that are equal to those in
NHANES. Again, this suggests that the standard method is inappropriate in our context.22
In contrast, the density functions of BMI predicted using the percentile rank method are
very similar across samples. The density of predicted BMI in ATUS is almost indistinguishable
from the analogous density in NHANES. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests both have p-values
over 0.8, providing no reason to doubt that the density functions of predicted BMI are the same
across samples when our method is used.
The results for black women (Figure 2C) and women of other races (2E) are similar to
those for white women. The densities of predicted BMI using our approach are noticeably closer
to the corresponding densities in NHANES, which makes them more similar to measured BMI in
NHANES (and presumably the national population). Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests again reject the
equality of the standard method across data sets, but fail to reject equality when using our
method.
The results for men are less striking than the results for women, but still support our
approach. The density functions for white men (Figure 2B) appear more similar when the
percentile method is used than when the standard method is used, but testing the equality of
distributions suggests that none of these differences are statistically significant. This is consistent
with misreporting being less pronounced for white men than for other groups. Although the
22

Recall that all three datasets should be representative of the same population. Therefore, the true BMI
distributions should not vary by sample.

17

graphs of kernel densities for black men do not tell an obvious story, the K-S tests reject the
standard approach and fail to reject our percentile method.23 Finally, the standard method is
rejected for men of other races when we compare the ATUS to NHANES, and the percentile
method again produces predictions of BMI that are more consistent across contexts.
As a robustness check, we also tested for differences in the density functions of predicted
BMI between the ATUS and BRFSS (not shown). We would not expect our percentile correction
to produce different distributions between the two primary samples, and we find no evidence that
it does. On the other hand, we find statistically significant differences for men and women of
other races in these surveys when the standard correction is used, which is consistent with the
less obvious differences in context discussed above (e.g., survey content) affecting
misreporting.24

5

Do These Differences Matter?

The results of sections 3 and 4 suggest that using the relationship between reported and actual
height and weight in the NHANES to predict BMI in data from the ATUS or BRSS is
inappropriate in most cases. Furthermore, the rank-based alternative we propose appears to work
well in practice, producing predictions of BMI that are consistent across random samples of the
same population. In this section we provide results that illustrate the potential importance of our
adjustment to empirical work.

23

Regardless of method, the BMI of black men appears to be more difficult to predict that the BMI of other groups.
This is appears to be due to errors in the prediction of height for black men. We considered the possibility that this
difficulty is related to the small sample size for black men; however, we found similar results when we expanded the
NHANES sample to include the 2005-2006 and 2009-2010 waves.
24
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests reject the equality of distributions of BMI predicted using the standard correction with
p-values less than or equal to 0.001 for other women and men. No other test suggests a statistically significant
difference in predicted values between any ATUS and BRFSS subsamples.

18

5.1 Effects of BMI Correction on Regression Estimates
This section is intended to illustrate the impact our adjustment might have on empirical work that
uses BMI or obesity in regressions. For both the BRFSS and ATUS, we consider one case where
BMI or obesity is an explanatory variable and one case where it is the dependent variable. We
report the results both for the full sample and for each race gender subgroup. None of the
estimates presented in this section consider endogeneity or any other complications researchers
might encounter. These results are presented for demonstration purposes only.
To assist with the interpretation of results, Table 3 presents average BMI and percentages
overweight, obese (BMI

30), and class II/III obese (BMI

35) by correction method and

race gender group for both the BRFSS and ATUS samples. Averages for the measured values
from NHANES are included for comparison.
Both correction methods result in greater average BMI in most cases, but the differences
between the two methods and reported values at the means appear to be fairly small. It is in the
comparison of the upper tails of the distribution that we see important differences emerge. In
both the ATUS and the BRFSS, roughly 10.5% of population reports a BMI of 35 or higher.
Applying the standard correction raises this to 12.5%. Applying our percentile-based correction
produces estimates of nearly 14%, which is close to the NHANES rate of 14.4%. Consistent with
those who are the most prone to misreporting also being the most sensitive to context, the
differences between our rank-based correction and the standard correction are typically largest in
cases where the standard correction appears to matter the most.
The patterns seen in the full sample are seen to some degree in most of the race and
gender groups, but they are most pronounced for white women. The average reported BMI for

19

this group is 26.9. The standard correction increases average BMI to 27.6, and our correction
increases it further to 28.2, which is the same as the average measured BMI from NHANES. The
differences in the correction methods are again larger at the upper tails of the distribution. For
example, the overall obesity rate based on uncorrected reports is 25.5%. The standard correction
increases the rate to 30%, and our correction increases it further to 32.7%. The actual rate from
NHANES is 33.8%. Thus our correction still slightly underestimates the obesity rate for white
women, but it does significantly better than the standard approach. Looking at class II/III
obesity, the rate is under 11% when self-reported measures are used, just over 13% using the
standard correction, and around 16% using our percentile-based correction, which again is
slightly lower than the actual rate from NHANES (17.3%).
Black men are the most obvious exception to the pattern seen in the full sample. The
average self-reported BMI in both the BRFSS and the ATUS samples is nearly indistinguishable
from average measured BMI in NHANES for black men. Furthermore, while black men appear
to under-report obesity and class II/III obesity slightly, the incidence of self-reported overweight
status is higher than the actual incidence for black men.
5.1.1

BRFSS: Food Prices and BMI
For our first empirical example, we use the BRFSS to evaluate the relationship between

state-level food prices and BMI. Table 4 reports coefficient estimates of interest from OLS
regressions of BMI on food price and other basic control variables, as well as probit estimates
(presented as average marginal effects) of the effects of food prices on the probabilities of being
obese or class II/III obese. In each case, results are presented with no adjustment, adjustment
using the standard approach, and then adjustment using our percentile method. The control
variables include race (dummies for non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white), education
20

(dummies for some high school, high school graduate, some college, and four-year college
degree or greater), marital status (dummies for married, divorced, and widowed), age, inflationadjusted household income, and a dummy for whether the year was 2008. The state food price
measure is computed from city-level data from the Council for Community and Economic
Research (formerly American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association) Cost of Living
Index.25 The sample average food price is $2.56, so a one-dollar increase in food price represents
approximately a 40% increase relative to the mean.
The results presented in Table 4 suggest that neither the standard correction nor our
correction affect the conclusion that higher food prices are associated with lower body mass;
however, the choice of correction method has potentially important implications for the
magnitudes of coefficients. For the full sample and for most subgroups, the standard correction
leads to larger magnitudes than no correction, while our correction leads to even larger
magnitudes than the standard correction. This is consistent with the aforementioned result that
measurement error in self-reported weight and height serves to compress the BMI distribution.
The more measurement error is eliminated, the more “stretched out” the BMI distribution
becomes. In other words, the smaller the measurement error, the larger the change in BMI that is
associated with a given change in food prices. For the 0-1 variables, this stretching out of the
distribution increases the number of lower-BMI individuals (i.e. those closer to the cutoff) that
are categorized as obese or class II/III obese. It is therefore not surprising that our correction,
which purges the most measurement error, would lead to larger magnitudes than the standard

25

Following Chou et al. (2004), for each city we average over the prices of each grocery food item, weighting by the
C2ER shares of each item’s importance in the basket of goods. We then define state prices as the populationweighted average of the prices in the state’s C2ER markets. Prices are in 2008 dollars.

21

correction, which purges some measurement error, which in turn leads to larger magnitudes than
using no correction.
More specifically, consider the whole-sample regressions. The effect of food price on BMI
using our percentile correction is 23% larger (-0.937 compared to -0.764) than that using no
correction, and 9% larger (-0.937 compared to -0.858) than that using the standard levels-based
correction. For obesity, the estimated effect using our approach is 20% larger than with no
correction, and 3.4% larger than with the standard correction. The differences are most striking,
however, for class II/III obesity. The estimates with our correction are 64% and 28% larger than
those using no correction and the standard correction, respectively. The finding that mitigating
measurement error matters most for class II/III obesity makes sense in light of the
aforementioned results from the literature that the extent of misreporting of both weight and
height increases as weight increases (Rowland, 1990; Cawley, 2002). In other words, correcting
measurement error leads to the largest increases in BMI among the right tail of the distribution,
where the Class II/III obesity cutoff lies.
Accurately estimating effects on class II/III obesity is vital, as a recent meta-analysis found
that an increased risk of mortality from high BMI does not begin until crossing the class II/III
obesity threshold (Flegal et al., 2013). To illustrate, suppose we are interested in predicting lives
saved from a calorie tax that raises the price of the food basket by $1. Obesity is estimated to
cause 112,000 deaths per year (Flegal et al., 2005), and Flegal et al.’s (2013) results suggest it is
reasonable to attribute all of the premature mortality from obesity to class II/III obesity. The
class II/III obesity rate in the 2007-2008 NHANES is 14.4%. Using the estimate with our
correction of -0.041 a $1 increase in food prices would reduce class II/III obesity by 28.5%,
compared to 22.2% using the standard correction’s estimate of -0.032 and 17.4% using the
22

estimate with no correction of -0.025. Multiplying these numbers by the annual deaths from
obesity, the estimated lives saved from the hypothetical policy are 31,889 using our correction,
compared to 24,889 using the standard correction and 19,444 with no correction. Therefore, the
chosen correction method can lead to important differences in policy implications, even if the
general conclusions about sign and statistical significance are unaffected.
Turning to the subsamples, we observe the same general pattern of the magnitudes
increasing as measurement error is purged for all groups except black women, black men, and
men of a race other than white or black. Even for these three groups, however, our correction still
leads to the largest magnitudes for class II/III obesity – substantially larger magnitudes for black
women and other men. For BMI, our correction increases the food price effect most substantially
relative to the standard correction for other men (14% larger estimated food price effect), black
women (14% larger), and white women (13%). For class II/III obesity our correction increases
the estimated food price effect by over 20% relative to the standard correction for all groups
except black men. The largest changes are among other men (44%), white women (41%), and
black women (37%).
5.1.2

ATUS: Food Prices and BMI
Table 5 is analogous to Table 4, but presents estimated effects of food prices on body

mass using data from the ATUS. Overall, the results are very similar, but the standard errors are
larger in Table 5 due to the smaller sample size. Looking at the entire sample, the estimated
effect of food prices on BMI is smallest when reported BMI is used and largest when our rankbased correction is used. Furthermore, correcting for measurement error appears to have the
largest effect when we consider class II/III obesity. The estimated effect of an increase in food
prices on the probability of class II/III obesity is 29% larger with the standard correction than
23

with reported values (-0.036 versus -0.028), and 22% larger with our correction than with the
standard correction (-0.044 versus -0.036).
Looking within race and gender groups, the results for white women again show that
correcting for measurement error results in larger estimated effects of prices on body mass. The
estimated effects of food prices on BMI fall for black men as we correct for measurement error,
which is consistent with black men reporting themselves as overweight more often than they are.
5.1.3 BRFSS: BMI and Diabetes
We next turn to an examination of the implications of our rank-based correction in regressions
with a weight-related independent variable. For the BRFSS, we consider a question of broad
interest to epidemiologists and health policy researchers: the impact of obesity on diabetes. We
estimate probit models with a dummy for whether the individual has ever been diagnosed with
diabetes as the dependent variable; either BMI, obese, or class II/III obese as the independent
variable of interest; and the same set of controls as our preceding BRFSS analysis in Section
5.1.1.
Average marginal effects of BMI, obesity, and class II/III obesity on P(Diabetes) are
reported in Table 6. In all regressions, the association between BMI, obesity, or class II/III
obesity and diabetes is positive and statistically significant, so the correction method again does
not influence the general conclusions. However, important differences again emerge in the
magnitudes. In most regressions, the standard correction leads to smaller magnitudes than no
correction, while our correction leads to even smaller magnitudes than the standard correction.
This is the opposite of the pattern observed when the weight-related variable was the outcome,
but is again consistent with the observation that measurement error compresses the BMI
distribution. Correcting measurement error leads to a larger change in BMI being associated with
24

a given change in diabetes, and therefore a smaller coefficient estimate when BMI is an
explanatory variable.
Turning to the results for the full sample, the most interesting observation is that the
corrections have only a minimal effect on the estimated relationship between BMI and diabetes,
but more substantial effects on the estimates for obesity and class II/III obesity. Being obese is
estimated to increase P(Diabetes) by 6.9 percentage points using no correction, 6.5 percentage
points using the standard levels correction, and 6.2 percentage points using our percentile
correction. Our correction therefore leads to a 10% smaller magnitude than no correction, and a
5% smaller magnitude than the standard correction.
For most subsamples, we observe the same pattern of the estimated effects of obesity and
severe obesity on P(diabetes) decreasing with the extent of the measurement error purged. The
most notable exceptions are for black men, but they are also the only group for which the
incidence of class II/III obesity appears to be lower when our correction is used than it is when
the standard correction is used. In the BMI regressions, our correction makes the biggest
difference for black women (10% smaller magnitude than no correction, 8% smaller magnitude
than the standard correction). In the obesity and class II/III obesity regressions, our correction is
most consequential for white women. The estimated effect of obesity on P(diabetes) using our
correction is 14% smaller than using no correction, and 7% smaller than using the standard
correction. For class II/III obesity, these numbers are 10% and 6%, respectively. It is not
surprising that the correction is important for white women since they are the group among
which underreported weight is the most common.

25

5.1.4 ATUS: BMI and Disability
The results in Table 7 provide another example of how correcting for measurement error can
affect estimates that use a measure of body mass as an independent variable. In this case, we use
data from the ATUS to consider effects of BMI, obesity and class II/III obesity on the probability
of being out of labor force due to disability.26 The results in Table 7 are average marginal effects
from probit models that use the same controls as previous regressions in the section.
As in the case of diabetes, adjusting for measurement error does not affect the basic
conclusion that body mass is positively associated with disability, but it does reduce the
estimated effects. The average marginal effect of obesity on disability falls by 26%, from 0.024
(0.005) to 0.018 (0.004), when the standard correction is applied; and by 32%, to 0.016 (0.004)
when our percentile correction is used. The difference between our correction and the standard
correction is more pronounced when we consider the effects of class II/III obesity. The estimated
effects fall by 22% when our correction is used, but by only 6% when the standard correction is
used. The results, therefore, are again consistent with measurement error compressing the upper
tail of the BMI distribution and resulting in fewer people being classified as obese or class II/III
obese.
The patterns of effects for most race and gender groups are similar to those for the entire
sample. The results for white women again mirror those for the full sample most closely;
however the results for black women may be the most striking. The average marginal effect of
class II/III obesity on the probability a black woman is disabled falls by nearly 26% when the
standard correction is applied, but by more than half when our rank-based correction is used.

26

This variable equals one if the respondent reported being out of the labor force due to disability in either the
ATUS or the CPS. Its mean (standard deviation) is 0.0559 (0.2297). We acknowledge that this is variable is not an
ideal measure of disability; however, it is still useful for the purpose of our demonstration.

26

5.2 Obesity Maps
Finally, we demonstrate the effect of measurement error correction on the estimated
prevalence of obesity in the United States. Figure 3 is inspired by the well-known obesity maps
produced by the CDC using data from BFRSS.27 Figure 4 is similar to Figure 3, but uses the
standard validation method to correct for measurement error before calculating the prevalence of
obesity. Finally, Figure 5 shows the map after our rank-based method has been used.
These three figures demonstrate that correcting for measurement error can have dramatic
effects on the estimated prevalence of obesity. Our percentile correction has a larger effect than
the standard validation approach because the standard approach is biased by the measurement
error it aims to correct. Looking at the nation as a whole, we find that 27.3% of the population
reports being obese, 30.8% are found to be obese using the standard correction, and 33.3% are
found to be obese using the correction we propose.
Table 8 summarizes the pattern of obesity prevalence in Figures 4-5. When no correction is
made, the obesity rates for most states (34) are higher than 25 percent and less than or equal to
30 percent, while no state has an obesity rate over 35 percent. With the standard correction, most
states (29) fall into the 30-35 percent range and three fall into the 35-40 percent range. Using our
correction, the modal obesity rate still falls into the 30-35 percent range, but now 15 states have
obesity rates in the 35-40 percent range. Furthermore, we find at least a quarter of the adult
population in every state is obese when our correction is applied.
It is also interesting to look at the number of states that move to a higher interval of obesity
prevalence when we correct for measurement error. When using the standard correction, 36
27

There are a couple minor differences between our maps and those produced by the CDC. While the CDC map
considers all states and uses data on all adults, we focus on adults between the ages of 19 and 64 in the continental
United States. We also pool data from 2007 and 2008 into one map instead of creating separate maps for each year.

27

states move to the next highest prevalence interval, while 12 states do not change ranges. Using
our approach, no state remains in the same prevalence interval and 14 move up two intervals,
which is consistent with a median increase in the prevalence of obesity (not shown) of just over
six percentage points.
Effects of correcting for measurement error also vary by state. The largest absolute
increases in prevalence when our correction is applied are in West Virginia and Iowa (7.5 and
7.1 percentage points, respectively). The smallest increases, 5.0 and 5.2 points, are in New York
and Rhode Island. As a percent of reported obesity prevalence, estimated prevalence increased
the most (by over 27 percent) in Delaware and Utah, and the least (around 17.4 percent) in
Mississippi and South Carolina. Finally, the corrections increase the variance between states (not
shown) from 5.88 to 6.21 with the standard correction and 6.53 with our correction.

6

Conclusion
Since Cawley (2002, 2004) it has been common in the economics-of-obesity literature to

correct for reporting error in height and weight by using data from the NHANES as an external
validation sample for the authors’ primary data. The standard approach regresses the measured
values on the reported values using NHANES data, and then uses the estimated coefficients to
predict height and weight in the primary dataset. This approach relies on the assumption that the
misreporting of height and weight is the same in both surveys, even though interview methods
and context often differ between surveys.
We propose an alternative correction that does not require misreporting to be constant
across samples. Instead, we assume that if person A says she weighs more than an otherwise
similar person B, the conditional expectation of A’s actual weight is higher than B’s. This

28

assumption implies that the relationship between the percentile rank of a respondent’s reported
height or weight and her measured height or weight will be the same in both samples, as long as
the samples are representative of the same population. We can then use percentile ranks of
reported values, in place of the reported values themselves, to predict measured values.
The implementation of our rank-based correction is similar to the standard approach. Other
than calculating the percentiles, the only difference is that our regressions require functional
forms of the percentile ranks that are more flexible than the polynomials that are commonly used
with self-reported values. The result is a correction for measurement error that is more robust
than the standard approach, while still being easy to implement.
To illustrate the value of our correction, we compare data from the NHANES and two
nationally representative telephone surveys, the BRFSS and the ATUS. Since all three datasets
are representative of the same population, we would expect the distributions of reported height
and weight to be the same if there are no survey effects; however, we repeatedly reject the
hypothesis that the distributions of these self-reports are the same across datasets. Furthermore,
our results suggest that misreporting is more sensitive to context in cases (e.g., the weight of
white women) where misreporting is more severe in the NHANES sample.
When we compare predictions of BMI using the standard approach and our rank-based
approach, we find that the standard approach predicts statistically significant differences in the
distributions of BMI between samples that are representative of the same populations, and those
differences reflect the differences in reported values. We find no evidence of such differences
between samples when BMI is predicted using our alternative method. In other words, the

29

standard approach appears to be biased by differences between samples in the misreporting it
aims to correct, while our approach is robust to such differences.
We also consider how corrections for misreported height and weight might affect empirical
research. We find that the estimated prevalence of obesity and class II/III obesity is higher when
our rank-based correction is used than when either the standard correction or no correction is
used. Next, we present examples of regression estimates with body mass as either a dependent or
an independent variable. In each of these examples, we find differences in coefficient estimates
that are consistent with measurement error compressing the upper tail of the distribution. The
differences in coefficient estimates between our correction and the standard correction are often
similar in size to the differences in estimates between the standard correction and uncorrected
reports. These differences are often economically significant and could affect the conclusions
researchers and policymakers draw.
There are a few caveats we wish to discuss. First of all, we must stress that neither the
standard approach nor our proposed alternative should be used every time researchers encounter
self-reported height and weight. We argue that our rank-based method should be used when the
validation and primary samples are representative of the same population and there is concern
that misreporting differs across samples. However, the standard approach is appropriate when
this concern is not present, such as when the validation data are a random subsample of the
primary data. One such example is the Physical Measures subsample of the Health and
Retirement Study. The use of an internal validation sample should obviously be preferred to an
external validation sample, even when our correction is used; however, such data are rarely
available to social scientists.

30

There are also cases in which we believe no use of validation data is likely to reliably
address the measurement error concern. In particular, both the standard validation method and
our alternative method rely on the assumption that the validation sample and the primary sample
are representative of the same population.28 Researchers who doubt that this assumption holds in
their data should be wary of using either validation method. Obvious examples include when the
primary and validation data survey respondents in different times or places, or when the samples
span different age ranges. In such cases, it is unclear whether measurement error would be
minimized by the standard correction, our correction, or no correction. One strategy would be to
restrict the validation sample to match the primary sample as closely as possible, and then verify
that the conclusions reached are similar using each of the three approaches.29 Additionally, it is
unclear that either correction method reliably improves on uncorrected measures when using
primary data from surveys, such as the NLSY cohorts, that include a non-random combination of
in-person and telephone interviews.30 In some applications, researchers may need to adjust for
differing patterns of misreporting within their sample before any correction is applied using
external validation data.
More broadly, our work should be seen as a warning (or reminder) that external validation
data should be used with caution. The reporting error we wish to correct can be sensitive to
differences in interview context, and even our rank-based method requires stronger assumptions
than the use of an internal validation sample would. Furthermore, context could vary in ways that
are less obvious than differences in interview method, geography, or sample age range. For
28

Differences in misreporting between populations would affect the standard correction, and differences in the
distributions of actual height and weight would affect our alternative correction. See Section 2 for more detail.
29
For instance, if the primary data includes only 18-39 year olds, researchers should drop those 40 and older from
the NHANES when constructing the validation sample. Researchers should also match their primary data to
NHANES surveys from the closest years available.
30
We invite readers who still doubt the potential effects of context on the misreporting to look at how self-reported
weight varies with telephone interviews in the NLSY79 or NLSY97.

31

example, there is no reason to assume that misreporting in surveys that span decades, such as the
BRFSS or NLSY79, has remained constant over time as waistlines expanded and social norms
changed.31
As a final note, we must acknowledge that body mass is not the same as body composition.
As discussed by Burkhauser and Cawley (2008) and others, body fat percentage or other
measures of adiposity may be preferable to BMI in many applications. Unfortunately, measures
of body composition are rarely available in large datasets because, like actual weight and height,
they are more expensive to collect than self-reported weight and height. Therefore, the
widespread use of self-reported BMI is likely to continue in the future, and reporting error will
continue to be a problem as long as self-reported BMI is used.

31

Courtemanche et al. (2014) apply our correction to BRFSS year-by-year for exactly this reason. Cawley and
Burkhauser (2006) also acknowledge this problem.

32

References
Baum, Charles. “The effects of cigarette costs on BMI and obesity,” Health Economics 18, no. 1 (2009):
3-19.
Baum, Charles. “Effects of food stamps on obesity,” Southern Economic Journal 77, no. 3 (2011): 623651.
Baum, Charles and Christopher Ruhm. “Age, socioeconomic status and obesity growth,” Journal of
Health Economics 28, no. 3 (2009): 635-648.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz. “Measurement error in survey data.” Handbook of
econometrics 5 (2001): 3705-3843.
Burkhauser, Richard and John Cawley. “Beyond BMI: The value of more accurate measures of fatness
and obesity in social science research.” Journal of Health Economics 27, no. 2 (2008): 519-529.
Burkhauser, Richard, John Cawley, and Maximilian Schmeiser. “The timing of the rise in U.S. obesity
varies with measure of fatness.” Economics and Human Biology 7, no. 3 (2009): 307-318.
Carroll, Raymond J, David Ruppert, Leonard A Stefanski, Ciprian M Crainiceanu. Measurement Error in
Nonlinear Models: a Modern Perspective, 2nd edition. (2006) Chapman & Hall, Boca Raton, FL.
Cawley, John. “Addiction and the consumption of calories: Implications for obesity.” Unpublished
manuscript (2002), Cornell University.
Cawley, John. “The impact of obesity on wages.” Journal of Human Resources 39, no. 2 (2004): 451474.
Cawley, John and Richard Burkhauser. “Beyond BMI: The value of more accurate measures of fatness
and obesity in social science research.” NBER Working Paper No. 12291 (2006).
Cawley, John and Anna Choi. “Health Disparities Across Education: The Role of Differential Reporting
Error.” (2014)
Cawley, John and Chad Meyerhoefer. “The medical care costs of obesity: An instrumental variables
approach.” Journal of Health Economics 31, no. 1 (2012): 219-230.
Cawley, John and Sheldon Danzinger. “Morbid obesity and the transition from welfare to work.” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 24, no. 4 (2005): 727-743.
Cawley, John, John Moran, and Kosali Simon. “The impact of income on the weight of elderly
Americans.” Health Economics 19, no. 8 (2010): 979-993.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer. “An economic analysis of adult obesity: Results
from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.” Journal of Health Economics 23, no. 3
(2004): 565-587.
Courtemanche, Charles, Garth Heutel, and Patrick McAlvanah. “Impatience, incentives, and obesity.”
Economic Journal (forthcoming).
Eid, J., H. Overman, D. Puga, and M. Turner. “Fat city: Questioning the relationship between urban
sprawl and obesity.” Journal of Urban Economics 63, no. 2 (2008), 385-404.
33

Fan, Maoyang. “Do food stamps contribute to obesity in low-income women? Evidence from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 92, no. 4 (2010),
1165-1180.
Flegal, Katherine, M. Carroll, R. Kuczmarski, C. Johnson. “Overweight and obesity in the United States:
prevalence and trends, 1960-1994,” International Journal of Obesity Related Metabolic Disorders 22,
no. 1 (1998): 39-47.
Flegal, Katherine, Barry Graubard, David Williamson, and Mitchell Gail. “Excess deaths associated with
underweight, overweight, and obesity,” Journal of the American Medical Association 293, no. 15
(2005): 1861-1867.
Flegal, Katherine, Brian Kit, Heather Orpana, and Barry Graubard. “Association of All-Cause Mortality
with Overweight and Obesity using Standard Body Mass Index Categories: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis.” Journal of the American Medical Association 309, no. 1 (2013): 71-82.
Goldman, Dana, Darius Lakdawalla, and Yuhui Zheng. “Food prices and the dynamics of body weight”
in Economic Aspects of Obesity, Grossman, Michael and Naci Mocan eds., Chicago, IL (2011):
University of Chicago Press.
Gregory, Christian. “Wages, BMI, and Age.” Unpublished manuscript (2010), United States Department
of Agriculture Economic Research Service.
Gregory, Christian and Christopher Ruhm. “Where does the wage penalty bite?” in Economic Aspects of
Obesity, Grossman, Michael and Naci Mocan eds., Chicago, IL (2011): University of Chicago Press.
Han, Euna, Edward C. Norton, Sally C. Stearns. “Weight and wages: fat versus lean paychecks.” Health
Economics, 18, no. 5 (2009): 535-548.
Lakdawalla, Darius and Tomas Philipson. “The growth of obesity and technological change: A theoretical
and empirical investigation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8965
(2002).
Lee, Lung-fei, and Jungsywan H. Sepanski. “Estimation of linear and nonlinear errors-in-variables
models using validation data.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 90, no. 429 (1995):
130-140.
Maclean, Johanna Catherine, and Asia Sikora. "Personality traits and body weight: Evidence from the
Health and Retirement Study." (2014).
Majumder, Md. Alauddin. “Does obesity matter for wages? Evidence from the United States.” Economic
Papers 32, no. 2 (2013): 200-217.
Ogden, C.L. and M.D. Carroll. “Prevalence of Overweight, Obesity, and Extreme Obesity Among Adults:
United States, Trends 1960-1962 Through 2007-2008,” National Center for Health Statistics report.
(2010) http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_adult_07_08/obesity_adult_07_08.htm.
Pinkston, Joshua C. (2014) “The Dynamic Effects of Obesity on the Wages of Young Workers.”
University of Louisiville, mimeo.
34

Plantinga, Andrew and Stephanie Bernell. “The association between urban sprawl and obesity: Is it a twoway street?” Journal of Regional Science 47, no. 5 (2007): 857-879.
Rowland, M.L. “Self-reported weight and height.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52, no. 6
(1990): 1125-1133.
Ruhm, Christopher. “Healthy Living in Hard Times.” Journal of Health Economics 24, no. 2 (2005): 341363.
Schmeiser, Maximilian. “Expanding wallets and waistlines: The impact of family income on the BMI of
women and men eligible for the earned income tax credit.” Health Economics 18, no. 11 (2009):
1277-1294.

35

Appendix: How to Use Our Percentile-Based Correction
Although our percentile-based approach may sound more complicated to implement than the
standard approach, we want to assure the reader that the added complication is trivial. Our
approach adds two simple steps to the standard approach. Each of those two steps requires one
line of code in Stata.
First, we find the percentile rank of the reported measure in the relevant subsample. This
is easily done in Stata using the “cumul” command by dataset, race or ethnic group, and gender.
Using reported weight as an example, we would have:
bysort dataset race sex: cumul reported_weight [aw= samp_wt], g(wt_rank) equal
where wt_rank is the newly created percentile rank in the distribution of reported_weight for the
subsample determined by the indicators dataset, race and sex.
Actual weight must then be regressed on a flexible function of wt_rank, and a polynomial
in age. We found that simple polynomials in wt_rank were not flexible enough to predict actual
weight, and used cubic basis splines in wt_rank instead. The second step our method adds to the
standard approach generates the splines with the user-written command “bspline”.1 For example,
bspline, xvar(wt_rank) p(3) gen(wt_spline) knots(0, .05, .1, .25, .5, .75, .9, .95, 1)
where wt_spline is the prefix of the generated splines.2
From this point on, our approach closely resembles the standard approach. Our splines
simply replace the polynomial in reported weight that previous authors have used:

1

The command “bspline” was written by Roger Newson. Documentation and code can be found here:
http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:boc:bocode:s411701
2
The number and spacing of knots can be adjusted as needed to improve the fit of the predicted values.

36

reg actual_weight (i.race##i.sex)##(c.age##c.age##c.age c.wt_spline*) [aw=samp_wt], nocons
Weight is predicted in both the validation sample, which contains actual_weight, and the primary
sample. Finally, the process can be repeated for height, allowing a predicted BMI measure to be
constructed.3

3

Alternatively, BMI itself could be predicted directly following the same approach.

37

Table 1. Summary Statistics by Dataset
BRFSS
67.37
(4.18)

ATUS
67.21
(4.10)

NHANES
67.24
(4.08)

178.6
(44.67)

178
(43.60)

180
(45.15)

….

….

66.9
(3.88)

….

….

181.8
(47.18)

White

0.680
(0.466)

0.689
(0.463)

0.674
(0.469)

Black

0.103
(0.303)

0.114
(0.318)

0.119
(0.323)

Other Race/Ethnicity

0.217
(0.412)

0.197
(0.397)

0.207
(0.405)

Male

0.516
(0.500)

0.513
(0.500)

0.504
(0.500)

Age

41.29
(12.48)

41.34
(12.54)

41.05
(12.67)

Observations

17,721

539,072

4,113

Reported Height
Reported Weight
Actual Height
Actual Weight

Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. All samples weighted to be representive of
adults in the US between the ages of 19 and 64 in the years 2007 and 2008. "Other
Race/Ethnicity" includes all respondents who indentify as Hispanic.

38

Table 2A. Comparison of Self-Reported Values: BRFSS vs. NHANES
Mean

Weight

NHANES
BRFSS

163.907
159.947

Height

NHANES
BRFSS

64.828
64.857

Percentiles of Distribution
Median
75th
90th
White Women
155
185
220
150
180
210
65
65

Weight

NHANES
BRFSS

199.387
200.060

195
195

Height

NHANES
BRFSS

70.690
70.731

71
71

67
67
White Men
220
220
73
72

0.972

250
250

0.591

74
74

0.559

Weight

NHANES
BRFSS

182.627
178.571

Height

NHANES
BRFSS

64.729
64.793

65
65

Weight

NHANES
BRFSS

198.628
201.797

190
195

Height

NHANES
BRFSS

70.221
70.279

70
70

Weight

NHANES
BRFSS

154.718
153.868

148
148

Height

NHANES
BRFSS

62.893
63.171

63
63

Weight

NHANES
BRFSS

180.930
183.433

175
179

Height

NHANES
BRFSS

67.585
68.142

67
68

Black Men
225
225
72
72

Other Men
200
200
70
71

0.047

68
68

0.572

250
260

0.179

74
74

0.317

Other Women
175
205
172
200
65
65

0.003

68
68

Black Women
170
214
250
170
200
240
67
67

Kolmogorov-Smirnov
Test (p-value)

0.498

66
67

0.025

230
230

0.017

72
72

<0.001

Notes: All samples weighted to be representative of adults in the US between the ages of 19 and 64 in the years 2007 and 2008. "Other"
includes all respondents who identify as Hispanic.

39

Table 2B. Comparison of Self-Reported Values: ATUS vs. NHANES
Mean

Percentiles of Distribution
Median
75th
90th
White Women
155
185
220
150
180
210

Weight

NHANES
ATUS

163.907
159.348

Height

NHANES
ATUS

64.828
64.773

65
65

67
67

Weight

NHANES
ATUS

199.387
197.917

White Men
195
220
190
220

Height

NHANES
ATUS

70.690
70.487

71
70

73
72

0.993

250
250

0.270

74
74

0.020

Weight

NHANES
ATUS

182.627
176.208

Height

NHANES
ATUS

64.729
64.434

65
64

Weight

NHANES
ATUS

198.628
198.814

190
195

Height

NHANES
ATUS

70.221
69.827

70
70

Black Men
225
225
72
72

0.116

250
257

0.331

74
74

0.060

Weight

NHANES
ATUS

154.718
150.478

Height

NHANES
ATUS

62.893
62.853

63
63

Weight

NHANES
ATUS

180.930
184.299

175
180

Height

NHANES
ATUS

67.585
67.931

67
68

Other Men
200
200
70
70

0.017

68
68

Other Women
148
175
205
140
170
197
65
65

0.002

68
68

Black Women
170
214
250
170
200
237
67
66

Kolmogorov-Smirnov
Test (p-value)

0.001

66
66

0.764

230
238

0.010

72
72

0.036

Notes: All samples weighted to be representative of adults in the US between the ages of 19 and 64 in the years 2007 and 2008. "Other"
includes all respondents who identify as Hispanic.

40

Table 3. Average Body Mass by Correction Method and Race/Gender Group from
BRFSS and ATUS, Compared to Actual Measures from NHANES
BMI
Reported Standard
Method
Full Sample
28.51
BRFSS
27.68
28.21
ATUS
27.71
28.22

28.49
28.52

Overweight
Reported Standard Percentile
Method
Method
67.0%
63.4%
65.9%
67.2%
64.0%
66.2%
67.4%

28.22
28.20

53.2%
53.6%

60.6%
57.9%
58.0%

71.2%
71.8%

71.2%
71.8%
72.2%

Percentile
Method

White Women
BRFSS
26.91
ATUS
26.94

28.20
27.63
27.65

White Men
BRFSS
28.02
ATUS
27.98

28.42
28.41
28.35

Black Women
BRFSS
30.13
ATUS
30.11

31.50
30.96
30.90

31.52
31.52

74.0%
74.5%

76.5%
76.6%
76.9%

Black Men
BRFSS
28.45
ATUS
28.50

28.51
28.60
28.64

28.47
28.48

69.7%
70.0%

Other Women
BRFSS
27.22
ATUS
27.06

28.39
27.87
27.71

28.25
28.27

Other Men
BRFSS
27.75
ATUS
27.99

28.13
28.07
28.30

28.45
28.47

28.14
28.18

Obese
Reported Standard
Method
33.6%
28.0%
31.4%
28.5%
31.7%

33.0%
33.0%

Class II/III Obese
Reported Standard Percentile
Method
Method
14.4%
10.5%
12.5%
13.8%
10.7%
12.5%
13.9%

32.7%
32.6%

10.8%
10.9%

17.3%
13.3%
13.2%

15.8%
16.0%

9.1%
9.0%

10.2%
10.9%
10.8%

11.0%
10.9%
28.2%
28.2%

Percentile
Method

25.5%
25.6%

33.8%
30.0%
30.2%

27.9%
28.2%

31.3%
30.8%
30.7%

78.9%
79.5%

42.2%
42.5%

48.1%
46.0%
45.8%

47.6%
47.8%

22.0%
21.0%

28.7%
24.9%
23.1%

65.8%
68.4%
68.8%

67.0%
66.5%

33.5%
33.7%

35.9%
35.5%
36.1%

36.1%
35.1%

12.0%
12.8%

14.0%
14.6%
14.6%

13.6%
13.5%

56.2%
54.0%

64.1%
60.8%
57.8%

63.5%
62.9%

27.5%
27.3%

35.1%
30.7%
30.1%

32.7%
31.8%

10.4%
10.3%

15.7%
12.1%
11.9%

14.7%
14.4%

68.4%
70.4%

70.8%
69.5%
71.8%

26.5%
28.6%

29.1%
29.1%
30.9%

7.9%
8.5%

9.6%
8.8%
9.2%

9.0%
9.1%

60.8%
61.0%
72.0%
72.0%

68.9%
69.4%

31.8%
31.8%

29.7%
30.2%

Notes: Actual measures from NHANES are underlined and in italics. All samples weighted to be representive of adults in the US between the ages of 19 and 64.

41

Table 4. BRFSS Estimated Effects of Food Prices on BMI, P(Obese), and P(Class II/III Obese)
by Race-Gender Group and BMI Correction Method

Whole Sample

-0.764
(0.170)***

BMI
Standard
Method
-0.858
(0.187)***

White Women

-0.704
(0.216)***

-0.786
(0.218)***

-0.890
(0.226)***

-0.042
(0.012)***

-0.046
(0.012)***

-0.051
(0.013)***

-0.021
(0.008)***

-0.027
(0.008)***

-0.038
(0.009)***

White Men

-0.415
(0.191)**

-0.479
(0.193)**

-0.510
(0.208)**

-0.032
(0.015)**

-0.037
(0.015)**

-0.038
(0.015)***

-0.013
(0.011)

-0.014
(0.010)

-0.017
(0.011)

Black Women

-0.894
(0.368)**

-0.871
(0.362)**

-0.991
(0.401)**

-0.029
(0.029)

-0.020
(0.033)

-0.026
(0.029)

-0.050
(0.017)***

-0.049
(0.018)***

-0.067
(0.021)***

Black Men

-1.565
(0.229)***

-1.785
(0.258)***

-1.721
(0.276)***

-0.130
(0.019)***

-0.129
(0.022)***

-0.105
(0.019)***

-0.055
(0.011)***

-0.077
(0.014)***

-0.081
(0.011)***

Other Women

-1.478
(0.321)***

-1.539
(0.301)***

-1.640
(0.334)***

-0.098
(0.022)***

-0.113
(0.026)***

-0.119
(0.025)***

-0.037
(0.010)***

-0.047
(0.013)***

-0.061
(0.013)***

Other Men

-0.710
(0.286)**

-0.855
(0.355)**

-0.975
(0.364)***

-0.042
(0.017)**

-0.063
(0.021)***

-0.061
(0.019)***

-0.028
(0.011)**

-0.036
(0.014)**

-0.052
(0.020)**

Reported

Percentile
Method
-0.937
(0.189)***

-0.050
(0.010)***

Obese
Standard
Method
-0.058
(0.011)***

Percentile
Method
-0.060
(0.012)***

Class II/III Obese
Standard
Percentile
Reported
Method
Method
-0.025
-0.032
-0.041
(0.007)*** (0.009)*** (0.010)***

Reported

Notes: All cells report estimated effects of $1 increase in state food price basket in the corresponding regression; the average food price is $2.56. Average
marginal effects are reported in the probit regressions for obesity and Class II/III obesity. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in
parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. The regressions include control variables for race, education, marital
status, age, inflation-adjusted household income, and a dummy for whether the year was 2008. The BRFSS sampling weights are used.

42

Table 5. ATUS Estimated Effects of Food Prices on BMI, P(Obese), and P(Class II/III Obese)
by Race-Gender Group and BMI Correction Method

Whole Sample

-1.099***
(0.182)

BMI
Standard
Method
-1.179***
(0.192)

White Women

-1.050***
(0.376)

-1.137***
(0.391)

-1.139***
(0.408)

-0.057**
(0.024)

-0.073***
(0.024)

-0.075***
(0.026)

-0.030
(0.018)

-0.034**
(0.016)

-0.044**
(0.021)

White Men

-0.605
(0.430)

-0.695
(0.458)

-0.822*
(0.487)

-0.080**
(0.036)

-0.085**
(0.043)

-0.074*
(0.041)

-0.020*
(0.012)

-0.021
(0.016)

-0.008
(0.014)

Black Women

-1.499
(1.079)

-1.675
(1.169)

-1.800
(1.294)

-0.077
(0.071)

-0.073
(0.082)

-0.084
(0.088)

-0.007
(0.052)

-0.055
(0.046)

-0.097
(0.067)

-1.316**
(0.521)

-1.290**
(0.558)

-1.198**
(0.536)

-0.029
(0.067)

-0.058
(0.065)

-0.028
(0.040)

-0.049*
(0.027)

-0.038
(0.039)

-0.059**
(0.029)

-0.929
(0.658)

-0.901
(0.671)

-0.978
(0.677)

-0.099**
(0.040)

-0.047
(0.057)

-0.055
(0.064)

-0.015
(0.014)

-0.019
(0.017)

-0.055***
(0.021)

-1.876***
(0.692)

-2.051***
(0.690)

-2.174***
(0.683)

-0.130***
(0.049)

-0.119**
(0.049)

-0.150***
(0.045)

-0.047
(0.034)

-0.075**
(0.035)

-0.079**
(0.032)

Reported

Black Men
Other Women
Other Men

Percentile
Method
-1.251***
(0.207)

-0.083***
(0.015)

Obesity
Standard
Method
-0.083***
(0.018)

Percentile
Method
-0.084***
(0.016)

Reported

Class II/III Obesity
Standard
Percentile
Reported
Method
Method
-0.028*** -0.036*** -0.044***
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.011)

Notes: All cells report estimated effects of $1 increase in state food price basket in the corresponding regression; the average food price is $2.56. Average marginal effects are reported in the
probit regressions for obesity and Class II/III obesity. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5%
level; * 10% level. The regressions include control variables for race, education, marital status, age, inflation-adjusted household income, and a dummy for whether the year was 2008. The
ATUS sampling weights are used.

43

Table 6 – BRFSS Estimated Effects of BMI, Obesity, and Class II/III obesity on P(Diabetes)
by Race-Gender Group and BMI Correction Method

0.069
(0.002)***

Obese
Standard
Method
0.065
(0.003)***

Percentile
Method
0.062
(0.002)***

Class II/III Obese
Standard
Percentile
Reported
Method
Method
0.107
0.102
0.096
(0.005)*** (0.005)*** (0.004)***

Whole Sample

0.0042
(0.0001)***

BMI
Standard
Percentile
Method
Method
0.0041
0.0041
(0.0001)*** (0.0001)***

White Women

0.0036
(0.0001)***

0.0035
0.0034
(0.0001)*** (0.0001)***

0.073
(0.002)***

0.068
(0.002)***

0.063
(0.002)***

0.103
(0.003)***

0.098
(0.003)***

0.088
(0.003)***

White Men

0.0044
(0.0002)***

0.0042
0.0044
(0.0002)*** (0.0002)***

0.065
(0.003)***

0.062
(0.002)***

0.061
(0.002)***

0.114
(0.004)***

0.107
(0.004)***

0.105
(0.004)***

Black Women

0.0051
(0.0002)***

0.0050
0.0046
(0.0002)*** (0.0002)***

0.079
(0.004)***

0.077
(0.004)***

0.072
(0.004)***

0.100
(0.007)***

0.098
(0.007)***

0.097
(0.006)***

Black Men

0.0064
(0.0005)***

0.0058
0.0060
(0.0004)*** (0.0004)***

0.081
(0.008)***

0.073
(0.008)***

0.078
(0.009)***

0.125
(0.013)***

0.116
(0.015)***

0.121
(0.013)***

Other Women

0.0040
(0.0002)***

0.0043
0.0043
(0.0002)*** (0.0003)***

0.072
(0.007)***

0.067
(0.006)***

0.068
(0.006)***

0.094
(0.013)***

0.093
(0.012)***

0.093
(0.010)***

Other Men

0.0040
(0.0004)***

0.0041
0.0041
(0.0004)*** (0.0005)***

0.057
(0.005)***

0.052
(0.006)***

0.050
(0.005)***

0.111
(0.017)***

0.099
(0.021)***

0.083
(0.017)***

Reported

Reported

Notes: All regressions are probits; the cells report average marginal effects of BMI and average effects of a switch from 0 to 1 in obesity and Class II/III obesity
status. The dependent variable is a dummy for ever being diagnosed with diabetes; its sample mean is 0.065. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and
clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. The regressions include control variables for
race (dummies for non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white), education (dummies for some high school but no degree, high school degree but no further,
some college but no degree, and four-year college degree or greater), marital status (dummies for married, divorced, and widowed), age, inflation-adjusted
household income, and a dummy for whether the year was 2008. The BRFSS sampling weights are used.

44

Table 7. ATUS Estimated Effects of BMI, Obesity, and Class II/III Obesity on P(Disabled)
by Race-Gender Group and BMI Correction Method

Whole Sample

0.0020***
(0.0003)

BMI
Standard
Method
0.0019***
(0.0003)

White Women

0.0027***
(0.0005)

0.0026***
(0.0005)

0.0025***
(0.0005)

0.0369***
(0.0078)

0.0295***
(0.0076)

0.0239***
(0.0078)

0.0533***
(0.0093)

0.0498***
(0.0090)

0.0442***
(0.0081)

0.0004
(0.0008)

0.0003
(0.0007)

0.0004
(0.0006)

0.0050
(0.0072)

0.0048
(0.0068)

0.0032
(0.0067)

0.0198**
(0.0081)

0.0152*
(0.0084)

0.0133*
(0.0080)

0.0039***
(0.0011)

0.0038***
(0.0010)

0.0031***
(0.0009)

0.0271
(0.0201)

0.0145
(0.0174)

0.0164
(0.0152)

0.0820***
(0.0184)

0.0607***
(0.0156)

0.0369**
(0.0148)

0.0022
(0.0032)

0.0014
(0.0028)

0.0013
(0.0025)

0.0617*
(0.0373)

0.0126
(0.0290)

0.0290
(0.0269)

0.0709**
(0.0316)

0.0781**
(0.0394)

0.0622**
(0.0301)

Other Women

0.0026***
(0.0004)

0.0026***
(0.0005)

0.0026***
(0.0005)

0.0345***
(0.0069)

0.0350***
(0.0067)

0.0345***
(0.0073)

0.0411***
(0.0111)

0.0413***
(0.0105)

0.0337***
(0.0100)

Other Men

0.0020**
(0.0008)

0.0023***
(0.0008)

0.0022***
(0.0007)

0.0229***
(0.0077)

0.0198***
(0.0072)

0.0223***
(0.0070)

0.0431***
(0.0117)

0.0430***
(0.0099)

0.0373***
(0.0127)

Reported

White Men
Black Women
Black Men

Percentile
Method
0.0017***
(0.0002)

0.0237***
(0.0045)

Obesity
Standard
Method
0.0175***
(0.0041)

Percentile
Method
0.0161***
(0.0041)

Class II/III Obesity
Standard
Percentile
Reported
Method
Method
0.0414*** 0.0388*** 0.0319***
(0.0042)
(0.0041)
(0.0037)

Reported

Notes: All regressions are probits; the cells report average marginal effects of BMI and average effects of a switch from 0 to 1 in obesity and Class II/III
obesity status. The dependent variable is a dummy for being out of labor market due to disability. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered
by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. The regressions include control variables for race
(dummies for non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white), education (dummies for some high school but no degree, high school degree but no further,
some college but no degree, and four-year college degree or greater), marital status (dummies for married, divorced, and widowed), age, inflation-adjusted
household income, and a dummy for whether the year was 2008. The ATUS sampling weights are used.

45

Table 8: Summary of State-Level Obesity
Prevalence Results
Reported
Standard
Percentile
Obesity
Correction
Correction
Number of States in Each Range of Obesity Prevalence
20-25%
8
1
0
25-30%
34
15
3
30-35 %
6
29
30
35-40%
0
3
15
Number of States Moving to a Higher Prevalence Category,
Relative to Reported Prevalence
No Change
-12
0
Up 1 Category
-36
34
Up 2 Categories
-0
14
Notes: This table summarizes results presented in Figures 3, 4 and 5. The
data are from the 2007 and 2008 BRFSS. Observations are limited to the 48
states in the continental U.S.

46

47

48

Kolmogorov-Smirnov Tests (p-values) for Equality of Density Functions
ATUS vs. NHANES
BRFSS vs. NHANES

Standard Method
0.006
0.006

49

Percentile Method
0.908
0.826

Kolmogorov-Smirnov Tests (p-values) for Equality of Density Functions
ATUS vs. NHANES
BRFSS vs. NHANES

Standard Method
0.809
0.819

50

Percentile Method
0.480
0.382

Kolmogorov-Smirnov Tests (p-values) for Equality of Density Functions
ATUS vs. NHANES
BRFSS vs. NHANES

Standard Method
0.049
0.043

51

Percentile Method
0.734
0.959

Kolmogorov-Smirnov Tests (p-values) for Equality of Density Functions
ATUS vs. NHANES
BRFSS vs. NHANES

Standard Method
0.075
0.001

52

Percentile Method
0.312
0.158

Kolmogorov-Smirnov Tests (p-values) for Equality of Density Functions
ATUS vs. NHANES
BRFSS vs. NHANES

Standard Method
0.001
0.005

53

Percentile Method
0.263
0.254

Kolmogorov-Smirnov Tests (p-values) for Equality of Density Functions
ATUS vs. NHANES
BRFSS vs. NHANES

Standard Method
0.018
0.813

54

Percentile Method
0.461
0.579

55

56

57

