NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SAFETY TRAP
Ricardo J. Caballero
Emmanuel Farhi
Working Paper 19927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19927

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

For useful comments, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Guillermo Calvo, Gauti Eggertsson, Oliver
Hart, Gary Gorton, Valentin Haddad, Bengt Holmström, Narayana Kocherlakota, Anton Korinek,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Matteo Maggiori, Neil Mehrota, Guillermo Ordonez, Ricardo Reis, Yuliy
Sannikov, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Kevin Stiroh, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde,
Iv`an Werning, and Mike Woodford. An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title: “A
Model of the Safe Asset Mechanism (SAM): Safety Traps and Economic Policy.” The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Emmanuel Farhi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Safety Trap
Ricardo J. Caballero and Emmanuel Farhi
NBER Working Paper No. 19927
February 2014, Revised January 2017
JEL No. E0,E1,E5,E52
ABSTRACT
In this paper we provide a model of the macroeconomic implications of safe asset shortages. In
particular, we discuss the emergence of a deflationary safety trap equilibrium with endogenous
risk premia. It is an acute form of a liquidity trap, in which the shortage of a specific form of
assets, safe assets, as opposed to a general shortage of assets, is the fundamental driving force. At
the ZLB, our model has a Keynesian cross representation, in which net safe asset supply plays the
role of an aggregate demand shifter. Essentially, safety traps correspond to liquidity traps in
which the emergence of an endogenous risk premium significantly alters the connection between
macroeconomic policy and economic activity. “Helicopter drops” of money, safe public debt
issuances, swaps of private risky assets for safe public debt, or increases in the inflation target,
stimulate aggregate demand and output, while forward guidance is less effective. The safety trap
can be arbitrarily persistent, as in the secular stagnation hypothesis, despite the existence of
infinitely lived assets.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
emmanuel.farhi@gmail.com

The Safety Trap
Emmanuel Farhi∗

Ricardo J. Caballero

This version: January 18, 2017
Abstract
In this paper we provide a model of the macroeconomic implications of safe asset shortages. In particular, we discuss the emergence of a deflationary safety trap equilibrium with
endogenous risk premia. It is an acute form of a liquidity trap, in which the shortage of a specific form of assets, safe assets, as opposed to a general shortage of assets, is the fundamental
driving force. At the ZLB, our model has a Keynesian cross representation, in which net safe
asset supply plays the role of an aggregate demand shifter. Essentially, safety traps correspond
to liquidity traps in which the emergence of an endogenous risk premium significantly alters
the connection between macroeconomic policy and economic activity. “Helicopter drops” of
money, safe public debt issuances, swaps of private risky assets for safe public debt, or increases
in the inflation target, stimulate aggregate demand and output, while forward guidance is less
effective. The safety trap can be arbitrarily persistent, as in the secular stagnation hypothesis,
despite the existence of infinitely lived assets.

1

Introduction

One of the main structural features of the global economy in recent years is the apparent shortage of
safe assets. The two black lines in Figure 1 illustrate the paths of the short-term interest rate (dark
blue area) and an estimate of the expected return on equity. The difference between the two lines
is the equity risk premium (light blue area).1 Short-term rates feature a widely noted downward
secular trend and a sharp drop during the Great Recession. The evolution of the expected return
on equity is markedly different: It features the same downward trend as the short-term interest
rate until the early 2000s but then remains more or less stable. The disconnect between a stable
expected return on equity and a declining short-term interest rate is particularly salient after 2002,
and even more so since the beginning of the Great Recession. A similar disconnect is observed
Respectively: MIT and NBER; Harvard and NBER. E-mails: caball@mit.edu, efarhi@harvard.edu. Ricardo
Caballero thanks the NSF for financial support. First draft: October 9, 2012. For useful comments, we thank Daron
Acemoglu, Guillermo Calvo, Gauti Eggertsson, Oliver Hart, Gary Gorton, Valentin Haddad, Bengt Holmström,
Narayana Kocherlakota, Anton Korinek, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Matteo Maggiori, Neil Mehrota, Guillermo Ordonez,
Ricardo Reis, Yuliy Sannikov, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Kevin Stiroh, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde,
Ivàn Werning, and Mike Woodford. An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title: “A Model of the Safe
Asset Mechanism (SAM): Safety Traps and Economic Policy.”
1
The expected return on equity and the equity risk premium are notoriously hard to estimate, and hence our
description of the evolution of these variables should be interpreted as a central scenario but with caution. Other
studies report broadly similar results. See for example Daly (2016). Campbell (2008) document similar evolutions
but of a smaller magnitude.
∗

1

!"#$"%&'(%%)(*+,"-

!"#$#%"$&'()"*"*

"%
"$
"#
""
"!
&%
&$
&#
&"
&!
%
$
#
"
!
&'%!

&'%(

&''!

&''(

"!!!

)*+,-+./01/+.23/-0-4+56

"!!(

"!&!

"!&(

)*+0-+./0.7+.6089:

Figure 1: Short-term interest rates (one-year Treasury yield), equity risk premium (one-year ahead
equity risk premium or ERP), and expected return on equity (sum of one-year ahead Treasury yield
and of one-year ahead ERP). Sources: one-year Treasury yield: Federal Reserve H.15; one year ahead
ERP: Duarte and Rosa (2015). The ERP is calculated as the first principal component of twenty models
of the one-year-ahead equity risk premium.

between estimates of real returns on (risky) productive capital by Gomme et al. (2011) as well as
Hall (2014) and short-term interest rates (see e.g. Caballero et al. 2017).
The stark divergence between safe and risky expected rates of return is suggestive of an increased
shortage of safe assets, the intensification of which at the onset of the Great Recession pushed the
U.S. economy against the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) where it remained for a long time, and still
remains in many developed economies. Decomposing these developments into shifts in safe asset
demand and safe asset supply is plagued with difficulties, and some studies attribute the shortage
to a decrease in the supply of safe assets (see e.g. Barclays 2012 who estimates that about 50% of
the supply of safe assets was destroyed during the U.S. and European crises) while others emphasize
the increase in the demand for safe assets (see e.g. Goldman Sachs 2012).
In this paper we provide a simple model of the macroeconomic implications of safe asset shortages. Safe assets are in zero net supply, issued by some agents to other agents through a process of
securitization of risky assets in positive net supply hampered by a financial friction. We discuss the
emergence of a deflationary safety trap equilibrium with endogenous risk premia once the economy
hits the ZLB. It is an acute form of a liquidity trap, in which the shortage of a specific form of
assets (safe assets), as opposed to a general shortage of assets, is the fundamental driving force.
The model is a perpetual youth OLG model with nominal rigidities and heterogeneous agents:
Neutrals (risk neutral) and Knightians (infinitely risk averse). Neutrals act as financial intermediaries by owning risky Lucas’ trees (aggregate risk) and issuing safe assets to Knightians. This
securitization process is hampered by a financial friction. At a given safe interest rate, as the supply
2

of safe assets shrinks relative to demand, a shortage of safe assets develops. The safe interest rate
drops and the risk premium rises. This mechanism transfers resources from Knightians to Neutrals,
reduces the demand for safe assets, and restores equilibrium in the safe asset market.
However, once the safe rate hits the ZLB, the transfer mechanism breaks down, and instead
equilibrium in the safe asset market is endogenously restored through a drop in output (income),
which reduces the demand for safe assets. This leads to a dual view of safe asset shortages. As
long as safe interest rates are positive, safe asset shortages are essentially benign. But when safe
interest rates reach the ZLB, they become malign. This is because at the ZLB tipping point, the
virtuous equilibrating mechanism through a reduction in safe interest rates is replaced by a perverse
equilibrating mechanism through a reduction in output.
There is an alternative, goods-markets, representation of the equilibrating mechanism. Figure 2
illustrates how equilibrium output (ξX) endogenously drops below exogenous potential output (X)
at the ZLB (when the safe interest rate is rK = 0). When prices are rigid, the determination of
equilibrium capacity utilization (ξ) can be represented by a standard Keynesian cross where AS(ξX)
is aggregate supply and AD(ξX) is aggregate demand. Reflecting the fact that output is demand
determined, aggregate supply is simply the 45 degree line AS(ξX) = ξX. Aggregate demand is
the sum of the aggregate consumptions of Knightians and Neutrals. The aggregate consumption
of Knightians θV S is a constant fraction θ of their aggregate wealth which is equal to the gross
supply of safe assets V S . The aggregate consumption of Neutrals is equal to their aggregate steadystate income which is equal to the sum of their aggregate labor income (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξX and their
aggregate dividend income δξX net of the aggregate interest payments to Knightians rK V S , where
δ is the fraction of output that accrues as dividends and α is the fraction of Knightians in the
population (an index of the gross demand for safe assets). The key observation is that aggregate
demand increases with output ξX, decreases with the safe interest rate rK , increases with the supply
of safe assets V S , decreases with the demand index for safe assets α.
A drop in safe asset supply or an increase in safe asset demand shift aggregate demand down. At
the ZLB, this contractionary demand shock cannot be counteracted by a reduction in safe interest
rates rK . The endogenous result is a recession (ξX < X) accompanied by an increase in risk premia
(r − rK ) (determined by the other equilibrium equations of the model). Intuitively, the reduction
in aggregate demand resulting from a reduction in the supply of safe assets lowers output, which
further reduces aggregate demand, etc. ad infinitum until the economy reaches a new fixed point
with lower output. More precisely, the reduction in the value of safe assets reduces the wealth of
Knightians and hence their consumption. This impulse depresses output. This initial reduction in
output then reduces the income of Neutrals, and hence their consumption, which further reduces
output. This feedback loop between output and the consumption of Neutrals keeps going until the
economy settles at a new fixed point with lower values of output, assets, wealth, consumption and
income.
When prices have some degree of flexibility captured by a Phillips curve, safety traps trigger deflationary forces, which raise the Keynesian multiplier and exacerbate the output drop by increasing
3

AS (ξX) = ξX.
!



!

AD (ξX) = (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξX + δξX + θ − rK V S ,

) = ξX.

Figure 2: AS-AD representation and the Keynesian cross. Recession caused by a decrease in the
supply of safe assets (V S ) or an increase in the demand for safe assets (α). Aggregate demand shifts
down.
real safe interest rates.
The safety trap can be arbitrarily persistent, or even permanent, consistent with the secular
stagnation hypothesis (Hansen 1939, Summers 2013, Eggertsson and Mehrota 2014) and despite
the existence of a positive supply of infinitely lived risky assets (safe assets are in zero net supply):
The value of risky assets remains finite even when the safe interest rate (rK ) is zero because our
model features risk premia so that the discount rate (r) that applies to the risky cash flows of risky
infinitely lived assets remains positive.
Figure 2 also hints at the kind of policies that are likely to be effective in a safety trap. Policies
that increase the gross supply of safe assets (V S ), such as “helicopter drops” of money, safe public
debt issuances, and versions of QE (such as QE1 in the U.S. and LTRO in the Eurozone) involving
swaps of “positive-beta” private risky assets for “zero-beta” public safe assets, stimulate aggregate
demand and output, and lower risk premia.2 In contrast, Operation Twist (OT) type policies
involving swaps of “negative-beta” long-term government debt for “zero-beta” short-term public
debt (such as QE2 and QE3 in the U.S.) are ineffective or even counterproductive. Similarly,
policies that seek to stimulate aggregate demand by boosting the value of risky assets, such as
Forward Guidance (FG), are largely ineffective in safety traps because they end up being dissipated
in higher risk premia: The positive effect of higher future asset values on the current value of
risky assets is endogenously offset by an increase in risky discount rates (r), limiting the resulting
increase in wealth and aggregate demand. Finally, policies that succeed in directly reducing the
2

We refer the reader to Remark 3 in Section 3 and Appendix A.2.3 for an analysis of “helicopter drops” of money.
Their effects depends on whether the extra money is retired using tax revenues once the economy exits the safety
trap. If it is, then they are equivalent to safe public debt issuances: they generate the same stimulus in the safety
trap, and they require the same increase in tax revenues after the economy exits the safety trap. If it is not, then
they are more stimulative than safe public debt issuances, but this extra stimulation is no free lunch and instead
comes at the cost of an over-stimulation of the economy after the economy exits the safety trap. In both cases,
money issuances are no “silver bullet”.

4

safe real interest rate, such as a large enough and credible increase in the inflation target, lead to
the emergence of a good equilibrium with no recession, positive inflation, and negative safe real
interest rates.
The sharp distinction between the risk tolerance of the two groups of agents allows us to isolate
the safety trap from more conventional liquidity traps. In our context, a safety trap corresponds
to a situation where the economy is at the ZLB and the securitization constraint is binding. In
contrast, a liquidity trap is a situation where the economy is at the ZLB but the securitization
constraint is not binding. In liquidity traps, in contrast to safety traps, QE does not stimulate
output while FG does. Of course reality is not as stark and both type of elements, safety and
liquidity, are likely to play a role. Our framework is designed to highlight the importance of safe
asset markets in determining the relative effectiveness of macroeconomic and financial policies in
ZLB contexts.3
We close the paper with a summary of two extensions developed in the appendix: First, the low
rates of a safety trap environment create a fertile ground for the emergence of bubbles. However, we
show that risky bubbles do not alleviate the safety trap situation, as they do not expand the stock
of safe assets. This formalizes some observations in Summers (2013) that in secular stagnation
environments, even large financial bubbles only seem to create moderate economic expansions.
Conversely, safe bubbles do alleviate the problem. We associate the latter concept to that of public
debt, and show that the existence of a bubbly region expands the fiscal capacity of the government
and reduces the crowding out effect, as bubble-debt does not require future taxation if real rates
remain secularly low. Second, we show that when the securitization capacity of the economy is
endogenous, private securitization decisions are efficient outside of a safety trap, but inefficient
inside of it. This is because in a safety trap, private agents do not internalize the stimulative effects
of safe asset creation, and hence private incentives to securitize are too low.
Related literature. Our paper is related to several strands of literature. First and most
closely related is the literature that identifies the shortage of safe assets as a key macroeconomic
fact (see e.g. Caballero 2006, Caballero et al. 2008a and 2008b, Caballero and Krishnamurthy
2009, Caballero 2010, Bernanke et al. 2011, and Barclay’s 2012).4 Our paper provides a model
that captures many of the key insights in that literature and that allows us to study the main
3

For example, the complete ineffectiveness of FG in safety traps as opposed to standard liquidity traps is an
extreme result, which relies on the stark assumptions of the model. It should not be interpreted as an indictment
of FG, but rather as a demonstration that the features of safety traps, even if they appear only in some milder
forms, are likely to mitigate the effect of FG. In this sense, the safety trap offers a possible resolution of the “forward
guidance puzzle”, a term that refers to the discrepancy between the implausibly large effects of forward guidance
in standard New Keynesian DSGE models of liquidity traps and its more limited effects observed in the data. See
e.g. Carlstrom et al. (2012) and Del Negro et al. (2015) for an exposition of this puzzle. See also Del Negro et al.
(2015) and McKay et al. (2015) for other possible rationalizations in models with incomplete markets and borrowing
constraints.
4
Caballero et al. (2008a,b) developed the idea that global imbalances originated in the superior development
of financial markets in developed economies, and in particular the U.S. Global imbalances resulted from an asset
imbalance. Although we do not develop the open economy version of our model here (see Caballero et al. 2015), our
model could capture a specific channel that lies behind global imbalances: The latter were caused by the funding
countries’ demand for financial assets in excess of their ability to produce them, but this gap is particularly acute
for safe assets since emerging markets have very limited institutional capability to produce them.

5

macroeconomic policy implications of this environment more precisely. Like us, Barro and Mollerus
(2014) considers an environment with heterogenous risk aversion. They show that such a model can
quantitatively match the value of safe assets to GDP as well as a number of asset pricing facts. He
et al. (2015) emphasize that the public supply of safe assets is determined not only by fiscal capacity
(as in our paper), but also by self-fulfilling expectations supported by strategic complementarities
among investors arising in the presence of default decisions.
Second, there is the literature on liquidity traps (see e.g. Keynes 1936, Krugman 1998, Eggertsson and Woodford 2003, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo 2011, Correia et al. 2012, and Werning
2012). This literature emphasizes that the binding ZLB on nominal interest rates presents a challenge for macroeconomic stabilization. Recent models (see e.g. Guerrieri and Lorenzoni 2011, and
Eggertsson and Krugman 2012) emphasize the role of tightened borrowing constraints in economies
with heterogeneous agents (borrowers and savers) in generating the aggregate demand contraction
that brings the economy into the ZLB. In our model it is the shortage of safe assets that causes a
similar phenomenon, with distinctive policy implications.
Third, there is an emerging literature on secular stagnation: the possibility of a permanent ZLB
situation (see e.g. Kocherlakota 2013 and especially Eggertsson and Mehrota 2014). Like us, they
use an OLG structure with a ZLB. Unlike us, they do not consider risk and risk premia. As we show,
this difference has important consequences for the relative effectiveness of different policy options.
An additional difference has to do with the theoretical possibility of permanent ZLB equilibrium in
the presence of infinitely-lived assets, such as land. Indeed, infinitely-lived assets would rule out a
permanent ZLB in Kocherlakota (2013) and Eggertsson and Mehrota (2014). In our model, trees
are infinitely lived but their value remains finite even when the safe interest rate is permanently at
zero. This is only possible because our model features risk and risk premia, which are ignored in
most liquidity trap analyzes. Finally, our modelling of inflation in Section 5 borrows heavily from
Eggertsson and Mehrota (2014).
Fourth, there is a literature that documents significant deviations from the predictions of standard asset-pricing models—patterns which can be thought of as reflecting money-like convenience
services—in the pricing of Treasury securities generally, and in the pricing of short-term T-bills
more specifically (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2011, 2012, Greenwood and Vayanos 2010,
Duffee 1996, Gurkaynak et al. 2006). Our model offers an interpretation of these stylized facts,
where the “specialness” of public debt is its safety during bad aggregate states.
Fifth, there is a literature which emphasizes how the aforementioned premium creates incentives
for private agents to rely heavily on short-term debt, even when this creates systemic instabilities
(Gorton 2010, Stein 2012, Woodford 2012, Gennaioli et al. 2012). Greenwood et al. (2012)
consider the role of the government in increasing the supply of short-term debt and affecting the
premium. Gorton and Ordonez (2013) also consider this question but in the context of a model with
(asymmetric) information acquisition about collateral where the key characteristic of public debt
that drives its premium is its information insensitivity. The inefficiency takes the form of too much
securitization. It occurs ex ante (before the crisis), because of a pecuniary externality (fire sales).
6

Instead, in our model, the inefficiency takes the form of too little securitization. The inefficiency
occurs ex post (during the crisis) if there is a safety trap, and it does not originate in a pecuniary
externality, but rather in a Keynesian externality operating through the level of aggregate demand.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our basic model and introduces the key
mechanism of a safety trap. Section 3 introduces public debt and considers the effects of QE policies.
Section 4 analyzes the role of forward guidance. Section 5 introduces inflation. Section 6 discusses
the robustness of the results to a relaxation of some of the extreme assumptions of the model. It
also summarizes two extensions discussed in the Appendix: the emergence and role of bubbles, and
the presence of a securitization externality. Section 7 concludes and is followed by an extensive
appendix.

2

The Model

In this section we introduce our basic model, which is a stylized stochastic overlapping generations
model. We start by developing a benchmark flexible price model. We then introduce nominal
rigidities, whose only purpose is to bring relevance to the nominal ZLB. In this model, as long as
safe nominal interest rates are positive, safe assets shortages can be accommodated with reductions
in safe nominal interest rates. The associated reduction in the return of safe assets reduces their
demand and restores equilibrium in the market for safe assets. But if safe nominal interest rates
are at the ZLB, then a safety trap emerges and asset markets are cleared through a recession.

2.1

Flexible Prices Benchmark

Demographics. The horizon is infinite and time is continuous. Population is constant and normalized to one. Agents are born and die at hazard rate θ, independent across agents. Each dying
agent is instantaneously replaced by a newborn. Therefore, in an interval dt, θdt agents die and θdt
agents are born.
Aggregate risk. We model aggregate risk as follows. There are two aggregate Poisson processes:
a good Poisson process with intensity λ+ and a bad Poisson process with intensity λ− . We denote
by σ + and σ − the stopping times for the realizations of the good and bad Poisson processes. We
define a Poisson event to be the first realization of either the good or the bad Poisson process, with
corresponding stopping time σ = min{σ + , σ − }. We say that the Poisson event is good if σ = σ +
and bad if σ = σ − . Before the Poisson event, for t < σ , output Xt per unit of time is equal to X.
After the Poisson event, for t ≥ σ, output Xt is equal to µ+ X > X if the Poisson event is good,
and to µ− X < X if the Poisson event is bad. The focus of our analysis is on the period before
the realization of the aggregate Poisson event, when agents make portfolio decisions in anticipation
of such an event. While most of our results only rely on the bad Poisson event, the good Poisson
event will be important when we consider the effects of forward guidance, and so we introduce it

7

from the start.
Preferences. We assume that agents only have an opportunity to consume when they die,
ct . We denote by σθ the stopping time for the idiosyncratic Poisson process controlling an agent’s
death. This risk is uninsurable and plays no role in our model, aside from its aggregate saving
implication.
There are two types of agents in the population: a fraction α of Knightians and 1−α of Neutrals,
with identical demographics. These agents have different preferences over aggregate risk: Knightians
are infinitely risk averse over short time intervals, while Neutrals are risk neutrals over short time
intervals. More precisely, for a given stochastic consumption process {ct } which is measurable with
respect to the information available at date t, we define the utility UtN of a Neutral alive at date t,
and UtK of a Knightian alive at date t, with the following stochastic differential equations
N
UtN = 1{t−dt≤σθ <t} ct + 1{t≤σθ } Et [Ut+dt
],

and
K
},
UtK = 1{t−dt≤σθ <t} ct + 1{t≤σθ } min t {Ut+dt
N
N
] to denote the expectation of Ut+dt
conditional on the information
where we use the notation Et [Ut+dt
K
K
given the
available at date t and mint {Ut+dt } to denote the minimum possible realization of Ut+dt
information available at date t.

Note that the information at date t contains the information about the realization of the idiosyncratic and aggregate Poisson events up to t, implying that 1{t−dt≤σθ <t} and ct are known at
date t. Similarly, the conditional expectation Et is an expectation over both aggregate shocks and
idiosyncratic Poisson death shocks.
Basically, Neutrals are risk neutral with no discounting, and Knightians have Epstein-Zin preferences with infinite relative risk aversion and infinite intertemporal elasticity of substitution, with
no discounting. When there is no aggregate risk (as happens after an aggregate Poisson event), the
preferences of Knightians and Neutrals coincide.
Non-traded inputs, monopolistic competition, and output. Even though we assume
that prices are flexible in this section, we will later introduce nominal rigidities in Section 2.2.
To be able to do so, we introduce monopolistic competition: We assume that monopolistic firms
produce imperfectly substitutable varieties of final goods and compete in prices. Later, when we
introduce nominal rigidities, we will assume that the firms’ posted prices are rigid and that they
accommodate demand at the posted price. These are standard modelling assumptions in the New
Keynesian literature following Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987).
Between t and t + dt, there is an endowment Xt dt of each differentiated variety i ∈ [0, 1] of
non-traded input. Each variety i of non-traded input can be transformed into one unit of variety
i of final good using a one-to-one linear technology by a monopolistic firm indexed by i which is
owned and operated by the agent supplying variety i of the non-traded input.
8

The differentiated varieties of final goods
are valued by consumers according to a standard Dixitσ
R σ−1  σ−1
1
Stiglitz aggregator ct dt = 0 xi,tσ di
dt, where xi,t dt is the quantity consumed of variety i of
R1
the final good, with associated consumption expenditure Pt ct dt = 0 pi,t xi,t dtdi and price index,
1
 1−σ
R
1
di
, where pi,t is the price posted by monopolistic firm i for variety i of the final
Pt = 0 p1−σ
i,t
 −σ
p
ct dt.
good. The resulting demand for each variety is given by xi,t dt = Pi,tt
We denote by Ct dt the aggregate consumption by all Knightians and Neutrals between t and
t + dt. Similarly we denote by and Xi,t the aggregate consumption of variety i by all Knightians
 −σ
p
Ct dt.
and Neutrals between t and t + dt. We have Xi,t dt = Pi,tt
For now, we assume that the prices set by monopolistic firms are perfectly flexible. Monopolistic
firm i takes Pt and Ct as given and sets pi,t so as to maximize profits pi,t Xi,t dt, where the demand
function Xi,t is given above, and subject to its capacity constraint Xi,t dt ≤ Xt dt. The optimal
price pi,t exhausts the capacity constraint Xi,t dt = Xt dt. Because all firms are symmetric, they set
identical prices in equilibrium pi,t = Pt . Output is then given by Ct dt = Xt dt.
Endowments and assets in positive net supply. Between t and t + dt, the varieties of
non-traded inputs indexed by i ∈ [δ, 1], are distributed equally to the different agents who are born
during that interval of time. The varieties of non-traded inputs indexed by i ∈ [0, δ] accrue equally
as dividends on the different infinitely lived Lucas trees from a continuum of measure one. No
variety is endowed to two different newborns, or accrues to two different Lucas trees.
Given that the prices of all varieties are identical and equal to the price index pi,t = Pt , real
income (equal to real output) Xt dt is divided into an endowment (1 − δ)Xt dt distributed equally
to agents who are born during that interval of time, and the dividend δXt dt of a unit measure of
identical infinitely lived Lucas trees.
Limited pledgeability and state-contingent assets in zero net supply. Only Neutrals
can own and operate Lucas trees (a Lucas tree owned and operated by a Knightian yields no
dividends). A Neutral can then securitize (borrow against) a tree that he owns by issuing arbitrary
state-contingent securities to outside investors (other Neutrals or Knightians) against the cash
flows of that tree. We assume that these state-contingent securities cannot be made contingent on
idiosyncratic death Poisson processes. Neutrals therefore act like banks in many models of financial
intermediation (see e.g. Holmström and Tirole 1997).
The securitization process is hampered by an agency problem: only a fraction ρ of the cash flows
of each tree can be pledged to outside investors. This assumption could be motivated in various
ways. One popular microfoundation in the financial constraints literature (see e.g. Holmström and
Tirole 1997, 1998, Kiyotaki and Moore 1997, and a vast literature since then) is the existence of a
moral hazard problem whereby the owner of a tree can abscond with a fraction 1 − ρ of the cash
flows. We refer to ρ as the securitization capacity of the economy.
We also make two technical financial friction assumptions which we maintain throughout the
paper. The first assumption, ρ > α, ensures that the financial friction would have no bite in the
9

absence of aggregate risk (i.e., if we had µ+ = µ− = 1). This allows us to isolate the limits to the
securitization of safe assets, from the more standard financial friction that limits the securitization of
assets in general. In particular, this implies that the financial friction has no bite after the realization
of the Poisson event (good or bad). This matters when we derive the value of safe assets V S = ρµ− Xθ
+ +
− (µ− −1)
−
1−δ
below. The second assumption, µ− [1 + λ (µ −1)+λ
] < 1 and µ− [1 − α−ρµ
] < 1, ensures
δθ
ρµ−
δ
that at t, where either a bad Poisson event, or a good Poisson event, or no Poisson event, could
take place between t and t + dt, the only relevant pledgeability constraint (binding in equilibrium)
pertains to cash flows following a potential bad Poisson event.
Money, the cashless limit, and the ZLB. A monetary authority sets the nominal interest
rate it . We focus on equilibria where the price level Pt has continuous paths and where the monetary
authority is constrained by the ZLB it ≥ 0.
For a justification of this ZLB constraint, we refer the reader to Appendix A.2 where we explicitly
introduce money into the model through a cash-in-advance constraint. In the monetary model,
because the price level has continuous paths, money is a safe asset with real rate of return −πt
where πt = ṖPtt is the inflation rate. Non-monetary safe assets have a real rate of return rtK = it − πt .
When it > 0, money is dominated by non-monetary safe assets as a safe store of value, and it is then
only held for the transaction services that it provides (the cash-in-advance constraint is binding).
When it = 0, money is not dominated by non-monetary safe assets as a safe store of value, and it is
then also held as a safe store of value (the cash-in-advance constraint is slack). The monetary model
has no equilibrium with it < 0 because money would then dominate non-monetary safe assets as a
safe store of value. The cashless limit of the monetary model (see e.g. Woodford 2003) coincides
with the model that we focus on here with a ZLB constraint.
Because prices are assumed to be flexible (for now), the assumption that the price level is
continuous and the imposition of the ZLB constraint on nominal interest rates it ≥ 0 have no
bearing on the real allocations that arise in equilibrium. This is because for any nominal interest
rate it , the inflation rate πt is an equilibrium variable which freely adjusts to deliver the required
equilibrium real rate of return on safe assets rtK = it − πt (the real interest rate). As we shall see
shortly in Section 2.2, this is no longer true when prices are not perfectly flexible. But for now we
focus exclusively on real variables.
Equilibrium. As we mentioned, we focus on the period before the (aggregate) Poisson event.
That is, we analyze the consequences of the possibility and fear of a shock rather than of the
realization of that shock.
Newborns trade their endowments for assets. They keep reinvesting and rebalancing their portfolio until they die, at which point they sell their assets for goods and consume them. Agents choose
their portfolios of assets to maximize their utility. Crucially, Knightians and Neutrals choose different portfolios.
The main features of the portfolios can be understood intuitively. In order to maximize his
utility at date t, a Knightian agent chooses to invest his wealth between t and t + dt in safe assets;
10

that is assets whose value at t + dt is independent of the realization of aggregate shocks (a good
Poisson event, a bad Poisson event, or no Poisson event) between t and t + dt. Similarly, in order to
maximize his utility at date t, a Neutral agent chooses to hold some Lucas trees and to issue some
safe assets to Knightians against their pledgeable dividends. This is all we need to know about
optimal portfolios in order to derive the equilibrium.
Because of the linearity of preferences and the i.i.d. (across agents and time) nature of death,
the model aggregates cleanly. We denote by WtK the total wealth of Knightians and WtN the total
wealth of Neutrals. We denote by VtS the total value of safe assets that can be issued against the
Lucas trees, and by VtR the total value of risky assets, by which we mean the value of the Lucas
trees net of the value of the safe assets that can be issued against them. Note that we have defined
VtS as the total value of safe assets that can be issued, not the value of safe assets that are actually
issued by Neutrals to Knightians. It is therefore possible that some safe assets are held by Neutrals.
We denote total wealth by Wt with Wt = WtK + WtN , and the total value of assets by Vt = VtR + VtS .
Note that Vt is the total value of Lucas trees, the only assets in positive net supply.
Between t and t + dt a fraction θ of agents die and consume. Because dying agents are a
representative sample of the population, consumption between t and t + dt is θWt dt. Given that
output between t and t + dt is Xdt, market clearing in the goods market pins down the equilibrium
level of wealth:
X
Wt = W = .
θ
Asset market clearing then determines the value of existing assets:
Vt = V = W =

X
.
θ

We can find VtS by solving backwards. After the Poisson event, the total value of Lucas trees
V + (after a good Poisson event) and V − (after a bad Poisson event) can be found by applying a
similar logic to that prior to the shock, so that:
X
X
and Vt− = V − = Wt− = W − = µ− .
θ
θ
Given that only a fraction ρ of the cash flows after the Poisson event can be pledged, and that the
financial constraint has no bite after the Poisson event (because ρ > α), the maximal value of safe
−
assets is ρV . We will verify later that the equilibrium value of safe assets before and after the
Poisson event is indeed
Vt+ = V + = Wt+ = W + = µ+

VtS = V S = VtS+ = V S+ = VtS− = V S− = ρµ−

X
.
θ

For now, we proceed as if it were the case. Risky assets are worth the residual
VtR = V R = (1 − ρµ− )

X
X
X
, VtR+ = V R+ = (µ+ − ρµ− ) , and VtR− = V R− = (µ− − ρµ− ) .
θ
θ
θ
11

Let rt , rtK , and δtS denote the expected rate of return on risky assets, the rate of return on safe
assets, and an index of the dividend pledged to safe assets, respectively. Then equilibrium before
the Poisson event is characterized by the following equations:
rtK V S = δtS X,
!

rt V R = (δ − δtS )X + λ+ (V R+ − V R ) + λ− V R− − V R ,

ẆtN = −θWtN

ẆtK = −θWtK + α(1 − δ)X + rtK WtK ,
!

!

+ (1 − α)(1 − δ)X + rtK (V S − WtK ) + rt V R − λ+ V R+ − V R − λ− V R− − V R ,
WtK + WtN = V S + V R ,
rt ≥ rtK ,

WtK ≤ V S

and (rt − rtK )(V S − WtK ) = 0.

The first two equations are the standard asset pricing equation for safe and risky assets. The third
and fourth equations are the wealth evolution equations for Knightians and Neutrals. The fifth
equation is just the asset market clearing equation. The sixth equation must hold because Neutrals
rank assets according to expected returns, so that either rt = rtK and Neutrals are indifferent
between safe and risky assets or rt > rtK and Neutrals hold only risky assets.
The first asset pricing equation is for safe assets and captures the immunity of such asset with
respect to aggregate shocks as the return is entirely given by the flow dividend δtS X. The second
asset pricing equation is for risky assets, and the dividend flow (δ − δtS )X is complemented by
expected capital gains and losses λ+ (V R+ − V R ) + λ− (V R− − V R ) in the event of an aggregate
Poisson event.
One can think of safe asset in two equivalent ways: as safe short-term debt which is rolled over
every period, with interest rate rtK , and exactly collateralized by a fraction of the dividends of Lucas
tree; or as a long-lived assets capitalizing this fractional stream of dividends. Correspondingly, one
can think of risky assets either as levered Lucas trees or as simply capitalizing the fraction of
dividends that has not been pledged to safe assets. In both cases, it is worth stressing that just
like the safe real interest rate rtK , the variable indexing the dividend pledged to safe assets δtS is an
equilibrium variable. It is endogenously determined to ensure that safe assets are indeed safe, i.e.
that their value V S does not change when a Poisson event occurs.
As we shall see, safe real interest rate jump (to δθ) when a Poisson event occurs and so does
the endowment (to µ+ X after a good Poisson event and to µ− X after a bad Poisson event). This
means that the variable indexing the dividend pledged to safe assets must also jump after a Poisson
−
event (to δ S+ = δρ µµ+ after a good Poisson event and to δ S− = δρ after a bad Poisson event). That
δ S− = δρ and δ S+ > δρ indicates that while the pledgeability constraint is binding after the bad
Poisson event, it is slack after the good Poisson event. Given our technical assumptions above,
we always have δtS < δρ in equilibrium so that the pledgeability constraint is also slack before the

12

Poisson event.5 The binding pledgeability constraint after the bad Poisson event is the limit on safe
asset creation. The extra pledgeable dividend after the good Poisson event and before the Poisson
event can only be pledged to risky assets.6
The evolution equation for Knightian wealth can be understood as follows: First, between t and
t + dt, a fraction θdt of Knightians die, sell their assets, and consume. Because the dying Knightians
are a representative sample of Knightians, this depletes the stock of Knightian wealth by θWtK dt.
Second, between t and t + dt, θαdt new Knightians are born with a total endowment α(1 − δ)Xdt,
which they sell to acquire assets. This increases Knightian wealth by α(1 − δ)Xdt. Third, between
t and t + dt, Knightians collect interest rates rtK WtK dt. Overall, the increase in Knightian wealth
K
− WtK = −θWtK dt + α(1 − δ)Xdt + rtK WtK dt. Taking the limit dt → 0 yields the
is therefore Wt+dt
stated equation.
The intuition for the evolution equation of Neutral wealth is similar. The only twist is that
conditional on no Poisson event, the total return earned on Neutral wealth between t and t + dt is
the sum of the return on the safe assets held by Neutrals rtK (V S −WtK )dt and of the expected return
!

on the risky assets held by Neutrals rt V R dt net of the expected capital gains λ+ V R+ − V R dt and
!

λ− V R− − V R dt in case of a Poisson event.
Two regimes. The dynamic system describing the equilibrium converges to a unique stochastic
steady state before the Poisson event, conditional on the Poisson event not occurring, and to a unique
deterministic steady state after the Poisson event. We focus on the former stochastic steady state,
and drop t subscripts. There are two regimes, depending on whether the constraint WtK ≤ V S is
slack (unconstrained regime) or binding (constrained regime).
In the unconstrained regime, Neutrals are the marginal holders of safe assets so that safe and
risky rates are equalized r = rK . A couple of steps of algebra show that in this case:
S

δ = δρµ

−




λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− (µ− − 1)
1+
< δρ,
δθ

r = rK = δθ + λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− (µ− − 1).
It is easy to verify that this regime holds as long as the following safe asset shortage condition
! −

α − ρµ−
+
+
−
(1
−
δ)θ
+
λ
(µ
−
1)
+
λ
µ
−
1
>0
ρµ−

(1)

does not hold. The interesting case for us is the constrained regime, where Knightians are the
5

This validates our earlier claim that the value of safe assets is given by V S = ρV − .
As we shall see, it is entirely possible for δtS and rtK to be negative before the Poisson event. If one chooses to
view safe assets as short-term debt which is rolled over every period, then this simply means that interest rate on
this debt is negative for a while. If instead one chooses to view safe assets as long-lived assets capitalizing a stream
of dividends, then this means that the dividends are negative for a while. In both cases, it represents a flow payment
from safe asset holders to their issuers. But note that after the Poisson event, safe real interest rates, δ S+ ,and δ S−
are all positive and so payments necessarily flow from safe asset issuers to holders. This explains why even in this
case, the value of safe assets (viewed as long-lived assets capitalizing a stream of dividends) remains positive and
finite before the Poisson event.
6

13

marginal holders of safe assets, and which captures the safe asset shortage environment. In it,
Knightians demand all the safe assets:
W K = V S = ρµ−

X
,
θ

and there is a risk premium r > rK . We then have:
δ S = δρµ− − (α − ρµ− )(1 − δ) < δρ,
rK = δθ −
r = δθ +

α − ρµ−
(1 − δ)θ,
ρµ−

λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− (µ− − 1)
α − ρµ−
(1
−
δ)θ
+
.
1 − ρµ−
1 − ρµ−

It follows that in this constrained region there is a risk premium
K

r−r =

α−ρµ−
(1
ρµ−

− δ)θ + λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− (µ− − 1)
1 − ρµ−

> 0.

It is easy to verify that this regime holds as long as the safe asset shortage condition (1) holds.7
The limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0. These expressions simplify in the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0.
Because the marginal investor for risky assets is a Neutral, the expected capital gains for risky assets
in the case of a Poisson event vanish in this limit. In the unconstrained regime, neither µ+ nor µ−
appears in the equilibrium equations before the Poisson event. But in the constrained regime, µ−
features prominently, because it determines the supply of safe assets for which the marginal investor
is a Knightian.
The demand for safe assets is summarized by the fraction of Knightians (α). The supply of safe
assets is determined by the severity of the potential bad shock (µ− ) and the ability of the economy
to create safe assets (ρ) through the sufficient statistic ρµ− . In the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0, these
sufficient statistics together determine whether we are in the unconstrained regime (α ≤ ρµ− ) or
in the constrained regime (α > ρµ− ), the rate of return on safe assets, the rate of return on risky
assets, and the risk premium.8
Remark 1 Our demographics and preferences allow us to capture a stylized version of a life-cycle
7

Note that all these equations only apply in the stochastic steady state before the Poissont event, conditional on
the Poisson event not occurring. In particular, after the Poisson event, safe assets are claims to a stream of dividends
δρµ− X, and the safe and risky expected rates of return jump to δθ, and the value of safe assets is the same as in
−
the stochastic steady state before the Poisson event V S = ρµθ X . In other words, safe assets are claims to dividends
S
δ S X before the Poisson event and δρµ− X after the Poisson event, and the relevant discount rate is rK = Vδ S before
the Poisson event and δθ after the Poisson event.
8
Away from the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0, for a given r and rK , the wealth of Neutrals in the stochastic
steady state before the Poisson event increases with the intensity of the bad Poisson event λ− and decreases with
the intensity λ+ of the good Poisson event. Therefore in equilibrium, r decreases with λ− and increases with λ+ ,
while rK is independent of λ+ and λ− . This explains why the condition for the constrained regime is tightened by
an increase in λ− and relaxed by an increase in λ+ .

14

model with a portfolio choice, abstracting from intertemporal substitution in consumption which is
not central to the questions we want to analyze. The only decision that agents are making is how
to invest their wealth at every point in time, and because Knightians and Neutrals have different
attitudes towards risk, they choose different portfolios.
Remark 2 Our model features two forms of market incompleteness. The first one is tied to our
overlapping generations structure, which makes future endowment (“wages”) non-pledgeable. The
second market incompleteness is the pledegeability of dividends constraint (ρ) which limits the ability
to securitize (tranche) Lucas’ trees. Tranching is desirable because it decomposes an asset into a
safe tranche which can be sold to Knightian agents and a risky tranche. In the policy discussion we
will not exploit the first form of incompleteness (we use the OLG structure mostly because it yields a
stationary distribution of wealth between Neutrals and Knightians) and focus instead on the second
form. The latter implies that in equilibrium risky assets held by Neutrals contain an unpledgable
safe claim of size (1 − ρ)µ− Xθ which is the starting point of our macroeconomic policy analysis later
on. See Section 3 for a more detailed discussion.

2.2

Nominal Rigidities, the Safety Trap, and the Liquidity Trap

In this section, we introduce nominal rigidities. We refer to the allocation of the above flexible price
model as the natural allocation. We write rtK,n for the natural safe interest rate (the Wicksellian
interest rate) before the Poisson event, and we write rtn for the natural risky expected rate of return
before the Poisson event. Both are equal to δθ after the Poisson event (good or bad). For natural
output, we also sometimes use the term potential output. It is equal to X before the Poisson event,
to µ+ X after a good Poisson event, and to µ− X after a bad Poisson event.
With nominal rigidities, there is potentially a gap between actual output and potential output.
Appropriate monetary policy can ensure that actual output is at potential as long as the safe natural
interest rate is positive. But when the safe natural interest rate is negative, the economy reaches
the ZLB and actual output drops below potential.
Depending on whether we are in the unconstrained regime where the financial friction is slack
and the heterogeneity in risk aversion plays no role, or in the constrained regime where it is binding
and where the heterogeneity in risk aversion matters, the situation that emerges is either a liquidity
trap or a safety trap. In our rendition, liquidity traps feature no risk premia while safety traps
feature positive and endogenous risk premia. It will become apparent that the key distinction
between the two situations has to do with the difference in the sensitivity of risk premia and its
specific drivers.9
Our focus is on the safety trap, which is novel, but we also characterize the more standard
liquidity trap as it will help us to highlight (by contrast) the unique policy implications of safety
9

In the broader literature on liquidity traps, risk premia are either assumed away by analysis relying on loglinearizations or play at best a peripheral role in analyses with non-linearized models.

15

traps later in the paper.
2.2.1

Rigid Prices, Monetary Policy, and the ZLB

We use the traditional ingredients of New Keynesian economics: imperfect competition, sticky
prices, and a monetary authority.
Rigid prices. We assume that the prices of the different varieties are entirely fixed (an extreme
form of sticky prices, which we shall relax later in Section 5) and equal to each other, pi t = P ,
where without loss of generality we take P = 1. Monopolistic firms accommodate demand for their
variety of final good at the posted price.
Because the prices of all varieties are identical, the demand for all varieties is the same. Output
is demand-determined, and as a result, xi,t = Ct = ξt Xt for all i where the capacity utilization rate
ξt ≤ 1 is the same for all firms. Capacity utilization ξt represents the wedge between actual output
ξt Xt and potential output Xt .
Monetary policy and the ZLB. In contrast with the case of flexible prices, with rigid prices,
the ZLB constraint impacts the real allocations that arise in equilibrium. This is because with rigid
prices, the nominal interest rate determines the safe real interest rate rtK = it and hence we have a
constraint rtK ≥ 0.
The safe natural interest rate is always positive at δθ after a Poisson event (good or bad). By
setting the nominal interest rate equal to this safe natural interest rate, the monetary authority can
replicate the natural allocation after a Poisson event. Before the Poisson event however, the safe
natural interest rate rtK,n need not be positive. If the safe natural interest rate is positive, then by
setting the nominal interest rate equal to the natural safe interest rate i = rtK,n > 0, the monetary
authority can replicate the natural allocation, ensuring that output is at potential ξ = 1. But if the
safe natural interest rate is negative rtK,n < 0, then there is a recession (ξt < 1) with it = rtK = 0. As
we shall see, it makes a great difference whether this happens in the unconstrained regime (liquidity
trap) or in the constrained regime (safety trap). The regime that is of most interest to us is the
safety trap. We therefore start with this case and then contrast it with the liquidity trap case. As
in the case where prices are flexible, we focus on stochastic steady states before the Poisson event
and drop t-subscripts.
2.2.2

The Safety Trap

With rigid prices, when rK,n < 0 and hence i = rK = 0, capacity utilization ξ becomes an equilibrium variable, in the same way that prices are equilibrium variables in standard Walrasian theory
with flexible prices. We now explain how ξ is determined in two different but equivalent ways. First
we explain how ξ enters the system of equilibrium equations. Second, we provide a simple AS-AD

16

−

r

α(1 − δ)ξX
W =
θ − rK

K

K

WK =

α (1 − δ ) X
θ − rK
1

X

0

−
V S = ρµ−

X
θ

V S = ρµ−

X
θ

Figure 3: Safety trap. Recession caused by a decrease in the supply of safe assets. The safe asset
supply curve shifts left (ρµ− < ρµ− ), the endogenous recession shifts the safe asset demand curve
left (ξ < 1), and the safe interest rate remains unchanged at 0.
Keynesian cross representation of the equilibrium where ξ is determined as a fixed point.10
Recall that we have assumed that actual and potential output coincide after the bad Poisson
event and therefore the value of safe assets (before the event) is still given by
V S = ρµ−

X
.
θ

Mechanically, the equilibrium values of all the variables are identical to those in the flexible price
+
−
model but with µ+ , µ− and X, replaced by µξ , µξ , and ξX. The requirement that rK = 0 determines
the severity of the equilibrium recession ξ:
0 = δθ − (1 − δ) θ
yielding
ξ =1+

α−

ρµ−
ξ

ρµ−
ξ

,

ρµ−
rK,n
= − < 1,
α (1 − δ) θ
ρµ

where ρµ− = α (1 − δ) corresponds to the value of these combined parameters for which zero is the
natural safe interest rate.11
We call this equilibrium a safety trap, since at full employment there is an excess demand for
safe assets. A recession lowers the absolute demand for safe assets while keeping the absolute supply
10

We assume throughout the paper in all our analyses of safety traps (and later in the corresponding analysis of
liquidity traps) that our technical financial friction assumptions as well as condition (1) continue to hold when µ− is
−
+
replaced by µξ and µ+ is replaced by µξ . This is guaranteed to hold if rK,n is not too negative, so that the recession
is not too severe.
11
Note that output in the safety trap can be higher or lower than output after the bad Poisson event. Indeed we
have ξX > µ− X if and only if the securitization capacity is large enough ρ > (1 − δ) α. This makes clear that in our
model the safety trap recession arises endogenously as the result of the fear of a bad shock, of the kind that have
been routinely emphasized in the recent macroeconomic uncertainty and rare disasters literatures, rather than by
the realization of a bad shock itself (a second moment shock vs. a first moment shock).

17

of safe assets fixed and restores equilibrium. Figure 3 illustrates this mechanism, which we describe
next.12
The supply and demand of safe assets are V S = ρµ− Xθ and W K =
librium in the safe asset market requires that W K = V S , i.e.

α(1−δ)ξX
θ−r K

respectively. Equi-

X
α (1 − δ) ξX
= ρµ− .
K
θ−r
θ
Consider a one time unexpected (zero ex-ante probability) shock that lowers the supply of safe
assets (a reduction in ρµ− ).13 In response to this shock, the economy immediately jumps to a new
steady state without any transitional dynamics. The mechanism by which equilibrium in the safe
asset market is restored has two parts. The first part immediately reduces Knightian wealth W K
to a lower level, consistent with the lower supply of safe assets ρµ− Xθ . The second part maintains
Knightian wealth W K at this lower level.
The first part of the mechanism is as follows. The economy undergoes an immediate wealth
adjustment (the wealth of Knightians drops) through a round of trading between Knightians and
Neutrals born in previous periods. At impact, Knightians hold assets that now carry some risk.
They react by selling the risky part of their portfolio to Neutrals. This shedding of risky assets
catalyzes an instantaneous fire sale whereby the price of risky assets collapses before immediately
recovering once risky assets have changed hands. Needless to say, in reality this phase takes time,
which we have removed to focus on the phase following the initial turmoil.
The second part of the equilibrating mechanism differs depending on whether the safe interest
rate rK = i is above or at the ZLB. If rK = i > 0, then a reduction in the safe interest rate rK = i
takes place. This reduction in the safe interest rate effectively implements a transfer (in every
period) from Knightians to Neutrals, which limits the growth of Knightian wealth. As a result, the
safe asset market remains in equilibrium, and so does the goods market. But if the safe interest rate
is against the ZLB rK = i = 0, then this reduction in the safe interest rate cannot take place and
the associated transfer cannot occur. The only adjustment mechanism is with a decline in output
(income), which also drags down Neutral’s wealth.
AS-AD representation and the Keynesian cross. We now provide an alternative way of
understanding the equilibrium determination of capacity utilization ξ in a safety trap as a fixed point
in an AS-AD Keynesian cross representation where ξ equalizes aggregate demand and aggregate
supply AD(ξX) = AS(ξX). This representation puts the goods market instead of the safe asset
12

We rule out rationing in the safe asset market. The reason is that the safe asset market is postulated to be
competitive and the price of safe safe assets to be flexible, which is an assumption shared by all the New Keynesian
literature. This is unlike the goods market where monopolistic suppliers of the different varieties of final goods post
rigid prices and accommodate demand at these posted prices.
13
The one time unexpected shock could be a reduction in the securitization capacity ρ of the economy. It could also
be a reduction in µ− , akin to an increase in macroeconomic uncertainty in the macroeconomic uncertainty literature,
or to an increase in the severity of disasters in the rare disasters literature. The safety trap recession then arises
transitorily but potentialy very persistently (in fact essentially permanently in the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0) in
response to a shock.

18

market at the center stage.
Aggregate supply is simply the 45 degree line
AS (ξX) = ξX.
This captures the fact that with rigid prices, output is demand determined. Aggregate demand
for goods AD(ξX) = θW K + θW N is given by the sum of the consumption of Knightians θW K
and Neutrals θW N , where θ acts as the effective aggregate average propensity to consume out
of wealth. Since Knightians only hold safe assets and safe assets are only held by Knightians
in the constrained regime, Knightian wealth coincides with the value of safe assets W K = V S ,
and Knightian consumption is θW K = θV S . Similarly, since Neutrals only hold risky assets and
risky assets are only held by Neutrals, Neutral wealth coincides with the value of risky assets
W N = V R and Neutral consumption is θW N = θV R , which can be computed to be θW N = θV R =
(1 − α)(1 − δ)ξX + δξX − rK V S . The intuition is simply that in a stochastic steady state before
the Poisson event, Neutral consumption equals Neutral income, which is the sum of the income of
Neutral newborns (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξ and of dividend income δξX net of interest payments on safe
assets held by Knightians rK V S . Aggregate demand for goods is therefore given by
!

AD (ξX) = (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξX + δξX + θ − rK V S .
Aggregate demand increases with output ξX because the consumption of Neutrals increases with
output (their income increases with output). Aggregate demand increases with the value of safe
assets V S because the consumption of Knightians increases more with the value of safe assets (their
wealth is equal to the value of safe assets) than the consumption of Neutrals decreases with the
value of safe assets (the interest payments on safe assets held by Knightians is proportional to the
value of safe assets). Aggregate demand decreases with the safe real interest rate rK = i because
the consumption of Neutrals decreases with the safe real interest rate (the interest payments on
safe assets held by Knightians is proportional to the safe real interest rate).
When rK,n ≥ 0, we have AD (X) = AS (X) when i = rK = rK,n . But when rK,n < 0, we
have i = rK = 0 and ξ is the solution of the fixed point equation AD (ξX) = AS (ξX). Aggregate
demand and aggregate supply are then two increasing functions of income ξX. Aggregate demand
is flatter than aggregate supply. Equilibrium is determined by a Keynesian cross at the intersection
of the aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves.
Crucially, a reduction dV S < 0 in the value of safe assets V S represents an adverse (downward)
shift to aggregate demand. Away from the ZLB, this reduction in aggregate demand can be accommodated by an easing of monetary policy (a reduction in i = rK ), thereby maintaining output at
potential (ξ = 1). But at the ZLB, monetary policy cannot be eased, and instead the reduction in
aggregate demand lowers output, which further reduces aggregate demand, etc. ad infinitum until
the economy reaches a new fixed point with lower output. Intuitively, the reduction in the value
of safe assets reduces Knightian wealth and hence Knightian consumption. This impulse depresses
19

output. This initial reduction in output then reduces the income of Neutrals, and hence their consumption, which further reduces output. This feedback loop between output and the consumption
of Neutrals keeps going until the economy settles at a new fixed point with lower values of output,
assets, wealth, consumption and income. The reduction in income of Neutrals and Knightians are
constant at these new lower levels.
This adjustment is captured by a familiar Keynesian multiplier
ξX
> 1,
θV S
which amplifies the effect of the initial reduction θdV S in aggregate demand to a final effect of
ξX
S
14
Figure 2 in the introduction provides a
d (ξX) = θV
S θdV —a proportional increase in output.
graphical illustration of this adjustment.
Risk premium. The equilibrium is block recursive in (ξ, r) so that r can be computed given ξ:

r = δθ + (1 − δ) θ

α−
1−

ρµ−
ξ
ρµ−
ξ

+

+
λ+ ( µξ

− 1) + λ
1−

−

ρµ−



µ−
ξ

−1


.

(2)

ξ

In the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0, if the economy is already in a safety trap with rK = 0, decreases
in the supply of safe assets ρµ− leave r (and hence r − rK ) unchanged while increases in the demand
for safe assets α increase r (and hence r − rK ).15 But if the economy is initially outside a safety
trap, large enough decreases in the supply of safe assets or increases in the demand for safe assets
will push the economy into a safety trap and lead to a drop in output and an increase in risk premia.
2.2.3

Contrasting Safety and Liquidity Traps

We now contrast safety traps (rK,n < 0 in the constrained regime) with liquidity traps (rK,n < 0
in the unconstrained regime). We therefore assume that rn = rK,n < 0 and i = r = rK = 0. We
follow similar steps to those of Section 2.2.2 and keep the analysis short in the interest of space.
The liquidity trap. Mechanically, the equilibrium equations are identical to those in the
−
+
flexible price model but with µ+ , µ− and X, replaced by µξ , µξ , and ξX. Capacity utilization ξ is
14

The analysis above goes through as well if we raise the share of Knightian agents α instead of reducing ρµ− , in
−
α
which case the recession factor is ξ = θ−rθK,n = α
< 1, where α = ρµ
1−δ corresponds to the value of this parameter
for which zero is the natural safe interest rate. The increase in α acts as an adverse shift in aggregate demand.This
interpretation resembles the Keynesian paradox of thrift. Combining both, asset supply and demand factors, we
−
have that the severity of the recession is determined by the sufficient statistic ρµα according to the simple equation:
−

ρµ−

ξ = ρµα− ρµα , where α = 1 − δ corresponds to the value of these combined parameters for which zero is the natural
safe interest rate.
15
When λ+ > 0 or λ− > 0, additional expected capital gains effects come into play. For example, decreases in ρ
now increase r (and hence r − rK ).

20

determined by the requirement that r = rK = 0:
δθ + λ+ (

µ−
µ+
− 1) + λ− (
− 1) = 0,
ξ
ξ

i.e.
ξ=

1
1−

rn
λ− µ− +λ+ µ+

.

The recession originates from a scarcity of assets (stores of value). It is more severe, the worse the
Poisson shocks (the lower are µ+ and µ− ), the more likely the good Poisson event (the higher λ+ ),
the more likely the bad Poisson event (the higher λ− ), the higher the propensity to save (the lower
θ), and the lower the ability of the economy to create assets that capitalize future income (the lower
is δ).
To understand this result, it is useful to derive the equilibrium condition in the asset market
W = V by expressing total asset demand W (left-hand side) and total asset supply V (right-hand
side) as a function of ξ and r:
+

+

−

−

δξX + λ+ µ θX + λ− µ θX
(1 − δ)ξX − λ+ µ θX − λ− µ θX
=
.
θ − r − λ+ − λ−
r + λ+ + λ −
Asset demand is increasing in r and in ξ. Asset supply is decreasing in r and increasing in ξ. When
rn = rK,n > 0, the asset market is in equilibrium at full capacity utilization when i = rn = rK,n . But
when rn = rK,n < 0, and r = rK = i = 0, at full employment, there is an excess demand for assets.
It is easy to see that a recession reduces asset demand more than asset supply, and lowers the excess
demand for assets, and helps restore equilibrium (otherwise, there is simply no equilibrium).
AS-AD representation and the Keynesian cross. We can also provide an AS-AD Keynesian cross representation of the determination of capacity utilization ξ in a liquidity trap. Aggregate
supply is given by the 45 degree line
AS (ξX) = ξX
and aggregate demand for goods is given by θW = θV = AD (ξX)
+

−

δξX + λ+ µ θX + λ− µ θX
.
AD (ξX) = θ
r + λ+ + λ−
When rn = rK,n ≥ 0, we have AD (X) = AS (X) when r = rK = rn = rK,n . But when rn =
rK,n < 0, we have r = rK = 0 and ξ is the solution of the fixed point equation AD (ξX) = AS (ξX).
Aggregate demand and aggregate supply are then two increasing functions of income ξX. Aggregate
demand is flatter than aggregate supply because δθ < λ+ + λ− which automatically holds when
rn = rK,n < 0. Equilibrium is determined by a Keynesian cross at the intersection of the aggregate
demand and aggregate supply curves.
Safety traps vs. liquidity traps. We conclude this section by highlighting three broad

21

differences between safety and liquidity traps:
• Risk premium. Both safety traps and liquidity traps occur when the natural safe interest rate
is negative rK,n < 0 and the ZLB binds i = rK = 0. In both cases a recession ensues ξ < 1. The
key difference between safety traps and liquidity traps is the reason behind the ZLB: Safety
traps arise because of a shortage of safe assets and positive while liquidity traps originate in
a shortage of assets in general. Positive and endogenous risk premia are at the core of the
mechanics of safety traps, while they only play a peripheral role in liquidity traps (in fact, in
our rendition, they are zero). The securitization capacity ρ, and more generally the supply of
safe assets V S play no role in liquidity traps, whereas they are the key bottlenecks in safety
traps. Aside from the direct relevance of endogenous risk premia during severe recessions,
this distinction has important implications for the persistence and policy implications of the
different kinds of traps.
• Persistence and secular stagnation. The possibility of a permanent ZLB equilibrium is sometimes disputed on the grounds that this would imply an infinite value for infinitely-lived
assets, such as land. In our model, Lucas trees are indeed infinitely lived, and for that reason,
a permanent liquidity trap cannot occur. Indeed, in the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0, we have
rK,n = δθ > 0 so that a liquidity trap is simply impossible. In contrast, in the constrained
−
(1 − δ)θ which can
regime, in the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0, we have rK,n = δθ − α−ρµ
ρµ−
be negative. In that case, an essentially permanent safety trap emerges. The value of trees
remains finite even when the safe interest rate is rK = i = 0 because our model features risk
premia so that the discount rate that applies to the risky cash flows of Lucas trees remains
positive r > 0.
• Policy options: a roadmap. In the next sections, we analyze policy options in safety traps,
and contrast them briefly with liquidity traps. In safety traps, effective stimulative policies
work by influencing the value of safe assets V S (public debt issuances and QE in Section 3)
and rK (increasing the inflation target in Section 5).
The risky rate r does not appear either in aggregate demand or in aggregate supply. The
!

equilibrium is block-recursive in ξ and r, V R . Even when λ+ > 0, the future value of risky
assets after the good Poisson event does not affect the determination of ξ (it only matters
for the risky rate of return r and the risk premium r − rK ). This point will prove crucial
later on when we discuss the ineffectiveness of forward guidance in a safety trap (Section
4). In sharp contrast, the relative effectiveness of safe public debt issuances and QE and
the relative ineffectiveness of Forward Guidance (FG) in safety traps are exactly inverted in
liquidity traps. Public debt issuances and QE become ineffective because they increase the
value of safe assets V S but crowd out the value of risky assets V R and hence do not increase
the value of assets V in general. FG becomes effective in liquidity traps because when λ+ > 0,
the future value of risky assets after the good Poisson event affects the determination of ξ.

22

In the rest of the paper, we focus on the constrained regime and safety traps in the main text,
and treat the unconstrained regime and liquidity traps in remarks at the end of each section.

3

Public Debt and Quantitative Easing

In this section we introduce safe public debt to our analysis. We focus on the safety creation and
transformation roles of the government by assuming that the taxes that support public debt are
levied on dividends (and are hence fully capitalized). As a result, the economy is de facto Ricardian
in the unconstrained regime, but not in the constrained one.
The government’s capacity to increase the total supply of safe assets by issuing safe public debt
depends on two factors: fiscal capacity and crowding out of private safe assets by public safe assets.
In a safe asset shortage situation, the relevant form of fiscal capacity is the government’s ability to
raise taxes in the bad events feared by Knightians. Crowding out, on the other hand, depends on
how much these taxes reduce the private sector’s capacity to issue safe claims backed by the risky
dividends of Lucas trees. In our model, there is less crowding out when the securitization capacity
of the economy is impaired (when the financial friction is severe). In a safety trap, issuing public
debt, and possibly undertaking QE by purchasing private risky assets, increases the supply of safe
assets, stimulates the economy, and reduces risk premia. By contrast, these policies are much less
relevant (irrelevant in our stylized model) in conventional liquidity traps.

3.1

Public Debt and Fiscal Capacity

Public debt. Let us first introduce safe public debt outside of a safety trap with rK > 0.
The government taxes dividends, δX. The tax rate is τ + after the good Poisson event occurs,
τ − after the bad Poisson event occurs, while the tax rate before the Poisson event is set to a value
τt that satisfies the government flow budget constraint. The government issues a fixed amount of
risk-free bonds that capitalize future tax revenues and pays a variable rate rtK . The proceeds of the
sales of these bonds are rebated lump-sum to agents at date 0.
Let the value of (safe) public debt be given by D. We have
D = τ − µ−

X
.
θ

Assumption 1 (Regalian taxation power): Taxes backing government safe debt can be levied on
the claim (1 − ρ)µ− Xθ to the privately unpledgable part of future dividends.
That is, the government is essentially better than private investors at collecting dividend revenues from Neutrals once borrowers’ incentives are weak, and can hence essentially get around the
pledgeability constraint of the economy through dividend taxation and debt issuance. This confers
23

the government a comparative advantage in the production of safe assets.16 In Section A.6, we
develop a different rationale for government intervention in the securitization market. There, we
endogenize the securitization capacity ρ and show that in a safety trap there is a securitization
externality that justifies government intervention; we postpone a full discussion of this justification
for intervention until then.
Note, however, that the scope for policy depends crucially on the securitization capacity of the
economy (indexed by ρ). In a very developed market, ρ is high, and soon public debt starts to crowd
out privately produced safe assets. To see this, note that because the consumption of a Neutral
cannot be negative (a form of limited liability), the fraction of dividends that it can pledge is now
ρ (τ − ) = min {ρ, 1 − τ − }. Thus, as long as τ − ≤ 1 − ρ there is no crowding out, but above this
threshold public safe assets crowd out private safe assets one for one (we return to this issue below).
The total (private and public) value of safe assets is then given by
V S = ρ(τ − )µ−

X
X
+ D = [ρ(τ − ) + τ − ]µ− .
θ
θ

The model is isomorphic to the one described in Section 2, with ρ replaced by ρ (τ − ) + τ − .17,18
Crowding out. In this model safe government debt acts exactly like tranching, with τ − playing
the same role as ρ, as long as public debt is low enough (τ − < 1 − ρ). In this non-Ricardian region,
issuing safe public debt does not crowd out private safe assets, resulting in a one for one expansion
of the supply of safe assets V S , an increase in the safe interest rate rK , a reduction in the risky
expected rate of return r, and a reduction in the risk premium r − rK . There is also a Ricardian
region where public debt is high enough (τ − ≥ 1 − ρ) so that issuing safe public debt crowds out
private safe assets one for one, leaving unchanged the supply of safe assets V S , the safe interest
rate rK and the risky expected rate of return r as well as the risk premium r − rK . The economy
is more likely to be in the Ricardian region than in the non-Ricardian region, the higher is the
securitization capacity ρ.
It will sometimes prove convenient to write
VS =

µ− X S D
v ( )
θ
X

16

This mechanism has some commonality with the idea in Holmström and Tirole (1998) that the government has
a comparative advantage in providing liquidity. In their model like in ours, this result arises from the assumption
that some agents (consumers in their model) lack commitment and hence cannot borrow because they cannot issue
securities that pledge their future endowments. This can result in a scarcity of stores of value. The government can
alleviate this scarcity by issuing public debt and repaying this debt by taxing consumers. The proceeds of the debt
issuance can actually be rebated to consumers. At the aggregate level, this essentially relaxes the borrowing constraint
of consumers, as they borrow indirectly through the government. In their model like in ours, the comparative
advantage of the government in providing liquidity arises because it is better than private lenders at collecting
revenues from consumers.
17
We assume throughout that the technical financial friction assumptions as well as condition (1) hold when ρ is
replaced by ρ (τ − ) + τ − . We also assume that this continues to be the case in a safety trap when in addition µ+ and
−
+
µ− are replaced by µξ and µξ , which is guaranteed as long as rK,n is not too negative so that the recession is not
too severe.
K
18
And we can also use rK D = τ δX to compute τ = τ − µ− rδθ .

24

D
D
where the function v S ( X
) is defined together with the function τ − ( X
) by the following equations

vS (

D
θ D
D
D
D
) = (ρτ − ( )) + −
= ρ(τ − ( )) + τ − ( ),
X
X
µ X
X
X

and
τ −(
Crowding out of private safe assets

θ D
D
)= − .
X
µ X

µ− X S D
v (X )
θ

1−

− D by public debt D is

dρ
µ− dv S
=− −
D
θ d( X )
dτ

is either 0 (in the non-Ricardian region) or 1 (in the Ricardian region). With this notation, the
D 19
).
model is isomorphic to the one described in Section 2, with ρ replaced by v S ( X
The tight link between imperfect crowding out and the failure of Ricardian equivalence in our
model relies on the assumption that taxes are capitalized. It would not hold if, for example, taxes
were levied on the endowment of newborns.20 We view this feature as desirable since it allows us
to focus on the market failure that is central to our analysis—the financial friction that hampers
the securitization process—rather than on more conventional features of OLG models.
Public debt and the safety trap. Now imagine that the economy is in a safety trap with
r
< 0, rK = 0, and ξ < 1. Just like in the basic model of Section 2, the safety trap equilibrium
+
−
simply amounts to replacing µ+ , µ− , and X by µξ , µξ . The requirement that rK = 0 determines
the severity of the equilibrium recession ξ:
K,n

0 = δθ − (1 − δ) θ

α−

D
)
µ− v S ( X
ξ

D
)
ρµ− v S ( X
ξ

.

As already noted in Section 2, we confirm that ξ is proportional to the supply of safe assets V S =
µ− X S D
v ( X ).
θ
Increasing safe public debt from D to D̂ > D increases the supply of safe assets V̂ S > V S
−
−
D̂
D
) and V S = µ θX v S ( X
), as long as there is less than full crowding out. This
where V̂ S = µ θX v S ( X
stimulates output, increasing ξ to ξˆ where
V̂ S
ξˆ = S ξ > ξ.
V
19

We can easily extend the model to feature intermediate crowding out by assuming that the trees differ in their
pledgeability ρ̃ with a distribution F (ρ̃). R This extension can be exactly mapped into the model above. The only
difference is that we now have ρ (τ − ) = min {ρ̃, 1 − τ − } dF (ρ̃) , so that crowding out is now given by − dτdρ− =
[1 − F (1 − τ − )] ∈ [0, 1].
20
More generally, the distribution of taxes matters for this result. We refer the reader to an earlier version of
this paper, Caballero and Farhi (2013), for an exploration of this idea. In a recent paper, Barro and Mollerus
(2014) consider a model with heterogeneous risk aversion and assume that taxes are distributed independently of
risk aversion. They generate a crowding out of 0.5 despite the fact that Ricardian equivalence holds in their model.
See Abel (2015) for a detailed exploration of the determinants of crowding out in Ricardian economies.

25

The stimulative effects of safe public debt can be understood most clearly by going back to our
AS-AD equilibrium representation. Because issuing safe public debt increases the supply of safe
assets V S , it produces and upward shift in aggregate demand, which in turn results in a proportional
increase in output through the Keynesian multiplier.21,22
In the model, we necessarily have τ + µ+ = τ − µ− , which implies that τ + < τ − . For this reason, it
is natural to expect fiscal constraints to be more binding after the bad Poisson event than after the
good Poisson event. This is why we adopt τ − , a measure of the ability of the government to raise
tax revenues after the bad Poisson event, as our measure of future fiscal capacity. In particular, in
a safety trap, increasing the supply of safe public debt to D̂ requires the government to have spare
future fiscal capacity; that is to have the ability to raise more taxes after the bad Poisson event
τ̂ − =

D̂ −
τ > τ −.
D

Note however that taxes do not have to be raised while the economy is in the safety trap before
the Poisson event. Indeed τ̂ = τ (and both are equal to 0) since the safe interest rates on debt is
rK = 0.
If the government issues more public debt than can be supported by its future fiscal capacity,
then public debt becomes risky. For example, suppose that τ − has an upped bound at τ̄ − reached
D̄
). Then public debt issuances beyond that level
for a level of public debt D̄ such that τ̄ − = τ − ( X
D̂ > D̄ is not safe and instead results in a partial default after the bad Poisson event with a haircut
D̄
∈ (0, 1]. Only the safe tranche of public debt D̂ (1 − h), and only to the extent
of at least h = D̂−
D̂
that it can be isolated through securitization, increases the supply of safe assets and stimulates the
economy.
Remark 3 Money is a safe assets. At the ZLB, money has the same return as non-monetary safe
assets. Money and non-monetary safe assets then become perfect substitutes. One may wonder what
happens when the government issues extra money through a “helicopter drop” before the Poisson
event when the economy is in a safety trap and rebates the proceeds lump sum. There are two
options which differ in what the government does once the economy is no longer at the ZLB after
the Poisson event: (a) retire the extra money; (b) not retire the extra money. Option (a) is literally
identical to what would happen if instead of extra money, the government had issued extra safe
short-term debt before the Poisson event and paid it back after the Poisson event. In both cases, the
government must raise the same amount of extra taxes after the Poisson event to either retire the
extra money or pay back the extra debt. This stimulates the economy before the Poisson event in
a safety trap. To analyze option (b) we must use the modification of the model introduced later in
Section 4 which allows for capacity over-utilization as well as capacity under-utilization. Compared
21
If the proceeds D̂−D of the additional safe debt issuance are rebated to Knightians, then there are no transitional
dynamics and the economy jumps immediately to the new stochastic steady state before the Poisson event. Otherwise
the new stochastic steady state before the Poisson event is only reached gradually over time.
22
In Appendix A.4, we show that safe public debt issuances can sometimes lead to Pareto improvements, or if not,
at least to welfare improvements for certain classes of Utilitarian welfare functions.

26

to option (a), option (b) further stimulates the economy before the Poisson event in a safety trap
but at the cost of over-stimulating the economy after the Poisson event. In other words, there is a
policy tradeoff. This tradeoff is unavoidable: It it precisely because it over-stimulates the economy
after the bad Poisson event that it further increases the value of safe assets and further stimulates
the economy before the Poisson event in a safety trap. See Appendix A.2.3 for a detailed exposition
of these arguments.

3.2

Quantitative Easing

Here we use the term QE loosely to encompass policies that swap risky assets for safe assets such
as QE1, LTRO, and many other lender of last resort central bank interventions. We model QE as
follows: The government issues additional safe short term debt and purchases private risky assets
(the value of which drops to zero after the bad Poisson event). Let β̂ g be the fraction of the value
of risky assets purchased by the government where23
β̂ g [1 − [ρ(τ̂ − ) + τ̂ − ]µ− ]

X
= D̂ − D.
θ

The key difference between QE and simply issuing more safe public debt is what the government
does with the proceeds from the debt issuance, but the equilibrium rates of return r and rK and
capacity utilization ξ are identical. In QE, the government uses the proceeds to purchase private
risky assets instead of simply rebating them lump sum to private agents. The revenues from the
taxes τ̂ before the bad Poisson event can be lowered because the government can now avail itself of
additional investment revenues from its holdings of private risky assets. If τ = 0, as would be the
case in a safety trap, then we can get τ̂ < 0. This should then be interpreted as a possibility to
reduce taxes if there were some other reasons for which taxes had to be raised.
As long as there is less than full crowding out, the safe asset shortage is alleviated by this policy:
r increases, r decreases, and the risk premium shrinks. Here QE works not so much by removing
risky private assets from private balance sheets, but rather by injecting public assets into private
balance sheets. In other words, QE works by increasing the supply of safe assets. The proceeds of
the extra debt issuance can either be rebated lump sum as in Section 3.1 or reinvested in a portfolio
of private assets as long as these assets are risky.
K

If the economy is in a safety trap, QE acts by stimulating output, increasing the value of ξ to ξˆ
in proportion to the increase in the value of safe assets, exactly as in the case analyzed in Section 3.1
where the revenues from safe public debt issuance are rebated lump sum instead of being reinvested
in a portfolio of private assets as long as these assets are risky and not safe as in this section
V̂ S
ξˆ = S ξ > ξ,
V
23

As long as β̂ g is low enough, this can be done without violating the pledgeability condition.

27

with as before V̂ S > V S where V̂ S =
full crowding out.24,25

µ− X S D̂
v (X )
θ

and V S =

µ− X S D
v (X )
θ

as long as there is less than

Remark 4 These results in safety traps (constrained regime) are in sharp contrast with liquidity
traps (unconstrained regime). In our stylized setup, safe public debt issuances and QE have no
effect at all on the recession ξ in liquidity traps (the unconstrained regime). This follows immediately from the fact that the securitization capacity ρ does not show up anywhere in the equilibrium
equations in liquidity traps. In our model, the effects of safe public debt issuances and QE in safety
traps rely entirely on the (assumed) superior ability of the government to address a form of market
incompleteness—the difficulty to isolate (macro) safe from risky assets.26
This irrelevance result relies on our assumption (made throughout the paper) that dividends are
taxed while the endowment of newborns (wages) is not. As a result, safe public debt issuances and
QE simply reshuffle the fraction of dividends that accrues to private asset holders and the fraction
of dividends that is absorbed by taxes to pay interest on debt of various maturities. This assumption
renders our framework de facto Ricardian in the unconstrained regime, despite the fact that we have
overlapping generations of agents.

4

Forward Guidance

Another major policy tool advocated in the context of the ZLB is Forward Guidance (FG): the
commitment to low future interest rates once the economy recovers. We show in this section that
this policy, which is very effective in liquidity traps, is not in safety traps. In a nutshell, the reason
is that in safety traps the effects of FG are largely dissipated in higher risk premia: The positive
effect of higher future asset values on the current value of risky assets is endogenously offset by an
increase in risky premia, leaving the current value of risky assets, wealth, and aggregate demand
unchanged.
We introduce one modification to our model in Section 2 (and also drop public debt since it is
not central to our message): Agents now can stretch capacity utilization and produce ξt > 1 units of
output per unit of non traded input. This comes at a cost as there is a (proportional separable) per
period utility loss from capacity utilization overextension, equal to max{ξt − 1, 0}. We introduce
this modification to capture the standard effects of FG which is to commit to over-stimulating the
24

Because the proceeds D̂ − D of the additional safe debt issuance are not rebated to Knightians, there are
transitional dynamics and the new stochastic steady state before the Poisson event is only reached gradually over
time.
25
Going back to equation (2), we see that in the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0, in a safety trap when rK = 0, public
debt issuances and QE leave r (and hence also r − rK ) unchanged. When λ+ > 0 or λ− > 0, additional expected
capital gains effects come into play and safe public debt issuances and QE now decreases r (and hence r − rK ).
26
If we allowed the endowments of newborns to be taxed, then safe public debt issuances and QE could have
some non-Ricardian effects, depending on exactly how these taxes are levied, and hence affect economic activity in
a liquidity trap. For example, Kocherlakota (2013) and Caballero et al. (2015) study non-Ricardian environments
where issuing safe public debt can stimulate the economy in a liquidity trap.

28

economy in the future after the good Poisson even when it has exited the ZLB by lowering interest
rates, while at the same time preserving all the results that we have derived so far.
We assume that the cost is large enough so that under flexible prices, we still have ξt = 1 before
and after the Poisson event, with the same natural allocation as that characterized in Section 2.27
Importantly, with nominal rigidities where output is demand determined, this need not be true,
depending on the stance of monetary policy. The equilibrium conditions are then identical to those
in Section 2, but with the possibility that capacity utilization exceeds one before or after the Poisson
event. All the results derived so far are unchanged in this modified model.
In this context, consider the following FG policy: Suppose that the good Poisson event occurs at
σ + . After the good Poisson event, the central bank stimulates the economy by setting the interest
+
rate i+
t below the natural interest rate δθ until σ + T , at which point it reverts to setting the
nominal interest rate equal to the natural interest rate i+ = δθ. Agents know throughout that the
central bank is committed to such policy.
We can now solve the model backwards. We start by characterizing the endogenous path of
equilibrium capacity utilization ξt+ after the good Poisson event. It is easy to see that for t > σ + +T ,
output is equal to potential so that equilibrium capacity utilization is ξt+ = 1. For σ + ≤ t ≤ σ + + T,
output is above potential, and equilibrium capacity utilization satisfies a simple differential equation
ξ˙t+
= i+
t − δθ ≤ 0,
ξt+
with terminal condition ξσ++ +T = 1. The solution for σ + ≤ t ≤ σ + + T is
ξt+ = e

R σ+ +T
t

(δθ−i+s )ds ≥ 1.

The model before the Poisson event is then isomorphic to the model without forward guidance
analyzed in Section 2.2 but with µ+ replaced by µ+ ξσ++ .28
By lowering interest rates, the central bank creates a temporary boom after the good Poisson
event. This boom boosts the total value of assets immediately after the good Poisson event from
µ+ Xθ to µ+ ξσ++ Xθ > µ+ Xθ .
Now suppose that the economy is in a safety trap before the Poisson event. Taking the above
boundary condition and working backward into the equilibrium equations pre-Poisson shows that
27

We imagine that there is separable, additive, and risk neutral, per period utility loss − max{ξt − 1, 0}∆udt
incurred by each agent transforming a unit of a variety of nontraded inputs into ξt units of the corresponding variety
of nontraded final good between t and t + dt. We denote the corresponding per period utility loss for a given Neutral
K
N
N
agent by ∆uN
t dt and for a Knightian agent by ∆ut dt. The total utility of a Neutral agent is then Ut + ∆Ut and
K
K
N
N
N
K
K
K
that of a Knightian agent Ut + ∆Ut where Ut = ∆ut dt + Et [Ut+dt ] and Ut = ∆ut dt + Et [Ut+dt ], where UtN and
UtK are given by the same formulas as in Section 2. We choose ∆u > 0 large enough so that when prices are flexible,
we still have ξt = 1 before and after the Poisson event.
28
We assume throughout that the techncial financial friction assumptions as well as condition (1) hold when µ+
−
µ+ ξ +
and µ− are replaced by ξ σ and µξ , which is guaranteed as long as rK,n is not too negative so that the recession
is not too severe and for the forward guidance is not too extreme.

29

the only effect of this policy is to increase the interest rate r during the safety trap to

r = δθ + (1 − δ) θ

α−
1−

ρµ−
ξ
ρµ−
ξ

+

λ+ (

ξ ++ µ+
σ

ξ

−

− 1) + λ− ( µξ − 1)
1−

ρµ−
ξ

.

This increase in the risky expected return r is such that the contemporaneous value of risky assets
V R (and hence the wealth of Neutrals W N ) is unchanged, despite the fact that its future value after
ξ µ+ X
− V S . But there is no effect on current output ξX.
a good Poisson event has increased to σ+ θ
This can be seen most clearly by going back to the AS-AD equilibrium representation. Neither ξσ+
nor r affect the value of safe assets V S or aggregate demand. The future increase in risky asset
values and the contemporaneous increase in risky expected rate of return are orthogonal to the
safe-asset shortage problem. Since the policy leaves the supply of safe assets unchanged, it does not
expand aggregate demand or output.29,30
A safety trap is addressed more directly by committing to provide support during bad rather
than good times, as would be the case of a commitment to lower interest i−
t rates after the bad
Poisson event. However, it is natural to question whether monetary authorities would have the
ability to lower interest rates in that state. If indeed the bad state happens to coincide with yet
another safety or liquidity trap, monetary authorities could find themselves unable to deliver a lower
interest rate (see Appendix A.3).
Remark 5 These results in safety traps (constrained regime) are, again, in sharp contrast with
those in liquidity traps (unconstrained regime). In a liquidity trap, forward guidance alleviates the
recession by pushing ξ to ξˆ where
λ+
ξ + µ+
λ− +λ+ σ +
+
µ− + λ−λ+λ+ µ+
λ− +λ+
λ−

−
+
ξˆ = ξ λ +λλ−

µ− +

> ξ.

Committing to low interest rates after the good Poisson event increases future value of assets
after the good Poisson event. In contrast to the safety trap case, this also increases the value of
assets before the Poisson event while the economy is in the liquidity trap. This wealth effect increases
demand and mitigates the recession. Forward guidance works by alleviating the asset shortage that
is at the root of the recession. It trades off a future boom (output above potential) after the good
Poisson event against a mitigation of the recession (output below potential) before it.31
29

There is one caveat to this conclusion. We have assumed that prices are entirely rigid. If prices could adjust
gradually over time in a forward looking manner, then forward guidance could regain some kick: A commitment to
lower interest rates after the good Poisson event could increase inflation while the economy is in a safety trap. This
would lower the safe interest rate rK and mitigate the recession. Note than when we model inflation in Section 5, we
assume, motivated by a desire to capture downward wage rigidity, that inflation is determined by a myopic Philipps
curve rather than an expectations-augmented Philipps curve, so that this effect does not arise.
A similar comment applies to the unconventional tax policies considered by Correia et al. (2012), which here
could simply take the form of an increasing path of sales taxes—say through a sales tax holiday—which would create
inflation in consumer prices and hence reduce rK .
30
In Appendix A.4, we show that FG is Pareto dominated by no FG.
31
There are no transitional dynamics before the Poisson event for the aggregate variables ξ, V , and W , when

30

5

Inflation

In this section we relax the extreme sticky price rigidity assumption and show how safety traps trigger deflationary forces, which exacerbate the output drop. We also show that the policy multiplier
(of increasing safe assets) is enhanced by its positive effect on inflation. Finally, as always, inflation
also opens the door for expectations and targets to alleviate the trap by lowering real rates.

5.1

Safety Trap, Deflation, and Inflation Targets

We assume that prices cannot fall faster than at a certain pace: πt ≥ −(κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξt )), with
κ1 > 0. The more slack there is in the economy, the more prices can fall. We impose that if there
is slack in the economy, prices fall as fast as they can: I.e., ξt < 1 implies πt = −(κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξt )).
We capture this requirement with the complementary slackness condition
[πt + (κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξt ))](1 − ξt ) = 0.
This is a traditional upward sloping Phillips curve relating inflation πt and capacity utilization ξt .
The Phillips curve becomes vertical at ξt = 1. Our motivation is to capture downward nominal
rigidities. This specification of the Phillips curve can be justified by appealing to a “nominal social
norm”, which can only be slowly revised downward over time, so that agents would never accept
setting prices falling faster than −(κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξt )) per unit of time. If κ1 = 0 and κ0 = 0, this
corresponds to complete downward nominal rigidities. If κ0 = 0 and κ1 = ∞, this corresponds
to the case of perfectly flexible prices. This modeling strategy and the results that follow borrows
heavily from Eggertsson and Mehrota (2014).
Together with the Phillips curve, we introduce a (truncated) Taylor rule for monetary policy
it = max{0, rtK,n + π ∗ + φ(πt − π ∗ )},
with φ > 1, π ∗ ≥ 0 where rtK,n is the safe natural interest rate at t.
Equilibrium inflation π and capacity utilization ξ are jointly determined by the following equations:
ρµ−
α
−
ξ
max{0, rK,n + π ∗ + φ(π − π ∗ )} − π = δθ − (1 − δ) θ ρµ− ,
ξ

[π + (κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξ))](1 − ξ) = 0,
−

where recall that rK,n = δθ − (1 − δ) θ α−ρµ
. The first equation is simply the requirement that
ρµ−
K
i − π = r , where we have used the Taylor rule to replace i and the equilibrium equations to
replace rK . The second equation is the Phillips curve. These two correspondences link inflation
π and output ξX and can be interpreted as aggregate demand and aggregate supply respectively.
forward guidance is announced. All these variables jump immediately to their new stochastic steady state values.

31

Figure 4: Aggregate supply and aggregate demand with inflation.
We denote them by π = ADπ (ξX) and π = AS π (ξX) to distinguish them from the aggregate
supply and demand functions AS (ξX) and AD (ξX) that we introduced in the Keynesian cross
equilibrium representation in Section 2. We discuss the link between these two representations in
detail below.
We make additional assumptions that guarantee that there is a safety trap equilibrium −κ0 <

min −rK,n , π ∗ and κ0 + κ1 < θ. The first assumption ensures that ADπ (1) > AS π (1) and the
second one guarantees that ADπ (0) < AS π (0) so that the feedback loop between inflation and
output remains bounded. We summarize all our assumptions regarding nominal rigidities.

Assumption 2 (Nominal rigidities) −κ0 < min −rK,n , π ∗ , κ1 > 0, and κ0 + κ1 < θ.
In this context, there is always a deflationary safety trap equilibrium (with π ≤ −κ0 ≤ π ∗ and
ξ < 1). Inflation π and capacity utilization ξ are determined by the following equations
π = (1 − δ) θ

α−

ρµ−
ξ

ρµ−
ξ

− δθ,

π = −(κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξ)).
Both equations expresses π as increasing linear functions of ξ. The first one is aggregate demand
π = ADπ (ξX), while the second one is aggregate supply π = AS π (ξX). With our assumptions
above, aggregate demand is steeper than aggregate supply and both curves intersect exactly once
on [0, 1] at some value ξ. This is the “bad” safety trap equilibrium, analog to the one discussed in
the previous sections.
32

But this model may also feature inflationary full employment equilibria (with π > −κ0 and
ξ = 1). To see this, note that the supply curve becomes vertical at ξ = 1 and the demand curve
has a kink at the value of π = π̃ that solves rK,n + π ∗ + φ(π − π ∗ ) = 0: the demand curve is an
upward sloping function ξ (π) for π ≤ π̃ and downward sloping for π > π̃. As a result, there are
either one or three intersections between the supply and demand curves. We have already seen the
bad equilibrium. The other equilibria, which exist if the inflation target is high enough π ∗ ≥ −rK,n ,
feature π > −κ0 and ξ = 1.32
To summarize, when −κ0 + rK,n < 0, there is always a safety trap equilibrium with ξ < 1 and
π < −κ0 ≤ π ∗ and it is locally determinate. If the inflation target is high enough (0 ≤ rK,n + π ∗ ),
then there are also two other equilibria with ξ = 1 with two different nominal interest rates (i = 0
and i = rK,n + π ∗ > 0) and two different inflation rates (π = −rK,n and π = π ∗ ), but only the
latter is locally determinate. In other words, the increase in the inflation target needs to be large
enough to even have a chance to work. Note however that even when there is a “good” equilibrium
with ξ = 1 and i = rK,n + π ∗ > 0, the “bad” equilibrium with ξ < 1 and i = 0 still exists because
expectations of low inflation are self-fulfilling: Starting from the “good” equilibrium, low enough
expected inflation increases the real interest rate despite the reduction of the nominal interest
rate to zero, depresses the economy, which in turn generates low inflation. Policy cannot select
among these equilibria: The best a high inflation target can achieve is the possibility of a good
equilibrium, not the elimination of the possibility of the bad equilibrium.33,34 Figure 4 provides a
graphical illustration. In the figure, equilibrium inflation in the safety trap equilibrium is negative
but this need not be the case.
We can connect this discussion with the Keynesian cross equilibrium representation developed
in Section 2, which can still be used with rK = i − π once inflation π has been solved out. Given
nominal interest rates i, higher inflation helps to reduce safe interest rates, causing an upward shift
in aggregate demand and resulting in a increase in output. When rK,n < 0 and π ∗ > −rK,n in
the good equilibrium, this logic is strong enough to generate a low enough safe real interest rate
rK = rK,n . But in the bad safety trap equilibrium with i = 0 and π < −κ0 ≤ π ∗ , it is not. In fact,
when −κ0 < 0, this logic can work in reverse, with the recession causing deflation, increasing safe
real interest rates rK = −π > 0 , reducing aggregate demand, further reducing output etc.
Also note that adding an inflation channel to the model increases the value of the Keynesian
multiplier to
ξX
1
κ1 ξ θV S
1 − θ−rK
1
[φπ ∗ +rK,n ] if rK,n +π ∗ +φ(π−π ∗ ) > 0
In an equilibrium with π > 0 and ξ = 1, inflation is determined by π = φ−1
K,n
∗
∗
K,n
K,n
∗
(in which case i = r
+ π + φ(π − π )) or by π = −r
if r
+ π + φ(π − π ∗ ) ≤ 0 (in which case i = 0). The
condition for existence of both equilibria is the same and is given by 0 ≤ rK,n + π ∗ .
33
This multiplicity is also present, and for similar reasons, in the analysis of liquidity traps in Eggertsson and
Mehrota (2014).
34
In Appendix A.4, we show that increases in the inflation target can sometimes lead to Pareto improvements,
or if not, at least to welfare improvements for certain classes of Utilitarian welfare functions. We also show that
they always lead to Pareto improvements if lump sum taxes are available to redistribute among Neutrals and among
Knightians in any given period.
32

33

so that d(ξX) =

1
1−

κ1 ξ
θ−r K

ξX
θdV S .
θV S

This is because an increase in the value of safe assets, increases

aggregate demand, which increases output, increasing inflation, reducing the safe real interest rate,
further increasing aggregate demand and output etc. ad infinitum. The more responsive is inflation
to capacity utilization ξ (the larger is κ1 ), the larger is the Keynesian multiplier. In other words,
increased price flexibility is destabilizing as in DeLong and Summers (1986).

5.2

Public Debt, QE and Forward Guidance with Inflation

We now turn to the effects of the policies considered in Sections 3 and 4 in this extended model
with inflation. We focus on the safety trap equilibrium and show that the main conclusions remain
qualitatively unchanged but the power of QE is enhanced.
We start with safe public debt and QE. In a safety trap, ξ < 1 and π < 0 are determined by the
intersection of the demand and supply curves:

π = (1 − δ) θ

α−

D
)µ−
vS ( X
ξ

D
vS ( X
)µ−
ξ

− δθ,

π = −(κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξ)).
Clearly, increasing D to D̂ > D (and either rebating the proceeds to consumers or purchasing
private risky assets) shifts the demand curve down which, given that it is steeper than the supply
curve, results in an increase in ξ to ξˆ > ξ. Note that the stimulus is stronger in this extended setup
with endogenous inflation
V̂ S
ξˆ > S ξ,
V
−

−

D
D̂
) and V̂ S = µ θX v S ( X
). This is because of a virtuous cycle whereby additional
with V S = µ θX v S ( X
safe assets increase output, which increases inflation (reduces deflation), which lowers the real
interest, further stimulating output etc. ad infinitum, resulting in a larger value of the Keynesian
multiplier as explained above.

We turn next to forward guidance. In order for monetary policy to be able to generate a boom
after the good Poisson event, we introduce the following modification of our setup. We assume that
the Phillips curve only becomes vertical at a value ξ¯ > 1 so that we now have
[πt + (κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξt ))](ξ¯ − ξt ) = 0.
Furthermore, we assume that κ0 = −π ∗ so that inflation is π ∗ if the economy is at capacity.
To capture forward guidance, we continue to assume that monetary policy follows the truncated
Taylor rule
it = max{0, rtK,n + π ∗ + φ(πt − π ∗ )}

34

before and after the bad Poisson event, but we allow monetary policy to depart from this rule after
the good Poisson event and follow instead (recall that rtK,n = δθ after the good Poisson event)
+
∗
∗
i+
t = max{0, ı̂t + π + φ(πt − π )}
+
+
+
+
where ı̂+
t < δθ for σ ≤ t ≤ σ + T and ı̂t = δθ for t > σ + T . Then output is above potential
after the good Poisson event. Capacity utilization satisfies the differential equation


ξ˙t+ ! +
∗
+ = ı̂t − δθ + (φ − 1) (πt − π ) ≤ 0,
ξt
πt − π ∗ + κ1 (1 − ξt+ ) = 0
with terminal condition ξσ++ +T = 1.
Just as in Section 4, the solution features ξt+ > 1 and πt ≥ π ∗ for σ + ≤ t < σ + + T . The
rest of the analysis is identical and the conclusion is identical. Forward guidance stimulates the
economy after the good Poisson event, resulting in a boom and inflation above target. But this fails
to stimulate the economy before the Poisson when the economy is in a safety trap.
Remark 6 We could also introduce inflation in the unconstrained regime and liquidity traps. Just
like in the constrained regime, when the natural safe interest rate is negative rK,n < 0, there is
always a bad liquidity trap equilibrium with a recession ξ < 1 and deflation π < 0. If the inflation
target π̄ is high enough, there is also a good equilibrium with no recession ξ = 1 and inflation at
target π = π̄. Introducing inflation does not change the results that safe public debt and QE are
ineffective in liquidity traps. Forward guidance gains an extra kick by increasing inflation, reducing
real interest rates, further stimulating output and inflation, and so on.

6

Extensions and Robustness

In the appendix we present two extensions, which we briefly summarize here: an analysis of the
role of bubbles (Appendix A.5) and an endogenization of the securitization process to demonstrate
the presence of a securitization externality (Appendix A.6). We also comment on the robustness of
our results.
Bubbles and fiscal capacity. The very low interest rates that characterize a safety trap
raises the issue of whether speculative bubbles may emerge, and whether these can play a useful
role through their wealth effect. We show in Appendix A.5 that bubbles can indeed arise in safety
traps, but that only the emergence of safe bubbles (as opposed to risky bubbles) can stimulate
economic activity. This is because only safe bubbles alleviate the shortage of safe assets while risky
bubbles end up simply crowding out other risky assets. The fact that risky bubbles have no effect on
output in a safety trap formalizes some observations in Summers (2013) that in secular stagnation
environments, even large financial bubbles only seem to create moderate economic expansions. It
35

stands in contrast to standard liquidity trap environments, where both safe and risky bubbles
stimulate output. This is because in standard liquidity trap environments, both increase total asset
supply and alleviate the underlying shortage of assets.
We associate safe bubbles to (some) safe public debt: The existence of a bubbly-region where
the safe real interest rate is permanently below the growth rate of the economy is equivalent to an
expansion of the fiscal capacity of the government who can issue some amount of safe debt without
ever having to raise taxes.
Securitization externality. In Appendix A.6 we endogenize the securitization capacity of the
economy. We assume that by investing resources jt Xdt, a Neutral agent can increase ρ(jt ) and,
with it, increase the supply of safe assets (i.e., the share of the tree’s revenue in the bad state of
the world that is pledgable today).
We show in this extension that outside of a safety trap, the competitive equilibrium is constrained
Pareto efficient, but that in a safety trap, it is constrained inefficient (there is underprovision of safe
assets). We trace back this inefficiency to a securitization externality. In a safety trap, private agents
do not internalize the full social benefit of creating safe assets. More specifically, they do not take
into account the stimulative effects of these assets. This market failure builds a case for government
intervention in securitization markets. The government could use taxes or quantity restrictions to
encourage securitization, force financial institutions to raise more fresh capital than they would
do otherwise or directly recapitalize them to boost their securitization capacity, or simply directly
engage in securitization through QE. This argument is distinct from the comparative advantage of
the government in safe asset creation that we analyzed in Section 3.
Robustness. Our model is stylized, which allows us to isolate and illustrate the key mechanisms, and to bring out most clearly the differences between safety traps and liquidity traps. Of
course, its stark assumptions are likely to hold in a milder form in practice, and it is important to
understand how our results would be altered in such contexts.
The fundamental features of our model, which drive our results, are the following: (i) nominal
rigidities and a ZLB; (ii) macroeconomic uncertainty and risk aversion; (iii) heterogeneity in risk
aversion with risk tolerant and risk averse agents; (iv) financial frictions hampering securitization.
Features (i) and (ii) are standard, although they are rarely combined in standard liquidity trap
analyses which rely on perfect foresight or log-linearizations. Feature (iii) gives rise to risk sharing
through asset markets, and in particular through the issuance of zero-net-supply safe assets from
risk tolerant agents to risk averse agents (one could imagine either the issuance of entirely safe
assets as in our model and also as in Barro and Mollerus 2014, or simply of safer assets than the
positive-net-supply Lucas trees). Feature (iv) hampers this securitization process by limiting the
collateral that can be used to back these safe assets.
We model macroeconomic uncertainty in feature (ii) as a macroeconomic Poisson event, and we
assume that all uncertainty is resolved at once after this Poisson event. The safety trap then only
arises before the Poisson event, precisely because a bad Poisson event might occur in the future.
36

At the cost of analytical tractability, one could allow for more general stochastic processes, and
relax the assumption that uncertainty is resolved all at once with the realization of the event. For
example, if another Poisson event could occur after the first Poisson event, then the economy could
end up in a safety trap not only before the first realization of the Poisson event, but also after the
realization of the first bad Poisson event, because another future bad Poisson event might occur.
The resulting compounding of macroeconomic uncertainty would further reduce safe asset supply,
and trigger an even bigger recession before the first Poisson event. Output after the first bad Poisson
event would also be lower, not only because of the exogenous impact of the first bad Poisson event,
but also because of an endogenous recession.
In our model, features (iii) and (iv) take an extreme form: agents are either risk neutral or
infinitely risk averse; and there is a hard securitization constraint. In addition, we have assumed
that agents do not substitute consumption intertemporally. These extreme assumptions make the
model tractable and transparent, and allow us to derive our results in closed form. Milder versions
of these features would lead to milder forms of our main results: recessions at the ZLB associated
with increases in risk premia generated by shortages of safe assets; stimulative effects of safe debt
issuances and QE; reduced effectiveness of FG. For example, and focusing on FG, with finite differences in risk aversion, FG would increase the attractiveness of risky assets and hence reduce the
demand of safe assets by risk averse agents, thereby stimulating the economy, the more so, the
lower the risk aversion of risk averse agents, and the higher the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Likewise, with an active investment margin to relax financial frictions as in Appendix A.6,
FG would increase the incentives of risk tolerant agents to invest in securitization and issue safe
assets to capture risk premia, increase the supply of safe assets, and hence stimulate the economy,
the more so, the higher the elasticity of securitization capacity to investment or, equivalently, the
responsiveness of the supply of safe assets to risk premia. Similar observations apply to safe debt
issuances and QE. In particular, it is no longer key that public debt be absolutely safe in order to
stimulate output: It is enough that it be safer (lower beta) than the private risky assets that are
being purchased with the proceeds of the debt issuance.

7

Final Remarks

In this paper we provide a model that captures some of the most salient macroeconomic consequences
and policy implications of a safety trap. The model is deliberately highly stylized, which allows us
to isolate the specific role of safe asset shortages at the ZLB. Safety traps correspond to liquidity
traps in which the emergence of an endogenous risk premium significantly alters the connection
between macroeconomic policy, wealth, and economic activity.
In a nutshell, in a situation of safety trap, private agents (and some sovereigns) want to substitute
some of their risky holdings for safer ones. In the absence of mechanisms to lower safe interest rates
to restore equilibrium, the most powerful policies are those that help the private sector implement
this swap. As we mentioned in the main text, the early QE policies implemented by the FED during
37

the subprime crises did just that, and there is extensive evidence of their effectiveness. Another
successful example is the OMT (outright monetary transactions) program established by the ECB
in late 2012, which had an immediate impact on the Eurozone risk perception, or the more recent
(April 2016) move of the ECB to purchase corporate bonds.
However, over time and partly as a result of lack of political support, asset purchase policies
have turned mostly into swaps of one form of safe asset for another, which is not nearly as effective
in a safety trap context. In fact, in a previous version of this paper (Caballero and Farhi 2013), we
argued that Operation Twist (OT) type polices, where the FED purchases long maturity Treasuries
and sells short maturity ones, could be counterproductive. The reason is that long-term public debt,
while risky, is a negative-beta asset. OT type policies boil down to swapping negative-beta assets
for zero-beta assets, which reduces the effective supply of safe assets. By contrast, the right form of
QE policies entails swapping positive-beta assets for zero-beta assets, which increases the effective
supply of safe assets.
Similarly, forward guidance policies are largely ineffective and can be seen as a mostly failed
attempts at stimulating the economy by attempting to increase the value of risky assets, which are
essentially dissipated in offsetting increases in risk premia.
Sufficient increases in the inflation target, by reducing safe real interest rates, are effective at
stimulating output. The same goes for imposing negative interest rates rK < 0, to the extent that
it is possible. Recently, some countries have experimented with modest levels of negative interest
rates. At this stage, it is unclear exactly how far below zero interest rates can go. Of course safety
traps can emerge even if the lower bound is not exactly at zero, as long as there is some finite lower
bound.
Given the faster growth of safe-asset-consumer economies than that of safe-asset-producer economies
as well as the aging of wealth-rich economies, absent major financial innovations, the shortage of
safe assets is only likely to worsen over time, perhaps as a latent factor during booms but reemerging
in full force during contractions. It is our conjecture that the shortage of safe assets will remain as
a structural drag, lowering safe rates, increasing safety spreads, straining the financial system, and
weakening the effectiveness of conventional monetary policy during contractions.

38

References
[1] Abel, Andrew, 2015, “Crowd Out in Ricardian Economies,” mimeo Wharton.
[2] Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances?
The Case of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper During the Financial Crisis of 2007–09,” Paper
presented at the 10th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, International Monetary
Fund. November.
[3] Adrian, Tobias, Richard K. Crump, and Emanuel Moench, 2014, “Efficient, regression-based
estimation of dynamic asset pricing models,” Staff Reports 493, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.
[4] Barclays 2012. Equity Gilt Study.
[5] Barro, Robert J. and Andrew Mollerus, 2014, “Safe Assets,” mimeo Harvard University.
[6] Barro, Robert .J and Herschel I. Grossman, 1971, “A General Disequilibrium Model of Income
and Employment,” American Economic Review, 61(1), pp. 82-93, March.
[7] Bénassy, Jean-Pascal, 1986, “Macroeconomics: An Introduction to the Non-Walrasian Approach,” Academic Press, Orlando.
[8] Bernanke, Ben, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Ponder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin, 2011. “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007,” International Finance Discussion Paper 1014, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
[9] Blanchard, Olivier J, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 1987. “Monopolistic Competition and the Effects
of Aggregate Demand.” American Economic Review, 77(4), pp. 647-66.
[10] Caballero, Ricardo J., 2006. “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages.” In The Role of
Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century The Fourth European Central Banking Conference 9-10 November, Andreas Beyer and Lucrezia Reichlin, editors, pp.
272-283.
[11] Caballero, Ricardo J., 2009. “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis,” Paolo Baffi
Lecture, Bank of Italy.
[12] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Emmanuel Farhi, 2013, “A Model of the Safe Asset Mechanism
(SAM): Safety Traps and Economic Policy.” MIT and Harvard mimeo.
[13] Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008a, “Financial
Crash, Commodity Prices, and Global Imbalances.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Fall, pp. 1-55.

39

[14] Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008b, “An Equilibrium
Model of “Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review, 98(1),
pp. 358-393.
[15] Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2015, “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB.” Harvard mimeo.
[16] Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2017, “Rents, Technical
Change, and Risk Premia: Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capial,
Earnigs Yield, and Factor Shares.” forthcoming in the American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings.
[17] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2009, “Global Imbalances and Financial
Fragility,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May.
[18] Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst and Matthias Paustian, 2012, “Inflation and output
in New Keynesian models with a transient interest rate peg,” mimeo Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland.
[19] Campbell, John, 2008, “Estimating the Equity Premium,” Canadian Journal of Economics,41(1), pp. 1-21.
[20] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011, “When Is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), pp. 78-121.
[21] Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan-Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, 2013, “Unconventional
Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound,” the American Economic Review,103(4), pp. 1172-1211.
[22] Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek and Erik Stafford, 2009, “The Economics of Structured
Finance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 23, No. 1, Winter.
[23] Cúrdia, Vasco, Andrea Ferrero, Ging Cee Ng, and Andrea Tambalotti 2015, “Has U.S. monetary
policy tracked the efficient interest rate?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 70(C), pp. 72-83.
[24] Daly, Kevin, 2016, “A Secular Increase in the Equity Risk Premium,” International Finance.
[25] De Long, Bradford J. Lawrence H. Summers, 1986, “Is Increased Price Flexibility Stabilizing?,”
American Economic Review, 76(5), pp. 1031-44.
[26] Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni and Christina Patterson, 2015, “The Forward Guidance
Puzzle,” mimeo Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
[27] Duarte, Fernando M. and Carlo Rosa, 2015. “The equity risk premium: a review of models,”
Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, issue 2, pages 39-57.
[28] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman, 2012, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap:
A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), pp. 1469-1513.
40

[29] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, 2003, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 139-211.
[30] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Neil Mehrota 2014, “A Model of Secular Stagnation,” mimeo Brown
University.
[31] Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Helene Rey, “Reforming the International
Monetary System,” CEPR ereport, Setpember 2011.
[32] Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning, 2012, “Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency
Unions,” NBER working paper 18381.
[33] Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2011. “Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility,” forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.
[34] Goldman Sachs 2012. “Are there Fewer Safe Assets than Before?,” Goldman Sachs Global
Economics Weekly.
[35] Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar, and Peter Rupert, 2015. “Secular Stagnation and Returns to
Capital,” Economic Synopses, Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis.
[36] Gorton, Gary B., 2010, “Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007,” Oxford University
Press.
[37] Gorton, Gary B. and Guillermo Ordoñez, 2013, “The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets,”
NBER working paper 18732.
[38] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. 2007. “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege,” in Richard Clarida, editor,
G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, The University of Chicago
Press, pp. 11-55.
[39] Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2010, “Price Pressure in the Government Bond
Market,” American Economic Review, 100(2), pp. 585-90, May.
[40] Greenwood, Robin, Sam Hanson, and Jeremy Stein, 2012, “A Comparative-Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity”, mimeo, Harvard.
[41] Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2011, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and
the Liquidity Trap,” NBER working paper 17583.
[42] Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, “The U.S. Treasury yield
curve: 1961 to the present,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, 54(8), pp. 2291-2304,
November.
[43] Hall, Robert E., 2011a, “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review, 101, pp. 431-469.

41

[44] Hall, Robert E., 2011b, “Clashing Theories of Unemployment,” mimeo, Hoover Institution and
Stanford University.
[45] Hall, Robert E., 2014, “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy of the Financial
Crisis,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 29(1), pp 71-128.
[46] Hansen, Alvin, 1939l, “Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth,” American Economic Review, 29(1), pp 1-15.
[47] He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2015, “A Model of the Reserve
Asset,” mimeo Chicago Booth.
[48] Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1997, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds and the
Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,112(3), pp663-691.
[49] Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1998, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal
of Political Economy, 106(1), pp. 1-40.
[50] Keynes, John M, 1936, “The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money,” Macmilan.
[51] Kocherlakota, Narayana, 2013, “Impact of a Labor Price Fall when Labor Markets are Incomplete,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
[52] Korinek, Anton and Alp Simsek, 2013, “Liquidity Traps and Excessive Leverage”, mimeo,
MIT.
[53] Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, “The Effects of Quantitative
Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
[54] Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, “The Aggregate Demand for
Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 120:2, pp. 233-267
[55] Krugman, Paul R., 1998, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 29(2), pp. 137-206.
[56] Malinvaud, Edmond. 1977, “Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered,” Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
[57] McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura and Jón Steinsson, 2015, “The Power of Forward Guidance
Revisited,” NBER working paper 20882.
[58] Obstfeld, Maury, 2011, “International Liquidity: The Fiscal Dimension,” Monetary and Economic Studies, pp. 33-48, November.
[59] Stein, Jeremy C., 2012, “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 127(1), pp. 57-95.
42

[60] Summers, Lawrence H., 2013, Speech at the IMF Annual Economic Conference.
[61] Werning, Ivan, 2012, “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” MIT mimeo.
[62] Woodford, Michael, 1990, “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings 80, pp. 382-88, May.
[63] Woodford, Michael, 2003, “Interest and Prices,” Princeton University Press.

A

Appendix

A.1
A.1.1

Detailed Derivations
Derivations for Section 2.1

In this section, we assume that prices are flexible. We focus on stochastic steady states before the
Poisson event. There are two cases, depending on whether we are in the constrained regime or in
the unconstrained regime. Recall that both in the constrained regime and in the unconstrained
regime, we have the following implications of goods market clearing:
V =W =
V + = W + = µ+

X
θ

X
,
θ

and V − = W − = µ−

V S = V S+ = V S− = ρµ−
V R = (1 − ρµ− )

(3)
X
,
θ

X
.
θ

X
X
X
, V R+ = (µ+ − ρµ− ) , and V R− = (µ− − ρµ− ) .
θ
θ
θ

(4)
(5)
(6)

Unconstrained regime. Suppose first that we are in the unconstrained regime with r = rK
and W K ≤ V S . The equilibrium equations are
rV S = δ S X,

(7)

!

rV R = (δ − δ S )X + λ+ (V R+ − V R ) + λ− V R− − V R ,

(8)

0 = −θW N

0 = −θW K + α(1 − δ)X + rW K ,
!

!

+ (1 − α)(1 − δ)X + rW N − λ+ V R+ − V R − λ− V R− − V R ,
W K + W N = V S + V R.

(9)
(10)
(11)

We can sum the two asset pricing equations and the two wealth evolution equations to get the

43

following aggregate asset pricing equation and aggregate wealth evolution equation
!

rV = δX + λ+ (V + − V ) + λ− V − − V ,

(12)

!

!

0 = −θW + (1 − δ)X + rW − λ+ V + − V − λ− V − − V ,

(13)

W = V.

(14)

Combining equations (12), (13), and (14) immediately implies that as already anticipated
W =V =

X
.
θ

Plugging this back in the aggregate asset pricing equation (12) yields
r

µ+ X
X
µ− X
X
X
= δX + λ+ (
− ) + λ− (
− ),
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ

which can be rewritten as
!

r = δθ + λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− µ− − 1 .

(15)

We are indeed in the constrained regime if
W K ≤ V S.
Using equation (7), we can rewrite this condition as
ρµ− X
α (1 − δ) X
≤
,
θ−r
θ
or equivalently, using expression (15) for the equilibrium interest rate r, as
! −

α − ρµ−
+
+
−
−
δ)
+
λ
(µ
−
1)
+
λ
µ
−
1
≤ 0.
θ
(1
ρµ−
Constrained regime. Suppose now that we are in the constrained regime with r > rK and
W K = V S . We then have
rK V S = δ S X,
(16)
!

(17)
rV R = (δ − δ S )X + λ+ (V R+ − V R ) + λ− V R− − V R ,

0 = −θW N

0 = −θW K + α(1 − δ)X + rK W K ,
!

!

+ (1 − α)(1 − δ)X + rW N − λ+ V R+ − V R − λ− V R− − V R ,

(18)
(19)

W K = V S,

(20)

W N = V R.

(21)

44

In this regime we have
W

K

=V

S

ρµ− X
=
,
θ

(22)

(1 − ρµ− )X
.
(23)
θ
Plugging the expression for Knightian wealth (22) back in the evolution equation (18) for Knightian
wealth, we get
ρµ− X
ρµ− X
+ α(1 − δ)X + rK
,
0 = −θ
θ
θ
which can be rewritten as
α − ρµ−
(1 − δ)θ.
(24)
rK = δθ −
ρµ−
WN = V R =

We then plug back the expression for the value of safe assets (22) and the expression for safe real
interest rates (24) into the asset pricing equation (16) for safe assets to get
[δθ −

ρµ− X
α − ρµ−
(1
−
δ)θ]
= δ S X,
ρµ−
θ

which can be rewritten as
δ S = δρµ− − (α − ρµ− )(1 − δ).

(25)

We use the expression for the value of Neutral wealth (23) and the expression (25) for δ S to get
λ+ (µ+ − 1)X λ− (µ− − 1)X
(1 − ρµ− )X
S
= (δ − δ )X +
+
,
r
θ
θ
θ
which can be rewritten as
r = δθ +

λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− (µ− − 1)
α − ρµ−
(1
−
δ)θ
+
.
1 − ρµ−
1 − ρµ−

(26)

We are in the constrained regime if the risk premium is positive
r − rK > 0,
which, using equations (24) and (26) for the safe and risky expected rates of return rK and r, leads
to the sufficient condition for the constrained regime:
!

α − ρµ−
(1 − δ)θ + λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− µ− − 1 > 0.
−
ρµ
A.1.2

Derivations for Section 2.2

In this section, we assume that prices are rigid and that we are in the constrained regime. We focus
on stochastic steady states before the Poisson event.

45

With rigid prices, actual output can be below potential output ξX < X before the Poisson event
if rK,n < 0 and rK = 0 but never after the Poisson event where rK+ = r+ = rK− = r− = δθ.
We now have the following implications of goods market clearing:
V =W =
V + = W + = µ+

ξX
θ

ξX
,
θ

and V − = W − = µ−

V S = V S+ = V S− = ρµ−
V R = (1 − ρ

(27)
ξX
,
θ

X
.
θ

X
X
µ− ξX
)
, V R+ = (µ+ − ρµ− ) , and V R− = (µ− − ρµ− ) .
ξ θ
θ
θ

(28)
(29)
(30)

The equilibrium equations are
rK V S = δ S ξX,

(31)

!

rV R = (δ − δ S )ξX + λ+ (V R+ − V R ) + λ− V R− − V R ,

(32)

0 = −θW N

0 = −θW K + α(1 − δ)ξX + rK W K ,
!

!

+ (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξX + rW N − λ+ V R+ − V R − λ− V R− − V R ,

(33)
(34)

W K = V S,

(35)

W N = V R,

(36)

rK ≥ 0, 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 1,

and rK (1 − ξ) = 0.

(37)

The last equation (37) is a ZLB complementary slackness condition. Recall from Sections 2.1
and A.1.1 that
α − ρµ−
(1 − δ)θ.
rK,n = δθ −
ρµ−
As long as rK,n ≥ 0, full capacity utilization ξ = 1 derived in Sections 2.1 and A.1.1 can be achieved
by simply setting i = rK,n so that rK = rK,n ≥ 0. But when rK,n < 0 as we assume from now on,
the constraint rK = 0 binds, and actual output is below potential with ξ < 1 (note that ξ is an
equilibrium variable). To solve for the equilibrium, we note that the equilibrium equations are then
+
isomorphic to those in Section A.1.1 but with the following renormalization: µ+ is replaced by µξ ,
−
µ− by µξ , and X by ξX. Equilibrium capacity utilization must be such that rK = 0, which using
expression (24) for rK together with the aforementioned renormalization, can be written as
−

0 = δθ −
or
ξ=

α − ρ µξ
ρ µξ

−

(1 − δ)θ,

θ
< 1.
θ − rK,n
46

Using expression (26) for r together with the renormalization, we get
+

−

r = δθ +

α − ρ µξ
1 − ρ µξ

−

(1 − δ)θ +

−

λ+ ( µξ − 1) + λ− ( µξ − 1)
1 − ρ µξ

−

.

To derive the Keynesian cross representation of the equilibrium, we simply combine the asset
pricing equations (31) to replace δ S in (32). We then use V R = W N to replace V R by W N in the
resulting equation and get
rW N − λ+ (

ξX
µ−
ξX
µ+
− 1)
− λ− (
− 1)
= δX − rK V S .
ξ
θ
ξ
θ

We can then plug back this expression in the evolution equation (34) for Neutral wealth to get
0 = −θW N + (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξX + δξX − rK V S ,
which we can rewrite as
W N = (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξ

X
rK S
X
+ δξ −
V .
θ
θ
θ

Using the fact that the total value of Knightian wealth is W K = V S , we get that aggregate demand
for goods is given by
!

θ W N + W K = AD (ξX)
where
!

AD (ξX) = (1 − α)(1 − δ)ξX + δξX + θ − rK V S ,
with rK ≥ 0. Aggregate supply is simply the 45 degree line
AS (ξX) = ξX.
When rK,n ≥ 0, we have AD (X) = AS (X) when rK = rK,n . But when rK,n < 0, we have rK = 0
and ξ is the solution of the fixed point equation AD (ξX) = AS (ξX).
A.1.3

Derivations for Section 2.2.3

In this section, we assume that the economy is in the unconstrained regime and that prices are
rigid. The stochastic steady state equilibrium equations before the Poisson event for aggregate
asset values V , aggregate wealth W , the interest rate r and capacity utilization are given by:
rV = δξX + λ+ (

µ− X
µ+ X
− V ) + λ− (
− V ),
θ
θ

0 = −θW + (1 − δ)ξX + rW − λ+ (
47

µ+ X
µ− X
− V ) − λ− (
− V ),
θ
θ

(38)
(39)

V = W,
r ≥ 0, 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 1,

(40)

and r (1 − ξ) = 0.

(41)

Let
!

rn = δθ + λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− µ− − 1 .

(42)

If rn > 0, we can set r = rn and get ξ = 1. We then have
V =W =

X
.
θ

If rn < 0, we have r = 0 and ξ < 1. We then have
V =W =
and
0 = δθ + λ+ (

ξX
,
θ

µ−
µ+
− 1) + λ− (
− 1).
ξ
ξ

The alternative expressions for V and W used in the text
+

−

δξX + λ+ µ θX + λ− µ θX
,
V =
r + λ+ + λ−
+

−

(1 − δ)ξX − λ+ µ θX − λ− µ θX
,
W =
θ − r − λ+ − λ−
are simple rearrangements of equations (38) and (39) respectively.
A.1.4

Derivations for Section 3

Public debt. We start with the model with public debt. We follow the same steps as in Section
A.1.2. The equilibrium equations are exactly the same as in Section A.1.2 with one difference: ρ
must be replaced by ρ (τ − ) + τ − .
QE. Suppose that additional public debt is issued from D to D̂ > D. This requires an increase
τ − > τ − . But assume that instead of rebating the proceeds of the debt issuance,
from τ − to τ̂ − = D̂
D
they are used to purchase risky assets. This only change the equilibrium value of τ̂ but does not
affect any of the stochastic steady state equilibrium equations derived in Section A.1.2.
A.1.5

Derivations for Section 4

We give a detailed derivation of the new element of Section 4: the determination of output after the
good Poisson event with forward guidance. Indeed, given ξσ++ , the equilibrium before the Poisson
event is exactly the same as that characterized in Sections 2.2 and A.1.2 with µ+ replaced by ξσ++ µ+ .

48

After the good Poisson event, we are in the unconstrained regime, and we can represent the
equilibrium with an aggregate asset pricing equation, an aggregate wealth evolution equation, and
+
an aggregate market clearing condition. Because the interest rate i+
t = rt is not constant, the
solution features a transition. We have
+ +
+
+
i+
t Vt = δξt µ X + V̇t ,

(43)

+
Ẇt+ = −θWt+ + (1 − δ)ξt+ µ+ X + i+
t Wt ,

(44)

Wt+ = Vt+ .

(45)

Combining these equations yields the goods market clearing condition
Wt+ = Vt+ =

ξt+ µ+ X
,
θ

that can then be replaced into the aggregate asset pricing equation to yield
i+
t

ξ˙+ µ+ X
ξt+ µ+ X
= δξt+ µ+ X + t
θ
θ

that can be rewritten as the differential equation
ξ˙t+
= i+
t − δθ,
ξt
that must be solved with the terminal condition
ξσ++ +T = 1.
The solution for σ + ≤ t ≤ σ + + T is
ξt+ = e
A.1.6

R σ+ +T
t

(δθ−is )ds

≥ 1.

Derivations for Section 5.1

The stochastic steady state equilibrium equations with inflation before the Poisson event are exactly
the same as in Section A.1.2 but with the following differences: There are three new equilibrium
equations and one of the equilibrium conditions must be modified.
The three new equilibrium equations are the Fisher equation, the truncated Taylor rule, and
the Phillips curve:
(46)
rK = i − π,
i = max{0, rK,n + π ∗ + φ(π − π ∗ )},

(47)

[π + (κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξ))](1 − ξ) = 0.

(48)

49

In addition, the ZLB complementary slackness condition (37) becomes
i ≥ 0, 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 1,

and i (1 − ξ) = 0.

(49)

Given the equilibrium value of rK , the real equilibrium allocation is exactly the same as in
Section A.1.2. But there is now an endogenous link between ξ and rK through the Fisher equation
(46), the truncated Taylor rule (47), and the Phillips curve (48).
When −κ0 + rK,n < 0, in the bad safety trap equilibrium inflation π and capacity utilization are
jointly determined by the requirement that rK = −π and by the Phillips curve:
−π = δθ − (1 − δ) θ

α−

ρµ−
ξ

ρµ−
ξ

,

π = −(κ0 + κ1 (1 − ξ)).
We can rewrite these equations as
π = −θ + (1 − δ) θα

ξ
,
ρµ−

π = −(κ0 + κ1 ) + κ1 ξ.

(50)
(51)

Assumption 2 guarantees that there exists a unique solution to this system of equations with ξ < 0
and π < −κ0 ≤ π ∗ . Indeed, these are two linear equations for π as a function of ξ, and Assumption 2
guarantees that equation (50) (aggregate demand) is steeper than equation (51) (aggregate supply)
and crosses it once from below for a value of ξ ∈ (0, 1) and corresponding value of π < −κ0 ≤ π ∗ .
There can also be good equilibria with π > −κ0 and ξ = 1. In these equilibria, inflation is either
1
[φπ ∗ +rK,n ] if rK,n +π ∗ +φ(π−π ∗ ) > 0 (in which case i = rK,n +π ∗ +φ(π−π ∗ ))
determined by π = φ−1
or by π = −rK,n if rK,n + π ∗ + φ(π − π ∗ ) ≤ 0 (in which case i = 0). The condition for existence of
these good both good equilibria is the same and is given by 0 ≤ rK,n + π ∗ .

A.2
A.2.1

Money, the ZLB, and the Cashless Limit
Flexible Prices

To justify a ZLB it ≥ 0, we introduce money into the model. We then define and focus on the
cashless limit (see e.g. Woodford 2003).
We represent the demand for real money balances for transactional services using a cash-inadvance constraint that stipulates that individuals with wealth wt and money holdings mt can only
consume min(wt , mεt ).
We focus on equilibria where the price level Pt has continuous paths (later when we introduce

50

nominal rigidities, this necessarily will be the case), and we denote by πt the rate of inflation. This
implies that money is a safe asset with real rate of return −πt , whereas non-monetary safe assets
have a real rate of return of it − πt . When it > 0, money is held only for transaction services. When
it = 0 money is also held as a pure safe store of value. This model has no equilibrium with it < 0,
because then money would dominate other safe assets. Hence there is a ZLB it ≥ 0.
The demand for real money balances for transactional services is εWtK and εWtN for Knightians
and Neutrals respectively. We assume that the real money supply is εM ε with M ε = Xθ before the
Poisson event and that it adjusts to accommodate one for one the change in potential output after
the Poisson event (M ε− = µ− Xθ and M ε+ = µ+ Xθ for bad and good events, respectively).
We also assume that potential adjustments in the nominal stock of money supply are distributed
lump sum in proportion to equilibrium real money holdings. This implies that in equilibrium,
nominal money holdings and lump sum nominal money grants add up to deliver a total real return
of zero on real money holdings.
After the (bad) Poisson event, the value of the safe tranches of trees ρ(µ− Xθ − εM ε− ) =
ρµ− (1 − ε) Xθ is a fraction ρ of the total value of assets excluding money µ− Xθ −εM ε− = µ− (1 − ε) Xθ .
This is also the value of the safe assets (excluding money) before the Poisson event:
V S = ρµ− (1 − ε)

X
.
θ

Denoting by MtK and MtM the real money holdings of Knightians and Neutrals respectively, the
equilibrium equations are now:
rtK V S = δ S X,
!

!

rt V R = (δ − δ S )X + λ+ V R+ − V R + λ− V R− − V R ,

ẆtN

ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rtK (WtK − MtK ) − πt MtK ,
!

!

!

= −θWtN +(1 − α) (1 − δ) X+rtK V S − WtK + MtK −πt MtN +rt VtR −λ+ V R+ − V R −λ− V R− − V R ,
MtK + MtN = M ε ,
WtK + WtN = V S + V R + M ε ,
rt ≥ rtK ,

WtK − MtK ≤ V S ,

and (rt − rtK )(V S − WtK + MtK ) = 0,

MtK ≥ εWtK and MtN ≥ εWtN ,

with equality if it > 0,

and the requirement that
rtK = it − πt with it ≥ 0.
The first two equations are the asset pricing equations for non-monetary safe and risky assets,
which are identical to the one in the main text. The third and fourth equations are the wealth
accumulations of Knighitans and Neutrals. They differ from the ones in the main text because
some of the wealth of their wealth is held in the form of money with a real rate of return −πt . The
51

fifth and sixth conditions are the market clearing conditions for money and total assets. The seventh
equation must hold because Neutrals rank non-monetary assets according to expected returns, so
that either rt = rtK and Neutrals are indifferent between safe and risky assets or rt > rtK and the
only non-monetary assets held by Neutrals are risky assets. The eight condition is the cash-inadvance constraint for Knightians and Neutrals. The ninth condition is the Fisher equation which
links nominal interest rates and safe real interest rates.
The cashless limit ε → 0 yields the same model as the model with flexible prices analyzed in
the main text.
A.2.2

Rigid Prices

With rigid prices, the equilibrium equations are
rtK V S = δ S ξt X,

!

!
rt VtR = (δ − δ S )ξt X + λ+ V R+ − VtR + λ− V R− − VtR + V̇tR ,

ẆtN

ẆtK = −θWtK + α (1 − δ) X + rtK (WtK − MtK ),
!

!

!

= −θWtN +(1 − α) (1 − δ) X+rtK V S − WtK + MtK +rt VtR −λ+ V R+ − V R −λ− V R− − V R +V̇tR ,
MtK + MtN = M ε ,
WtK + WtN = V S + VtR + M ε ,
rt ≥ rtK ,

WtK − MtK ≤ V S ,

and (rt − rtK )(V S − WtK + MtK ) = 0,

MtK ≥ εWtK and MtN ≥ εWtN ,

with equality if it > 0,

and the requirement that
rtK = it with it ≥ 0.
There are three main differences with the case where prices are flexible. The first difference is that
X is replaced by ξt X, where ξt is capacity utilization. The second difference is that even conditional
on no Poisson event, the value of risky assets can change over time, leading to an extra source of
capital gains V̇tR . The third difference is that inflation is zero πt = 0.
The cashless limit ε → 0 yields the same model as the model with rigid prices analyzed in the
main text with a ZLB constraint. In the next section we analyze additional issues that arise away
from the cashless limit.
A.2.3

Helicopter Money and Fiscal Capacity

We consider the model with taxes and government debt of Section 3 but unlike in the main text,
we consider what happens away from the cashless limit. We assume that prices are rigid and that
52

we are in the constrained regime. We focus on stochastic steady states before the realization of the
Poisson event and drop t-subscripts. We incorporate the modification of the model introduced in
Section 4 which allows for capacity over-utilization as well as capacity under-utilization.
The question is what happens when the government issues extra money before the Poisson event
when the economy is in a safety trap. There are two options which differ in what the government
does once the economy is no longer at the ZLB after the Poisson event: (a) retire the extra money
and keep; (b) not retire the extra money.
Option (a): retire the extra money after the Poisson event. This option is identical
to what would happen if instead of extra money, the government had issued extra safe short-term
debt before the Poisson event and paid it back after the Poisson event. For simplicity, we assume
throughout that we are in the non-Ricardian region where government debt does not crowd out
private safe assets.
Let us start backwards. In order to buy back the money stock after the bad Poisson event, the
government undertakes an open market operation immediately after the realization of the event,
swapping the extra supply of money M ε − M ε− for debt D where
D = M ε − M ε− ,
and the interest payment associated to this debt is financed by a tax τ − on the dividends of trees,
where
X
τ − µ− = D.
θ
Consider what happens when the government issues additional money M̂ ε > M ε = Xθ in a
−
safety trap, but maintains an adequate supply of money M ε− = µ θX after the bad Poisson event
−
and M ε+ = µ θX after the good Poisson event.
Before the Poisson event when the economy is in a safety trap, the value of private non-monetary
safe assets is unchanged at ρµ− (1 − ε) Xθ . But money increases from εM ε to εM̂ ε , so that the total
value of safe assets increases by a proportional factor of
ε

ε M̂
ρµ− + 1−ε
ρµ− (1 − ε) Xθ + εM̂ ε
Mε
.
=
ε
X
−
−
ε
ρµ + 1−ε
ρµ (1 − ε) θ + εM

This stimulates output to
ε

ξˆ =

ε M̂
ρµ− + 1−ε
Mε
ξ > ξ.
ε
−
ρµ + 1−ε

This is exactly the same effect as that which would be achieved by issuing additional short-term
debt in the amount ε(M̂ ε −M ε ), which is intuitive given that money and short-term debt are perfect
substitutes at the ZLB. And exactly like this debt issuance policy, it requires that the government

53

be able to increase taxes τ̂ − > τ − after the bad Poisson event and after the good Poisson event
!

 X
τ̂ − − τ − µ− = ε(M̂ ε − M ε ),
θ

!

 X
τ̂ + − τ + µ+ = ε(M̂ ε − M ε ).
θ

Option (b): do not retire the extra money after the Poisson event. Consider next
what happens when the government issues additional money M̂ ε > M ε = Xθ before the Poisson
event when the economy is in a safety trap, but does not retire the extra money after the bad
Poisson event occurs, while maintaining an interest rate of δθ. We show that this option further
stimulates the economy in a safety trap before the Poisson event, but at the cost of over-stimulating
the economy after the Poisson event when the economy is no longer at the ZLB.
In this case, after the bad Poisson event, output is above potential at ξσ−− µ− X where
ξσ−− =

M̂ ε
> 1.
M ε−

The mechanism is simple: starting with a capacity utilization of one or equivalently output at
potential, the extra money increases wealth, which increases consumption, which stimulates output,
increases the value of the dividend of the Lucas’ trees, increases the value of Lucas’ trees, which
further increases wealth, etc. This feedback loop settles at a new fixed point with higher output
above potential and higher capacity utilization above one.
Given that it stimulates output after the Poisson event, option (b) increases the cash flows hat
Neutral can promise to pledge after the Poisson event, and in particular after the bad Poisson event.
This in turn increases the supply of private non-monetary safe assets before the Poisson event to
−
ρµ− ξ −− X(1−ε)
ε
σ
= MM̂ε− ρµ X(1−ε)
. Money increases from εM ε to εM̂ ε as in option (a). The total value
θ
θ
of safe assets increases by a proportional factor of
ε

ε

ε

ε

ε M̂
ε M̂
ρµ− MM̂ε− + 1−ε
ρµ− + 1−ε
ρµ− (1 − ε) Xθ MM̂ε− + εM̂ ε
Mε
Mε
=
>
.
ε
ε
X
−
−
ρµ + 1−ε
ρµ + 1−ε
ρµ− (1 − ε) θ + εM ε

The result is a mitigation of the recession before the Poisson event when the economy is in a safety
trap, increasing the value of ξ to ξˆ where
ε

ξˆ =

ε

ε

ε M̂
ε M̂
ρµ− MM̂ε− + + 1−ε
ρµ− + 1−ε
Mε
Mε
ξ
>
ξ > ξ.
ε
ε
−
−
ρµ + 1−ε
ρµ + 1−ε

Because of the further increase in the value of private non-monetary safe assets brought about by
the over-stimulation of the economy after the bad Poisson event, the mitigation of the recession is
stronger in option (b) than by option (a).
Thus issuing money while the economy is in a safety trap and not taking it away when the

54

economy exits the safety trap further mitigates the recession associated with the safety trap. However, this extra effectiveness is not a free lunch, as it comes with the important cost of excessively
stimulating the economy when it exits the safety trap.

A.3

Supporting Asset Values in Bad Times

The previous section hints that a safety trap can be addressed by committing to provide support
during bad rather than good times, as would be the case of a commitment to lower interest i−
t rates
−
35
after the bad Poisson event. By setting the nominal interest rate it below the natural interest
rate δθ after the bad Poisson event, monetary authorities stimulate the economy and inflate the
value of safe assets to
ξ −−
V̂ S = ρµ− σ X,
θ
where
R σ− +T
−
ξσ−− = e σ− (δθ−is )ds > 1.
This mitigates the recession in the safety trap by raising ξ to ξξσ−− > ξ (the analysis is almost
identical to that of a monetary stimulus after the good Poisson event explained above, and the
model before the Poisson event is isomorphic to that analyzed in Section 2.2 but with µ− replaced
by µ− ξσ−+ ).36,37
However, it is natural to question whether monetary authorities would have the ability to lower
interest rates in that state. If indeed the bad state happens to coincide with yet another safety or
liquidity trap, monetary authorities could find themselves unable to deliver a lower interest rate.38
35
Another example is the OMT (outright monetary transactions) program established by the ECB in late 2012,
which had an immediate impact on the Eurozone risk perception.
36
There are transitional dynamics before the Poisson event when forward guidance is announced, which we do
not report in the interest of space. After the (future) policy announcement, the economy first goes through a
phase where it is in the unconstrained regime for a while because because Knightian wealth only increases gradually
over time while the value of safe assets jumps up immediately. But conditional on no Poisson event occuring, the
economy eventually re-enters the constrained regime as Knightian wealth increases. All variables converge to their
new stochastic steady state values gradually over time.
37
Note we could just as well have used the model with public debt. The central banker’s put works by increasing
both the public and private sectors’ ability to provide safe assets.
38
Perhaps a more realistic policy option would be a commitment by the authorities to buy up safe assets at an
inflated price after the Poisson events—a form of government (central bank?) put. A commitment to buy up safe
−X
ˆ
private assets at an inflated value ω − ρµ− X
θ > ρµ θ would mitigate the recession and increase the value of ξ to ξ
where
ξˆ = ω − ξ > ξ.

It could be carried out by monetary authorities but it does require spare fiscal capacity (in the form of taxes or
seigniorage). This kind of public insurance policy can potentially play a crucial role in a safety trap. See, e.g.,
Caballero and Kurlat (2010) for a proposal to increase the resilience of the financial system in a shortage of safe
assets environment. Also, see Brunnermeir et al (2012) for a related proposal in the context of the current Euro
crisis.

55

A.4

Welfare

In this section, we analyze the welfare properties of the different policies that we have considered.
We treat the case of public debt issuances, increases in the inflation target, and FG. The analysis
for QE is more complex because it features nontrivial transitional dynamics. We focus on safety
traps when the economy is in the constrained regime against the ZLB at rK = 0. We also focus on
the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0.
Public debt issuance. After a public debt issuance D̂ > D, there is no transitional dynamics,
so that the economy jumps immediately to a new stochastic steady state before the Poisson event,
and also to a steady state after the Poisson event. Before the Poisson event it, increases output
ˆ = D̂ ξX > ξX, increases Neutral and Knightian wealth to Ŵ N = D̂ W N > W N and Ŵ K =
to ξX
D
D
D̂
K
K
K
W
>
W
,
leaves
r
and
r
unchanged.
After
the
Poisson
event
it
leaves
output and interest
D
rates unchanged. These imply that: Neutrals and Knightians that are already born at the time of
the public debt issuance are strictly better off (their wealth jumps up at impact and the rates of
return on their wealth is unchanged going forward); Neutrals and Knightians that are born after
the public debt issuance but before the Poisson event are strictly better off (their income when
newborn is higher and the rates of return on their wealth is unchanged); Neutrals and Knightians
that are born after the public debt issuance and the Poisson event are as well off (their income
when newborn is identical and the rates of return on their wealth is unchanged).39
Increase in the inflation target. After an increase in the inflation target that creates the
possibility of a good equilibrium, assuming that the economy moves to that equilibrium, there is
no transitional dynamics, so that the economy jumps immediately to a new stochastic steady state
before the Poisson event, and also to a steady state after the Poisson event. Before the Poisson event
it, increases output to X > ξX, increases Neutral and Knightian wealth to Ŵ N = 1ξ W N > W N
and Ŵ K = 1ξ W K > W K , increases r and decreases rK . After the Poisson event, it leaves output
and interest rates unchanged. These imply that: Neutrals that are already born at the time of the
increase in the inflation target are strictly better off (their wealth jumps at impact and the rates of
return on their wealth is unchanged going forward); Neutrals that are born after the increase in the
inflation target but before the Poisson event are strictly better off (their income when newborn is
higher and the rates of return on their wealth is unchanged); Neutrals and Knightians that are born
after the increase in the inflation target and the Poisson event are as well off (their income when
newborn is identical and the rates of return on their wealth is unchanged); however Knightians that
are already born at the time of the increase of the inflation target are strictly worse off (their initial
wealth is unchanged but the rate of return on their wealth is lower); and Knightians that are born
39

With λ+ > 0 or λ− > 0, r now decreases to r̂ < r after the public debt issuance, so that we can no longer
conclude that the public debt issuance generates a Pareto improvement through the reasoning above. It clearly
makes Knightians better off , it will benefit some Neutrals, but it might make some Neutrals worse off. The welfare
properties of public debt issuances then depend on the relative weighting
! of Ngains
 N tand losses. For example, we can
N
consider a weighted
Utilitarian
welfare
function
that
puts
a
weight
ν
1
−
β
β on the welfare of Neutrals born
!

at date t and ν K 1 − β K β Kt on the welfare of Knightians born at date t. For ν N low enough, ν K high enough,
β N high enough, or λ+ and λ− low enough, we can be sure that the public debt issuance increases total welfare even
though it does not necessarily lead to a Pareto improvement.

56

after the increase in the inflation target but before the Poisson event are not clearly better off (their
income when newborn is higher but the rates of return on their wealth is lower).
The welfare properties of an increase in the inflation target depends on the relative weighting
of gains and losses. For example, we can consider a weighted Utilitarian welfare function that puts
!

!

a weight ν N 1 − β N β N t on the welfare of Neutrals born at date t and ν K 1 − β K β Kt on the
welfare of Knightians born at date t. For ν N high enough, ν K low enough, or β K low enough, we
can be sure that the increase in the inflation target increases total welfare even though it does not
necessarily lead to a Pareto improvement.40
Another possibility is to introduce lump sum taxes that allow arbitrary redistribution within
Knightians and within Neutrals but not across these two groups. Because they only redistribute
within groups, these taxes do not change the characterization of the equilibrium. With these lump
sum taxes, we can be sure that we have a Pareto improvement from an increase in the inflation
target if ŴtN ≥ WtN and ŴtK ≥ WtK for all t with a strict inequality for some positive measure of
t, which is obviously the case.41
FG. To analyze FG, we must put ourselves in the case λ+ > 0 and λ− > 0. FG is then Pareto
dominated by no FG because: it does not change the allocation of Neutrals before the Poisson event
and Knightians born before the Poisson event: it only increases the consumption of Neutrals and
Knightians (born after the good Poisson event) after the good Poisson event at a net utility cost to
them.

A.5

Bubbles and Fiscal Capacity

The very low interest rates that characterize a safety trap raises the issue of whether speculative
bubbles may emerge, and whether these can play a useful role through their wealth effect. We
show that bubbles can indeed arise in safety traps, but that only the emergence of safe bubbles
(as opposed to risky bubbles) can stimulate economic activity. This is because only safe bubbles
alleviate the shortage of safe assets. We associate the latter to public debt, and in fact the existence
of a bubbly-region is equivalent to an expansion of the fiscal capacity of the government. We focus
on the constrained regime and on safety traps throughout in Sections A.5.1, A.5.2, A.5.3. We briefly
consider the unconstrained regime in liquidity traps in Section A.5.4.
40
With λ+ > 0 or λ− > 0, r now decreases to r̂ < r after the increase in the inflation target, so that Neutrals that
are already born at the time of the increase in the inflation target or that are born after the increase in the inflation
target but before the Poisson event are not necessarily better off. With the Utilitarian welfare function considered
in the text, we can be sure that for β K low enough and β N high enough, or for λ+ and λ− low enough and either
ν N high enough, ν K low enough, or β N low enough, the increase in the inflation target increases total welfare even
though it does not necessarily lead to a Pareto improvement.
41
This argument holds even if λ+ > 0 or λ− > 0.

57

A.5.1

Growth

We extend the model to allow for bubbles. It is well understood in the rational bubbles literature
that the growth rate of the economy is a key determinant of the possibility and size of bubbles.
We generalize our model by allowing for an arbitrary growth rate g > 0. At every point in
time, there is a mass Xt of trees. A mass Ẋt = gXt of new trees are created, which are claims to a
dividend of δ units of goods at every future date until a Poisson event occurs, at which point the
dividend jumps permanently to δµ+ if the good Poisson event takes place and to δµ− if the bad
Poisson event takes place. For reasons that will appear clear below, we assume that new trees are
initially endowed to Neutral newborns.42 Endowments to newborns also grow at the rate g.
With some abuse of notation, we suppress time indices throughout. Hence we write X, V S ,
V R , V , W K , W N , W for Xt , VtS , VtR , Vt , WtK , WtN , Wt . All these variables grow at rate g in
equilibrium. We also write rK , r, δ S for rtK , rt , δtS . All these variables are constant in equilibrium.
We focus on the constrained regime. With flexible prices or with rigid prices as long as we are
not in a safety trap rK > 0, the steady state equilibrium equations are
rK V S = δ S X,
!

rV R = (δ − δ S )X + λ+ (V R+ − V R ) + λ− V R− − V R ,

gW N = −θW N

gW K = −θW K + α (1 − δ) X + rK W K ,
!

!

+ (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + rW N − λ+ V R+ − V R − λ− V R− − V R + g(V S + V R ),
W K + W N = V S + V R,
W

We then have

K

=V

S

ρµ− X
.
=
θ

α − ρµ−
,
r = g + δθ − θ (1 − δ)
ρµ−
K

r = g + δθ + (1 − δ) θ

g
α − ρµ− λ+ (µ+ − 1) + λ− (µ− − 1)
+
−
.
−
−
1 − ρµ
1 − ρµ
1 − ρµ−

Now suppose that prices are rigid and that we are in a safety trap where
rK,n = g + δθ − θ (1 − δ)

α − ρµ−
< 0,
ρµ−

42
If new trees are endowed in equal proportions to Knightians and Newborns, then bubbles do stimulate the
economy in a safety trap because they reduce the value of the new trees endowed to Knigithian newborns and
hence reduce the growth rate of Knightian wealth. Endowing the new trees exclusively to Neutrals shuts down this
somewhat artificial effect of bubbles on safe asset demand.

58

then as in Section 2, we have a recession determined by
K

r = g + δθ − (1 − δ) θ

α−

ρµ−
ξ

ρµ−
ξ

= 0.

This formula shows that in the constrained regime with a scarcity of safe assets, the lower is the
structural growth rate g of the economy, the lower is the natural safe interest rate, and if the latter
is negative, the deeper is the recession (the lower is utilization capacity ξ). In this sense supply side
secular stagnation can lead to or reinforce demand side secular stagnation—a powerful and perverse
complementarity.
A.5.2

Bubbles

To ensure that bubbles are stationary, we allow for new bubbles to be created. Just like new
trees, new bubbles are endowed to Neutral newborns. The total value of the bubble Bt grows
at rate Ḃt = gBt until the bad Poisson event occurs, at which point the bubble drops to Bt− <
Bt and then keeps growing at rate g, or until the good Poisson event occurs, at which point
the bubble jumps to Bt+ ≥ Bt . The value of the bubble Bt+ after the good Poisson event is
irrelevant for our analysis. The bubble can be separated into a safe bubble BtS = Bt− with rate of
return rtK and a risky bubble BtR = Bt − Bt− with rate of return rt . We assume that new safe
bubbles per unit of time are then given by (g − rtK )BtS , and new risky bubbles per unit of time by
(g − rt ) BtR + λ+ (Bt+ − BtR − BtS ) + λ− (Bt− − BtR − BtS ). New bubbles and existing bubbles must
be positive in equilibrium. Again, we focus on balanced growth paths and suppress the dependence
on time and write B, B − , B + , B S and B R for Bt , Bt− , Bt+ , BtS and BtR .
After the bad Poisson event, goods market clearing requires that
δµ− X
) = µ− X.
r−
This implies that the interest rate r− is given by
θ(B − +

δµ− X

−

r =

µ− X
θ

−

B−

=

δθ
1−

θB −
µ− X −

.

The value of safe assets before the bad Poisson event is therefore
V

S

δρµ− X
,
=B +
r−
−

which can be rewritten as a function
VS =

µ− X S,B B −
v (
)
θ
X

59

with
v S,B (

B−
θ B−
)=ρ+ −
(1 − ρ) .
X
µ X

This expression makes clear that safe bubbles increase the value of safe assets because of the implicit
assumption that there is no agency problem involved in the tranching of bubbles into a safe and a
risky part. For future reference we also define the interest rate r+ after the good Poisson event
r+ =

δµ+ X
µ+ X
θ

− B+

.

As above, we focus on the constrained regime where W K = V S and r > g + δθ > rK . With
flexible prices or with rigid prices as long we are not in a safety trap rK > 0, the steady state
equilibrium equations are
rK (V S − B S ) = δ S X,
r(V R − B R ) = (δ − δ S )X,
gW K = −θW K + α (1 − δ) X + rK W K ,
gW N = −θW N + (1 − α) (1 − δ) X + [(g − rK )B S + (g − r)B R ] + rW N ,
W K + W N = V S + V R,
WK = V S =

µ− X S,B B −
v (
).
θ
X

In addition, we must have max {r− , r+ } ≤ g and rK ≤ g,
BS = B−,
and
!

λ+ (B + − B − ) ≥ r − g + λ+ + λ− B R .
We find the following expressions for the safe and risky rates:
S

K

r = g + δθ − θ (1 − δ)

α − µ− v S,B ( BX )
S

µ− v S,B ( BX )
S

S

r=

δθ − rK (µ− v S,B ( BX ) − θ BX )
S

,

,

R

1 − µ− v S,B ( BX ) − θ BX

The condition for the constrained regime is that r > rK .
Now suppose that prices are rigid and that we are in a safety trap with
S

r

K,n

= g + δθ − θ (1 − δ)
60

α − µ− v S,B ( BX )
S

µ− v S,B ( BX )

< 0.

Then we have a recession with ξ < 1 determined exactly as in the bubbleless equilibrium analyzed
in Section A.5.1 above
S
v S,B ( BX )µ−
α
−
ξ
= 0.
rK = g + δθ − θ (1 − δ)
S,B B S
−
v

(

X

)µ

ξ

Clearly, output ξX is increasing in the size of the safe bubble
−
−
S
B̂ S
ˆ with
= B̂X > BX = BX stimulates output to ξX
X

BS
X

=

B−
.
X

A larger safe bubble

V̂ S
ξˆ = S > ξ,
V
S

S

where V̂ S = v S,B ( B̂X ) and V S = v S,B ( BX ). However output is invariant to the size of the risky
R
bubble BX , and for the same reason is also invariant to φR . This is because the safe bubbles
increase the supply of safe assets V S while the risky bubbles only increase the risky expected rate
of return r (they fail to increase the supply of risky assets V R since they perfectly crowd out other
risky assets through an increase in the risky expected rate of return r). In other words, in terms
of the AS-AD equilibrium representation, only safe bubbles increase aggregate demand, not risky
bubbles.
The fact that risky bubbles have no effect on output in a safety trap formalizes some interesting observations in Summers (2013) that in secular stagnation environments, even large financial
bubbles only seem to create moderate economic expansions.
A.5.3

Fiscal Capacity: Debt as a Safe Bubble

A natural interpretation of safe bubbles is that they are a form of government debt. To develop this
idea, assume that the risky bubble is equal to zero, and interpret the safe bubble B − as government
debt B − = D. When r < g, and by implication δθ < g, the government can sustain a stable debt to
output ratio without ever having to levy any taxes (τ = τ + = τ − = 0). The government can then
−
−
increase the supply of safe assets by levering on the bubble in V S = µ θX v S,B ( BX ), with a crowding
out (of private safe assets) by public debt of:
−

dv S,B ( BX )
µ−
[1 −
] = ρ < 1.
−
θ
d( BX )
Finally, note that as the government issues more public debt, r− and r+ increase, which limits how
−
−
). In a safety
much public debt can be issued without ever having to tax, namely BX ≤ µθ (1 − δθ
g
trap, this gives the government some fiscal space to increase debt and stimulate the economy.

61

A.5.4

Bubbles and Fiscal Capacity in Liquidity Traps

In this section, we consider the possibility and consequences of bubbles in the unconstrained regime
in a liquidity trap, allowing for growth, and introducing safe and risky bubbles Bt = BtR + BtS .
Suppose that prices are rigid and that we are in a liquidity trap with rn = rK,n < 0, r = rK =
i = 0, and ξ < 1.43 We then have the following steady state equilibrium equations
r(V − B R − B S ) = δξX + λ− [

µ+ X
µ− X
− B − − (V − B R − B S )] + λ+ [
− B + − (V − B R − B S )],
θ
θ
θV = ξX,
r = 0.

In addition we must have max {r− , r+ } ≤ g, r ≤ g,
BS = B−,
and
!

λ+ (B + − B − ) ≥ r − g + λ+ + λ− B R .
This also yields
0 = δξX + λ− [

ξX
µ+ X
ξX
µ− X
− B− − (
− B R − B S )] + λ+ [
− B+ − (
− B R − B S )],
θ
θ
θ
θ

or
ξ=

λ−
[µ−
λ− +λ+

−

λ+
[µ+
λ− +λ+
δθ
λ− +λ+

+ θ B−B
]+
X
1−

+

+ θ B−B
]
X

,

and finally
ξ=

λ−
µ−
λ− +λ+

+

λ+
µ+
λ− +λ+

+

R
+
− −g)B R −λ+ B +
θ λ+ B S
[
+ gB +(λ +λ
]
X λ− +λ+
λ− +λ+
,
1 − λ−δθ
+λ+

Assume that λ+ + λ− > g and that risky bubbles have their maximal equilibrium values so that
(λ+ + λ− − g)B R = λ+ B + . We then have
ξ=

λ−
µ−
λ− +λ+

+

λ+
µ+
λ− +λ+

1−

+

θ λ+ B S
[
X λ− +λ+

δθ
λ− +λ+

+

gB R
]
λ− +λ+

.

Hence we see that both risky and safe bubbles stimulates output in a standard liquidity trap. This
is because in this unconstrained case, both risky and safe bubbles increase the total value of assets.
43

Under these assumptions, bubbles are possible as long as δθ < g.

62

A.6

Securitization Externality

In this section, we endogenize the securitization capacity of the economy. We assume that by
investing resources jt Xdt, a Neutral agent can increase ρ(jt ) and, with it, increase the supply of
safe assets (i.e., the share of the tree’s revenue in the bad state of the world that is pledgable today).
We show in this extension that outside of a safety trap, the competitive equilibrium is constrained
Pareto efficient, but that in a safety trap, it is constrained inefficient (there is underprovision of
safe assets).
We trace back this inefficiency to a securitization externality. In a safety trap, private agents
do not internalize the full social benefit of creating safe assets. More specifically, they do not take
into account the stimulative effects of these assets, which creates a role for government intervention
in the securitization market. This argument is distinct from the comparative advantage of the
government in safe asset creation that we analyzed in Section 3, but it can also be used to support
it if we associate the government extra-taxation power to the private sector’s technology to increase
safe assets (at a cost).
A.6.1

Securitization Externality in a Safety Trap

We focus throughout on the constrained regime and on safety traps, and we specialize the model
to the limit λ+ → 0 and λ− → 0 for simplicity.
With flexible prices (or with rigid prices as we are not in a safety trap rtK > 0), the equilibrium
equations are
rtK VtS = δtS X + V̇tS ,
rt VtR = (δ − δtS − jt )X + V̇tR ,
ẆtK = −θWtK + α(1 − δ)X + rtK WtK ,
ẆtN = −θWtN + (1 − α)(1 − δ)X + rt WtN ,
VtS =

ρ(jt )µ− X
,
θ

ρ′ (jt )µ−
= 1.
θ
There are two differences with the baseline model of Section 2. First, the asset pricing equation for
risky assets reflects the fact that dividends are reduced by securitization investment jt X. Second,
there is a new equation (the last one) which is simply the first order condition for securitization.
This condition is intuitive: a Neutral managing a tree equates the marginal cost of increasing
′
−
securitization investment by Xdjt between t and t + dt to the marginal benefit of issuing ρ (jtθ)µ Xdjt
additional safe assets on which he earns a spread (rt − rtK ) between t and t + dt.
(rt − rtK )

Apart from that, the analysis of the equilibrium is almost identical to that of the baseline model.
In particular, and focusing on steady states, there is an unconstrained regime with r = rK and a
63

constrained regime with r > rK . If prices are rigid, we can enter a safety trap where rK,n < 0,
rK = 0, and output ξX is below potential with ξ < 1. We denote by j the associated level of
investment. The details are omitted in the interest of space.
We now investigate the efficiency properties of the competitive equilibrium. To do so, it is
convenient to introduce lump sum taxes that allow arbitrary redistribution within Knightians and
within Neutrals but not across these two groups. Because they only redistribute within groups,
these taxes do not change the characterization of the equilibrium.
Consider the steady state of the competitive equilibrium with Neutral wealth W N , Knightian
wealth W K , interest rates r and rK , and securitization j. We focus on the constrained regime
throughout. We analyze first the case where prices are flexible. We then analyze the case with
rigid prices. In the first case, output is always at capacity. The corresponding planning problem is
easier to analyze. Moreover, as long as the natural safe real interest rate is positive, this flexible
prices planning problem is a constrained version of the rigid prices planning problem, but the
corresponding constraints are satisfied at the optimum of the latter, so that their solutions coincide.
This is no longer the case when the natural safe real interest rate is negative.
We are interested in whether it is possible to generate a Pareto improvement by controlling
securitization jt (either through taxes or quantity restrictions) and setting it at a different level
than would occur in a competitive equilibrium without government interventions in securitization.
With the lump sum taxes mentioned above, this happens if and only if we can find processes ŴtK ,
ŴtN , Ŵt , V̂tS , V̂tR , V̂t , r̂t , r̂tK , δ̂tS and ̂t that verify all the equilibrium equations except the first
order condition for ̂t , and such that ŴtN ≥ WtN and ŴtK ≥ WtK for all t and a strict inequality for
some positive measure of t.
Therefore, the steady state of the competitive equilibrium is constrained Pareto efficient if and
K
only if we can find Pareto weights λN
t > 0 and λt > 0 such that the solution of the following
planning problem is such that ŴtN = W N , Ŵ K = W K , and ̂t = j:
max

ŴtK ,

subject to ŴtN =

X
θ

−

[̂t +ρ(̂t )µ− ]X
,
θ

ŴtN ,

∞

Z
̂t

ŴtK =

N
K
K
λN
t θ Ŵt + λt θ Ŵt dt
0

ρ(̂t )µ− X
θ

and Ŵ0K = W K .

The solution to this problem is
λN
ρ′ (̂t )µ−
= t .
θ
θ
R N
r−r K
N
N
Taking λK
λt dt < ∞, we can rewrite the solution
t = λt (1+ θ ) and λt > 0 arbitrary such that
′
−
K ρ (̂t )µ
as (rt − rt ) θ
= 1 or equivalently ̂t = j. This shows that with flexible prices, the competitive
equilibrium is constrained Pareto efficient.
N
(λK
t − λt )

Now suppose that prices are entirely rigid. The steady state of the competitive equilibrium
(which may or may not feature a safety trap) is constrained Pareto efficient if and only if we can
64

K
find Pareto weights λN
t > 0 and λt > 0 such that the solution of the following planning problem is
such that ŴtN = W N , Ŵ K = W K , ̂t = j and ξˆt = ξ:

ŴtK ,

− [̂t +ρ(̂θt )µ
t)
K
44
ˆ
r̂tK ρρ(̂
′ (̂ ) , r̂t ≥ 0 and ξt ≤ 1.
t
subject to ŴtN =

ξ̂t X
θ

max

ŴtN ,

− ]X

∞

Z

̂t , r̂tK ,

ξ̂t

, ŴtK =

N
K
K
λN
t θ Ŵt + λt θ Ŵt dt
0

ρ(̂t )µ− X
,
θ

Ŵ0K = W K ,

d̂t
dt

=

−
θ
[α(1 − δ) − ρ(̂tξ̂)µ ]ξˆt +
ρ′ (̂t )µ−
t

This is an optimal control problem with a state variable ̂t . However as long as r̂tK > 0, the
corresponding costate variable ν̂t is equal to zero so that ξˆt = 1 and the solution coincides with that
of the flexible prices planning problem. Below we state the main results and omit some derivations.
We refer the reader to the Appendix A.6.2 for the details.
If the steady state of the competitive equilibrium does not feature a safety trap (rK > 0 and
R N
r−r K
N
N
ξ = 1), then taking λK
λt dt < ∞, the solution of
t = λt (1 + θ ) and λt > 0 arbitrary such that
the planning problem coincides with the the competitive equilibrium, showing that the competitive
equilibrium is constrained Pareto efficient.
But if the steady state of the competitive equilibrium does feature a safety trap (rK = 0 and
K
ξ < 1), then it is not possible to find weights λN
t > 0 and λt > 0, such that the solution of
the planning problem coincides with the competitive equilibrium. This shows that the competitive
equilibrium is not constrained Pareto efficient.
K

−φt

e
r−r
N
) with λN
We can take λK
t = X with φ > 0. As is usual in such problems, we
t = λt (1 +
θ
renormalize the costate variable by multiplying it by eφt . Then, as long as the allocation (including
the costate renormalized costate) converge to a non-degenerate steady state when t goes to ∞, we
′
−
have that (r − rK ) ρ (̂∞θ )µ = 1 + θ(σ + θ)ν̂∞ < 1. This implies that ̂∞ > j, and by implication
−
∞ )µ
> ξ.
ξˆ∞ = ρ(̂
α(1−δ)
K
K
K
K
Moreover, one can show that r̂∞ < r∞ = r and r̂∞
= r∞
= rK = 0 so that r̂∞ − r̂∞
< r∞ − r ∞
=
r − rK . It follows that:
′
−
K ρ (̂∞ )µ
(r̂∞ − r̂∞
)
< 1.
θ
These results show that there is a positive externality from securitization. This is because securitization stimulates economic activity, which is not internalized by private agents, creating a role for
government intervention in the securitization market.

The government could use taxes or quantity restrictions to encourage securitization. This should
not be interpreted too narrowly. Indeed, in practice, one possible interpretation of jt is as a proxy
for the net worth of financial intermediaries. Forcing financial intermediaries to increase jt could
then be interpreted as forcing them to raise more fresh capital than they would do otherwise. This
44

To undestand where the equation for

d̂t
dt

is coming from, combine the asset pricing equation for safe assets with
ρ(̂t )µ−
ξ̂t
−
r̂tK ρ(̂tθ)µ =

the wealth accumulation equation for Knightians to get

= α(1 − δ) + δ̂tS . Solve out this equation for δ̂tS and

replace in the asset pricing equation for safe assets

δtS ξˆt +

65

ρ′ (̂t )µ− d̂t
θ
dt .

The equation in the text follows.

would improve welfare by stimulating the economy. Another interpretation is that ρ is increased
by monitoring, either private or public. Assume, for example, that public and private monitoring
are perfect substitutes with associated costs jtG ≥ 0 and jtP ≥ 0 and that ρ (jt ) is increasing in total
monitoring jt = jtG + jtP . With the additional assumption that public monitoring is financed by
taxes on dividends, this model can be mapped exactly to the model in this section. Then a possible
implementation of constrained Pareto efficient allocations in safety traps is an increase in public
monitoring jtG = ̂t and jtP = 0 (assuming that monitoring cannot be negative).45
A.6.2

Derivations for Section A.6.1

We analyze the planning problem corresponding to the case of rigid prices. The first order conditions
are
′
−
d
θ
ρ(̂t )µ− ˆ
dν̂t
N ρ (̂t )µ X
NX
= (λK
−
λ
)
−
λ
+
ν
{
[α(1
−
δ)
−
]ξt },
−
t
t
t
t
dt
θ
θ
d̂t ρ′ (̂t )µ−
ξˆt
0 = λN
t

θ
ρ(̂t )µ−
X
+ ν̂t { ′
[α(1
−
δ)
−
]} − η̂t ,
θ
ρ (̂t )µ−
ξˆt
ν̂t

ρ(̂t )
+ γ̂t = 0,
ρ′ (̂t )
lim ν̂t = 0,

t→∞

η̂t (1 − ξˆt ) = 0,
γ̂t r̂tK = 0.
N
Can we find λK
t > 0 and λt > 0 such that the solution coincides with the steady state of the
competitive equilibrium? If the steady state of the competitive equilibrium does not feature a
r−r K
N
] and λN
safety trap (rK > 0 and ξ = 1), then taking λK
t = λt [1 +
t > 0 arbitrary such that
θ
R N
λt dt < ∞, the solution of the planning problem coincides with the the competitive equilibrium,
showing that the competitive equilibrium is constrained Pareto efficient.

But if the steady state of the competitive equilibrium does feature a safety trap (rK = 0 and
K
ξ < 1), then for any weights λN
t > 0 and λt > 0, the solution of the planning problem is different
from the competitive equilibrium, showing that the competitive equilibrium is not constrained
Pareto efficient. This would require η̂t = 0 and λN
t = 0, a contradiction. This shows that the
competitive equilibrium is not constrained Pareto efficient.
K

r−r
N
Now continue to assume rK = 0 and ξ < 1, and take λK
] and λN
t = λt [1 +
t > 0, i.e.
θ
the Pareto weights that rationalize the competitive equilibrium outside of a safety trap. And take
e−φt
λN
t = X so that the integrals converge. Renormalizing the Hamiltonian (and the multipliers), we
45

This latter interpretation can be seen as another rationalization for the sort of government interventions in
securitization markets (public debt and QE) considered in Section 3, with public monitoring jtG playing a role
similar to the role of taxes τt in Section 3. The difference is that public monitoring is costly in terms of resources
while taxes are not because they are not distortive.

66

get
φν̂t −

dν̂t
r − rK ρ′ (̂t )µ− 1
d
θ
ρ(̂t )µ− ˆ
=
− + ν̂t { ′
[α(1
−
δ)
−
]ξt },
dt
θ
θ
θ
d̂t ρ (̂t )µ−
ξˆt
0=

θ
ρ(̂t )µ−
1
+ ν̂t { ′
[α(1
−
δ)
−
]} − η̂t ,
θ
ρ (̂t )µ−
ξˆt
ν̂t

ρ(̂t )
+ γ̂t = 0,
ρ′ (̂t )

lim ν̂t e−φt = 0,

t→∞

η̂t (1 − ξˆt ) = 0,
γ̂t r̂tK = 0.
Assume that the solution converges to a non-degenerate steady state (including multipliers), then
we necessarily have
ρ(̂∞ )µ− ˆ
θ
[α(1 − δ) −
]ξ∞ = 0,
ρ′ (̂∞ )µ−
ξˆ∞
ρ′ (̂∞ )µ−
= 1 + θ(σ + θ)ν̂∞ ≤ 1,
θ
where the last inequality is strict if ν∞ < 0 (which we can show holds by contradiction, as it would
imply j∞ = j, η∞ = 1θ > 0 and ξ∞ = ξ = 1, which is impossible). This shows that in the long run,
as long as we converge to a non-degenerate steady state (including multipliers), we have
(r − rK )

̂∞ > j.
Using
r̂∞ = δθ + (1 − δ)θ

α − ̂∞ −
1 − ̂∞ −

ρ(̂∞ )µ−
ξ̂∞
ρ(̂∞ )µ−
ξ̂∞

<r

and
K
r∞
= 0,

we can also show that
K
(r̂∞ − r̂∞
)

ρ′ (̂∞ )µ−
ρ′ (̂∞ )µ−
< (r − rK )
< 1.
θ
θ

67

