NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEARNING FROM THE DOERS:
DEVELOPING COUNTRY LESSONS FOR ADVANCED ECONOMY GROWTH
Anusha Chari
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 19934
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19934

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

Henry gratefully acknowledges financial support from the W.R. Berkley and Richard R. West Chairs.
We thank Allison Cay Parker for invaluable editorial assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19934.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Learning From the Doers: Developing Country Lessons for Advanced Economy Growth
Anusha Chari and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 19934
February 2014
JEL No. E62,E65,F43,O11,O19,O57
ABSTRACT
From 1980 to 1992, emerging and developing countries grew by 3.4 percent per year. Their annual
rate of growth increased to 5.4 percent between 1993 and 2012. No such increase occurred for advanced
nations, whose average growth from 1980-2012 was roughly constant (excluding the impact of the
2008-09 Recession). Developing nations turned themselves around by embracing discipline—sustained
commitment to a pragmatic and flexible growth strategy. Three illustrations of discipline through
the lens of trade, fiscal, and debt reforms in the developing world offer relevant, practical lessons for
recovery in advanced economies and continued catch-up growth in developing nations.

Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu
Peter Blair Henry
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, 11-58
New York, NY 10012
pbhenry@stern.nyu.edu

Introduction
Not long ago, developing and emerging economies were known as “Third World” nations
mired in poverty, debt crises, stratospheric inflation rates, and chronic instability while advanced
countries seemed to hold the keys to prosperity. Tables have turned. The first decade of the 21st
century brought unprecedented economic progress in the developing world, which now produces
half of global GDP and is expected to account for almost three quarters of global growth by
2017. It has been a less auspicious time for developed countries, evidenced by the epic Financial
Crisis of 2008–09 and its consequences for the United States and Europe.
As the fortunes of nations ebb and flow, it is important to distinguish between cycles and
trends. Recent statistics suggesting an upswing in advanced countries and decreased growth in
emerging markets divert our attention from the most important story about the world economy
since the end of the Second World War, even as it continues to unfold. Namely, that through
their struggle to reject failed models of development such as dependency theory and central
planning—often at the behest of advanced-nation governments in the past—a critical mass of
developing countries turned themselves around by embracing the true key to success: a
disciplined approach to economic policy. 1
Discipline is a sustained commitment to a pragmatic growth strategy executed with a
combination of temperance, vigilance, and flexibility that values the long-term prosperity of all
over the short-term enrichment of any single group (Henry, 2013). Figure 1, which we
constructed using data from the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (WEO)
database and which plots the average growth rate of real GDP in advanced as well as emerging
and developing economies from 1980 through 2012, tells the central story that the rest of this

1

For the origins of dependency theory see Prebisch (1950) and Singer (1950).

2

article develops in some detail. In addition to the well-documented contraction of advanced
economies during the Great Recession of 2008–09, the figure presents two salient facts.

Figure 1. GDP Growth in Emerging and Developing Economies Has Increased Relative to That of Advanced Ones

10

8
Advanced
Emerging and developing

6

Percent

4

2

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

-2

-4

-6

First, the growth rate of real GDP in the developing world has been dramatically higher
in the last two decades than it was in the 1980s. Between 1980 and 1992, the average growth rate
of real GDP in developing countries was 3.4 percent per year versus 5.4 percent from 1993 to
2012. The significance of this two-percentage-point increase in growth is profound: for a country
whose population grows at 1 percent per year, annual GDP growth of 3.4 percent means that per
capita income doubles once every 29 years; with 5.4 percent growth, per capita income doubles
in just 16.
Second, excluding the years 2007–2012, which was a period of slower growth in
developed countries because of the recession—a negative shock that had little to do with
developing countries per se—there has been no substantive decline in advanced-country fortunes

3

following the acceleration of growth in the developing world. Developed countries grew by 2.9
percent per year from 1980 to 1992—almost identical to the 2.8 percent rate at which they
expanded from 1993 to 2007. There is little if any evidence to support an argument that faster
growth in the emerging world came at the expense of average living standards in advanced
nations.
The relatively flat line for growth in advanced economies also suggests that the
accelerated rise of living standards in developing countries was not caused by an aggregate shock
to the global economy, but points to the idiosyncratic set of reforms (e.g., inflation stabilization
and trade liberalization) that were adopted during the 1990s as an unprecedented number of
countries rejected ideological approaches to economic policymaking and instead embraced
discipline. The pages ahead provide specific illustrations of discipline, seen through the lens of
economic reform in the developing world—a story of turnaround in three acts, each of which
offers practical lessons for welfare-improving outcomes.

I. The Trade Trap: Discipline Avoids Mercantilism
The recent slow growth in advanced nations has lured their governments into the
mercantilist trap of thinking that exports are good, imports are bad, and a large trade surplus is
the key to renewed prosperity. Measured by the number of protectionist measures imposed since
November 2008, France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom are all on the list of the
world’s top 10 most protectionist countries (Evenett, 2013). The opening act of economic reform
in the developing world—South Korea’s rise from impoverished nation in the 1950s to
manufacturing juggernaut—predates the WEO’s time series on global growth, but it
demonstrates that discipline in the context of free trade lies not in running surpluses but in

4

driving up productivity through a sustained process of easing restrictions on both imports and
exports.
In the 1950s, the Cold War occupied center stage, and countries like Singapore and South
Korea were far from the economic “tigers” they would become. In keeping with dependency
theory, the dominant intellectual paradigm in the developing world at the time, both countries
eschewed trade with developed nations in order to pursue a policy of industrialization through
import substitution, but the strategy was not successful in either country. As of 1960, South
Korea’s GDP per capita was US$1,100. Evaluating South Korea’s prospects for the future at the
time, the U.S. Congress argued there was “little or no hope for sustained growth,” while World
Bank studies claimed “industrial growth in Korea was not feasible.”2
In 1964, the Korean government confronted the shortcomings of import substitution and
began liberalizing trade. The reduction of import restrictions was a key element of Korea’s
successful pivot to export-oriented growth. Although policymakers maintained high tariffs on a
wide range of imports, they understood that certain capital goods, intermediate inputs, and
transportation equipment were vital for production and therefore the country’s economic
development. Accordingly, they created a minimal “positive” list of permissible investment
goods that they allowed to expand over time. By 1967, the commitment to opening up had grown
to the point where policymakers replaced the previous list with a “negative” one—a new
protocol under which importers were automatically granted permission for any item not
enumerated.
Korea’s import liberalization strategy had at least two positive effects on the economy.
First, it reduced the cost of production by providing workers and firms with critical inputs at
lower prices. Second, it enabled Korean companies to reverse-engineer everything from
2

Krueger (2010).

5

automobiles to electronic equipment, effectively importing new technologies that would have
taken decades to develop in isolation. Working with government-supported research and
development organizations (ranging from the Korean Institute of Machinery and Metals to the
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute), Korean companies were able to
assimilate and improve upon a variety of technologies that helped them leapfrog the learning
curve and become world-class firms such as Hyundai and Samsung.
The Korean government unquestionably played a significant role in the country’s rise to
economic prominence, and critics of economic reform often cite this involvement as evidence
that extensive government intervention and industrial policy are viable alternatives to more
market-oriented economies. But this critique misses the larger point. The key to Korea’s
turnaround was not so much an ideological tilt toward a large role for government as it was the
discipline to enact and sustain policy changes that empowered firms to take advantage of the
international marketplace. For example, the decision in 1964 by Korean policymakers to devalue
the won helped drive the success of their import liberalization strategy. By offsetting the impetus
for real exchange-rate appreciation created by Korea’s remaining import barriers, the devaluation
restored external competitiveness and set the stage for the takeoff of the country’s manufacturing
sector.
The Korean government’s willingness to reject import substitution and embrace trade
radically altered the country’s economic trajectory. From 1960 to 2005, Korea’s average
standard of living increased twelvefold, with imports and exports working together to drive
productivity gains from comparative advantage. Korean exports increased from 4.8 percent of
GDP in 1963 to 34 percent in 1980. Over the same period, imports as a fraction of GDP rose
from 15.9 percent to 41.4 percent. It bears emphasizing that Korea’s trade balance was negative

6

in both 1963 and in 1980. Indeed, between 1965 and 1990, Korea grew by 7.1 percent per year
while running persistent trade deficits.

II. Fiscal Follies: Discipline Does Not Equal Austerity
From international trade to public finance, the appropriate role of government in
economic activity remains a controversial topic. The Great Recession triggered a contentious
debate over whether fiscal consolidation (austerity) is helpful or harmful in restoring developed
economies to full employment and sustainable debt trajectories. These debates intensified during
the U.S. sequestration standoff and deliberations over the European Fiscal Compact.
Economic commentators from both ends of the political spectrum mistakenly conflate
discipline with the false courage to implement extreme policies. When it comes to whether to
impose fiscal austerity, however, studying the historical (and objective) responses of developingcountry stock markets to implementation of austerity programs demonstrates the error of
unyielding views. Thirty years of data from emerging markets suggest that the disciplined course
of action depends largely on the prevailing level of inflation in the country at the time austerity is
being considered.
The stock market is a useful tool for determining what discipline means in the context of
fiscal policy, because it internalizes both the short- and long-run effects of austerity (Henry,
2002). To the extent that austerity creates expectations of slower growth and higher discount
rates in the short run, it will depress present values. But the potential of higher growth and lower
discount rates in the long run creates an offsetting effect. If the expected long-run benefits
outweigh the short-run costs, then the country’s stock market will rise when its government

7

announces an austerity program. If the expected costs outweigh the benefits, the market will fall.
If the anticipated net effect is zero, there should be little to no market reaction.
The response of the Brazilian stock market to President Henrique Cardoso’s plan to end
hyperinflation in 1994 illustrates this kind of cost-benefit analysis at work. The Cardoso
government instituted fiscal consolidation, unveiled a new currency (the Real) and stopped
printing money to pay its bills. In the anticipation of the Real Plan, the Brazilian stock market
experienced cumulative abnormal returns of 75 percent in real dollar terms during the twelvemonth period prior to implementation. The plan worked. Over the course of the next three years
Brazil went from hyperinflation to single-digit annual price increases. The permanent reduction
in inflation along with other economic reforms placed the economy on a new path. The growth
rate of Brazilian GDP in the two decades beginning with stabilization was 3.2 percent per year—
no Asian miracle, but 1.2 percentage points faster than in the prior decade. Growth was
particularly strong between 2001 and 2011—3.6 percent per year—a time during which the
combination of growth and antipoverty measures lifted twenty million Brazilians out of poverty.
Unlike Brazil in the early 1990s, inflation was not the principal problem facing Chile
when its policymakers implemented austerity under three successive agreements with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) between 1983 and 1989. (The Pinochet regime ended tripledigit inflation in the 1970s.) In anticipation of the future economic impact of austerity, Chile’s
stock market experienced negative cumulative abnormal returns in each of the twelve-month
periods preceding the agreements. Across all three episodes of cold-turkey approaches to
macroeconomic stabilization, the average cumulative abnormal return was negative 87 percent.
In line with these negative market forecasts, real GDP also fell sharply and did not return to its
pre-recession level until 1986.

8

The differing reaction of the stock market to austerity programs conditional on the level
of inflation is not a phenomenon exclusive to Brazil and Chile. Figure 2 demonstrates that
average cumulative abnormal returns of 44 percent occurred in response to the twenty-five
separate austerity programs announced in the midst of high inflation (greater than 40 percent)
across twenty-one emerging nations between 1973 and 1994. Conversely, the fifty-six separate
programs announced in the midst of moderate inflation (less than 40 percent) triggered average
cumulative abnormal returns of negative 24 percent.

Figure 2. The Stock Market Responds Negatively to Fiscal Austerity Programs Initiated in the Midst of Moderate Inflation
60

50

40

Percent

30
High inflation
Moderate inflation

20

10

0
-12 -11 -10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

-10

-20

-30

With inflation rates in the United States and the Euro Area below 2 percent in 2010,
Figure 2 suggests that, rather than changing swiftly from stimulus to austerity that year, a more
gradual approach to fiscal consolidation for those countries might have been optimal. Indeed,
Europe’s prolonged decline in economic activity in the aftermath of the Great Recession stands
in contrast to the rapid recovery experienced by East Asia following its own crisis in 1997

9

(caused by similar factors such as property booms and excess leverage). At least part of the
difference in the post-crisis paths of employment and output in the two episodes appears to be a
result of greater fiscal flexibility on the part of Asian policymakers than their European
counterparts (Chari and Henry, 2014).
A gradual approach to deficit reduction need not imply a lack of seriousness—altering
the speed of progress toward a specified fiscal target is not the same as abandoning it. On the
contrary, gradualism can be a powerful tool in helping achieve the objectives of a broader growth
strategy (Dewatripont and Roland, 1995). The goal is not to balance the budget in one fell
swoop, but to implement positive net present value measures that place government debt on a
sustainable trajectory.

III. Discipline Applies to Borrowers and Lenders
When public debt does hit crisis-inducing levels, historical data on stock-market
responses in emerging markets also provide important insights about the most efficient way to
address the debt overhang and insolvency that inhibit the recovery of European countries such as
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Because there are many parallels between the
economic troubles of Europe and the landscape of heavily indebted, middle-income developing
countries in the late 1980s, the policy changes that resolved overhang following the Third World
Debt Crisis are deeply relevant to advanced economies. A quick review of events and data
demonstrates the following principle: when a government’s liabilities exceed its ability to pay,
discipline requires borrowers and lenders to bear the burden of adjustment in order to reach an
efficient resolution.

10

Following seven years of restructurings and forgone growth in the Crisis countries, and
despite prior insistence that debt relief had no place in the solution, the U.S. Treasury changed
tack in 1989. Then-Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas Brady unveiled a plan that called on
international commercial banks to provide approximately US$65 billion of debt forgiveness to
the sixteen nations in question. The anticipation of the official announcement of a Brady deal
generated average cumulative abnormal returns of 60 percent over a twelve-month
preannouncement window in the stock markets of the recipient countries. It is tempting to
conclude that the revaluation of assets simply reflected a transfer of wealth from bank
shareholders, but additional data reject this explanation. Publicly traded U.S. commercial banks
with large developing-country loan exposure experienced average cumulative abnormal returns
of 35 percent during the relevant time frame.
Debt relief, however, also carries a price tag. It was given to Brady countries in exchange
for their agreement to implement growth-enhancing reforms: inflation stabilization, trade
liberalization, and privatization of badly run state-owned firms whose lack of profitability was a
drag on public finances and helped give rise to debt overhang in the first place. Countries that
instituted and sustained subsets of the reforms that were most relevant to their circumstances
experienced significant improvements in economic performance. Countries that failed to honor
their reform commitments (Jordan, Nigeria, and the Philippines) experienced a much smaller
initial rise in the value of their stock markets than other Brady countries—30 percent versus 60
percent—and even those increases completely evaporated within a year as lack of commitment
to reforms became obvious (Arslanalp and Henry, 2005).
The lesson seems clear. Reducing the debt burden can be an important part of a pragmatic
growth strategy for countries that suffer from debt overhang. But debt relief will only succeed

11

when implemented in concert with reforms that raise productivity and provide a business
environment in which firms have an incentive to generate output, invest in capital, and hire
additional workers. Resistance to writing down debts that cannot be repaid places Europe at risk
for the extended malaise that has plagued Japan for two decades and stood in the way of Third
World resurgence until Secretary Brady’s bold change of course.

IV. Conclusion
As advanced and emerging nations struggle to regain their footing in the aftermath of the
Great Recession, they face somewhat different challenges. Developed nations seek to return their
economies to pre-crisis levels of growth and employment while responsibly addressing income
inequality. Developing countries must consolidate their hard-won gains of the past several
decades and implement second-stage reforms required in key areas (e.g., infrastructure and labor
markets) to maintain their high rates of catch-up growth. The historical examples presented in
this article provide wisdom that applies with equal relevance to the varied tasks ahead. The
analytical insight at the heart of each narrative is unique, but all three stories of economic
transformation contain a common truth: discipline drives turnarounds. If both advanced and
developing nations internalize the lesson and embrace a disciplined approach to economic
policy, they can grow in concert and create greater prosperity for all.

12

References
Arslanalp, Serkan and Peter Blair Henry. 2005. “Is Debt Relief Efficient?” Journal of Finance,
60(2), 1021-1055
Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2014. “Two Tales of Adjustment: East Asian Lessons for
European Growth.” http://www.peterblairhenry.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/ChariHenry-IMF-2013-Two-Tales-of-Adjustment-PRELIMINARY.pdf
Dewatripont, Mathias, and Gerard Roland. 1995. “The design of reform packages under
uncertainty.” American Economic Review: 85(5) 1207-1223.
Evenett, Simon. 2013. Protectionism’s Quiet Return: Global Trade Alert’s Pre-G8 Summit
Report Centre for Economic Policy Research, London
Henry, Peter Blair. 2002. “Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market?” Journal of Finance,
57(4), 1617-1648.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2013. Turnaround: Third World Lessons for First World Growth. Basic
Books: New York.
Krueger, Anne. 2010. “Trade Liberalization and Growth in Developing Countries,” in John
Siegfried, editor, Better Living Through Economics, Harvard University press,
Cambridge, MA.
Prebisch, Raul. 1950. The Economic Development of Latin America and its Principal Problems,
New York: United Nations, 1950.
Singer, Hans W. 1950. “The Distribution of Gains Between Borrowing and Investing Nations,”
American Economic Review: 40 (2): 473-85.

13

