NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIQUIDITY RISK AND THE DYNAMICS OF ARBITRAGE CAPITAL
Péter Kondor
Dimitri Vayanos
Working Paper 19931
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19931

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014, Revised January 2017

We thank Edina Berlinger, Bruno Biais, Itamar Dreschler, Nicolae Garleanu, Pete Kyle, Stavros
Panageas, Anna Pavlova, Jean-Charles Rochet, Hongjun Yan, an anonymous associate editor and
two anonymous referees; seminar participants at Atlanta Fed, Bank of Canada, Cass, Columbia,
Copenhagen, Duke, HKU, Imperial, LBS, LSE, Minneapolis Fed, Montreal, NUS, Ohio State,
Tinbergen, UIUC, UNC, Wash U, Wharton, and Zurich; and participants at the AEA, AFA, Arne
Ryde, Cambridge INET, CRETE, EIEF Market Microstructure, ESEM, ESSFM Gerzensee,
EWFC, NBER Asset Pricing, QMUL, and SED conferences, for helpful comments. We are also
grateful to Mihail Zervos for valuable guidance and encouragement with the proofs on
differential equations. Kondor acknowledges financial support from the European Research
Council (Starting Grant #336585). Both authors acknowledge financial support from the Paul
Woolley Centre at the LSE. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Péter Kondor and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk and the Dynamics of Arbitrage Capital
Péter Kondor and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 19931
February 2014, Revised January 2017
JEL No. D53,G01,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
We develop a continuous-time model of liquidity provision, in which hedgers can trade multiple
risky assets with arbitrageurs. Arbitrageurs have CRRA utility, while hedgers’ asset demand is
independent of wealth. An increase in hedgers’ risk aversion can make arbitrageurs endogenously
more risk-averse. Because arbitrageurs generate endogenous risk, an increase in their wealth or a
reduction in their CRRA coefficient can raise risk premia despite Sharpe ratios declining.
Arbitrageur wealth is a priced risk factor because assets held by arbitrageurs offer high expected
returns but suffer the most when wealth drops. Aggregate illiquidity, which declines in wealth,
captures that factor.

Péter Kondor
London School of Economics and Political Science
Houghton Street
WC2A 2AE
Houghton Street
London
UK
p.kondor@lse.ac.uk
Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk

1

Introduction

Liquidity in financial markets is often provided by specialized agents, such as market makers,
trading desks in investment banks, and hedge funds. Adverse shocks to the capital of these agents
cause liquidity to decline and risk premia to increase. Conversely, movements in the prices of assets
held by liquidity providers feed back into these agents’ capital.1
In this paper we study the dynamics of liquidity providers’ capital, the liquidity that these
agents provide to other participants, and assets’ risk premia. We build a framework with minimal
frictions, in particular no asymmetric information or borrowing constraints. The capital of liquidity
providers matters in our model only because of standard wealth effects. At the same time, we depart
from most frictionless asset-pricing models by fixing the riskless rate and by suppressing wealth
effects for agents other than the liquidity providers. These assumptions are sensible when focusing
on shocks to the capital of liquidity providers in an asset class rather than in the entire asset
universe.
Our combination of assumptions makes it possible to prove general analytical results on equilibrium prices and allocations. We characterize, in particular, how liquidity providers’ risk-appetite,
the endogenous risk that they generate, and the pricing of that risk, depend on liquidity demanders’ characteristics and on liquidity providers’ capital. We also show that the capital of liquidity
providers is the single priced risk factor, and that aggregate illiquidity, which declines in capital,
captures that factor. Our results thus suggest that a priced liquidity risk factor may be arise even
with minimal frictions.
We assume a continuous-time infinite-horizon economy. There is a riskless asset with an exogenous and constant return, and multiple risky assets whose prices are determined endogenously
in equilibrium. There are two sets of competitive agents: hedgers, who receive a risky income flow
and seek to reduce their risk by participating in financial markets, and arbitrageurs, who take the
other side of the trades that hedgers initiate. Arbitrageurs can be interpreted, for example, as
speculators in futures markets. We consider two specifications for hedgers’ preferences. Hedgers
1

A growing empirical literature documents the relationship between the capital of liquidity providers, the liquidity
that these agents provide to other participants, and assets’ risk premia. For example, Comerton-Forde, Hendershott,
Jones, Moulton, and Seasholes (2010) find that bid-ask spreads quoted by specialists in the New York Stock Exchange
widen when specialists experience losses. Aragon and Strahan (2012) find that following the collapse of Lehman
Brothers in 2008, hedge funds doing business with Lehman experienced a higher probability of failure, and the
liquidity of the stocks that they were trading declined. Coval and Stafford (2007) find that stocks sold by mutual
funds that experience extreme outflows drop significantly in price during the outflow period and earn abnormally high
expected returns over the next eighteen months. Jylha and Suominen (2011) find that outflows from hedge funds that
perform the carry trade predict poor performance of that trade, with low interest-rate currencies appreciating and
high-interest rate ones depreciating. Acharya, Lochstoer, and Ramadorai (2013) find that risk premia in commodityfutures markets are larger when broker-dealer balance sheets are shrinking.

1

can be “long-lived” and maximize constant absolute risk-aversion (CARA) utility over an infinite
consumption stream, or they can be “short-lived” and maximize a mean-variance objective over
changes in wealth in the next instant. Under both specifications, hedgers’ demand for insurance is
independent of their wealth. On the other hand, because arbitrageurs maximize constant relative
risk aversion (CRRA) utility over consumption, the supply of insurance depends on their wealth.
Arbitrageur wealth impacts equilibrium prices and allocations, and is the key state variable in
our model. Solving for equilibrium amounts to solving a system of ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) in wealth, with boundary conditions at zero and infinity. These ODEs include non-linear
terms. Yet, their structure makes it possible to prove general analytical results across the entire
parameter space, e.g., for all risk-aversion parameters of hedgers and arbitrageurs.2 In the case
where hedgers are short-lived, we show that a solution exists and we characterize how it depends
on wealth and on model parameters. Moreover, in both the short-lived and long-lived cases, we
characterize the behavior of the solution close to the boundaries.
Our analysis yields new insights on dynamic risk-sharing and asset pricing. We show that the
risk aversion of arbitrageurs is the sum of their static CRRA coefficient and of a forward-looking
component that reflects intertemporal hedging. The latter component makes the risk aversion of
arbitrageurs dependent on parameters of the economy that affect equilibrium prices. For example,
when hedgers are more risk-averse, arbitrageurs become endogenously more risk averse if their
CRRA is smaller than one. This effect can be sufficiently strong to imply that more risk-averse
hedgers may receive less insurance from arbitrageurs in equilibrium. Intuitively, when hedgers are
more risk-averse, expected returns rise steeply following declines in arbitrageur wealth. This makes
arbitrageurs with CRRA smaller than one willing to invest more conservatively, so to preserve
wealth in bad states and earn the high returns.
On the asset-pricing side, we show that arbitrageurs generate endogenous risk, in the sense that
changes in their wealth affect return variances and covariances through amplification and contagion
mechanisms. Endogenous risk is small at both extremes of the wealth distribution: when wealth
is close to zero this is because arbitrageurs hold small positions and hence have a small impact
on prices, and when wealth is close to infinity this is because prices are insensitive to changes in
wealth. The dependence of endogenous risk on arbitrageur wealth can give rise to hump-shaped
patterns of variances, covariances and correlations. It can also cause risk premia, defined as expected
returns in excess of the riskless asset, to increase with arbitrageur wealth for small values of wealth,
2
Ruling out frictions such as borrowing constraints, and suppressing wealth effects from hedgers, seem both
important for the tractability of our ODE system.

2

even though Sharpe ratios decrease. We show that risk premia always exhibit this pattern when
arbitrageurs’ CRRA coefficient is small, and can exhibit it for larger values as well provided that
hedgers are sufficiently risk-averse. In a similar spirit, we show that risk premia can be larger if
the arbitrageurs’ CRRA coefficient is smaller—precisely because endogenous risk is larger.
Additional asset-pricing results concern liquidity risk and its relationship with expected returns.
A large empirical literature has documented that liquidity varies over time and in a correlated
manner across assets within a class. Moreover, aggregate liquidity appears to be a priced risk factor
and carry a positive premium: assets that underperform the most during times of low aggregate
liquidity earn higher expected returns than assets with otherwise identical characteristics.3 We
map our model to that literature by defining liquidity based on the impact that hedgers have on
prices. We show that liquidity is lower for assets with more volatile cashflows. It also decreases
following losses by arbitrageurs, and this variation is common across assets.
Expected returns in our cross-section of assets are proportional to the covariance with the
portfolio of arbitrageurs, which is the single priced risk factor. That factor may be hard to measure
empirically as the portfolio of arbitrageurs is unobservable. We show, however, that aggregate
liquidity captures that factor. Indeed, because arbitrageurs sell a fraction of their portfolio following
losses, assets that covary the most with their portfolio suffer the most when liquidity decreases.
Thus, an asset’s covariance with aggregate liquidity is proportional to its covariance with the
portfolio of arbitrageurs. On the other hand, the covariances between an asset’s liquidity and
aggregate liquidity or return would not explain expected returns as well. This is because they are
proportional to the volatility of an asset’s cashflows rather than to the asset’s covariance with the
arbitrageurs’ portfolio. The covariance between an asset’s return and other proxies of arbitrageur
wealth, such as the leverage of financial intermediaries, used in recent empirical papers, would also
capture the true priced risk factor.4
We finally characterize when the long-run stationary distribution of arbitrageur wealth is nondegenerate, and show that it can be bimodal. The stationary distribution can be non-degenerate
because arbitrage activity is self-correcting: when wealth drops, the arbitrageurs’ future expected
3
Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000), Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001), and Huberman and Halka (2001) document the time-variation of liquidity in the stock market and its correlation across stocks. Amihud (2002) and Hameed,
Kang, and Viswanathan (2010) link time-variation in aggregate liquidity to the returns of the aggregate stock market.
Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) and Acharya and Pedersen (2005) find that aggregate liquidity is a priced risk factor
in the stock market and carries a positive premium. Sadka (2010) and Franzoni, Nowak, and Phalippou (2012) find
similar results for hedge-fund and private-equity returns, respectively. For more references, see Vayanos and Wang
(2013) who survey the theoretical and empirical literature on market liquidity.
4
Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) and He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) find that a single risk factor based on intermediary leverage can price a large cross-section of assets. As we argue in Section 5, our model is exactly consistent
with this finding. It also shows that such a finding may be explained with minimal frictions.

3

returns increase causing wealth to grow faster, and vice-versa. The stationary density becomes
bimodal when hedgers are sufficiently risk-averse. Indeed, because insurance provision in that case
is more profitable, arbitrageur wealth grows fast and large values of wealth can be more likely in
steady state than intermediate values. At the same time, while profitability (per unit of wealth)
is highest when wealth is small, wealth grows away from small values slowly in absolute terms.
Therefore, small values are more likely than intermediate values.
We see our work as bridging three relatively distinct streams of theoretical literature: on liquidity risk, on intermediary asset pricing, and on consumption-based asset pricing with heterogeneous
agents. The first stream focuses on the pricing of liquidity risk in the cross-section of assets. In
Holmstrom and Tirole (2001), firms avoid assets whose return is low when financial constraints are
severe, and these assets offer high expected returns in equilibrium. The covariance between asset
returns and liquidity (less severe constraints) is exogenous. It is instead endogenous in our model
because prices depend on arbitrageur wealth, and this endogeneity is key for our results on a priced
liquidity factor. In Amihud (2002) and Acharya and Pedersen (2005), illiquidity takes the form of
exogenous time-varying transaction costs. An increase in the costs of trading an asset raises the
expected return that investors require to hold it and lowers its price. A negative covariance between
illiquidity and asset prices arises also in our model but because of an entirely different mechanism:
low liquidity and low prices are endogenous symptoms of low arbitrageur wealth.
The second stream links intermediary capital to liquidity and asset prices. In Gromb and
Vayanos (2002), arbitrageurs intermediate trade between investors in segmented markets, and are
subject to margin constraints. Because of the constraints, the liquidity that arbitrageurs provide
to investors increases in their wealth. In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), margin-constrained
arbitrageurs intermediate trade in multiple assets across time periods. Assets with more volatile
cashflows are more sensitive to changes in arbitrageur wealth.5 Garleanu and Pedersen (2011)
introduce margin constraints in an infinite-horizon setting with multiple assets. They show that
assets with higher margin requirements earn higher expected returns and are more sensitive to
changes in the wealth of the margin-constrained agents. This result is suggestive of a priced liquidity
factor. In He and Krishnamurthy (2013), arbitrageurs can raise capital from other investors to invest
in a risky asset over an infinite horizon, but this capital cannot exceed a fixed multiple of their
internal capital. When arbitrageur wealth decreases, the constraint binds, and asset volatility and
expected returns increase. In Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), arbitrageurs are more efficient
5
In Gromb and Vayanos (2017), arbitrage spreads are positively related to the spreads’ sensitivity to arbitrageur
wealth because both characteristics are positively related to cashflow volatility and convergence horizon.

4

holders of productive capital and can trade a risky claim to that capital with other investors. The
long-run stationary distribution of arbitrageur wealth can have a bimodal density. A key difference
with all of the above papers is that we derive the effects of arbitrage capital without imposing any
constraints or contracting frictions.
Perhaps the closest papers to ours within the second stream of literature are Xiong (2001) and
Kyle and Xiong (2001). In both papers, arbitrageurs with logarithmic utility over consumption can
trade with exogenous long-term traders and noise traders over an infinite horizon.6 The liquidity
provided by arbitrageurs is increasing in their wealth, and asset volatilities are hump-shaped.
Relative to these papers, we derive the demand of all traders from optimizing behavior and consider
a general number of risky assets. We also prove analytical results (rather than numerical examples),
and do so for general parameter values within which logarithmic preferences are a restrictive special
case.
Finally, our paper is related to the literature on consumption-based asset pricing with heterogeneous agents, e.g., Dumas (1989), Wang (1996), Chan and Kogan (2002), Bhamra and Uppal
(2009), Basak and Pavlova (2013), Chabakauri (2013), Ehling and Heyerdahl-Larsen (2013), Garleanu and Panageas (2014), and Longstaff and Wang (2015). In these papers, agents have CRRA
utility and differ in their risk aversion. As the wealth of the less risk-averse agents increases, Sharpe
ratios decrease, and this can cause volatilities and correlations to be hump-shaped.7 In contrast to
these papers, we assume that only one set of agents has wealth-dependent risk aversion, and we fix
the riskless rate.
We proceed as follows. In Section 2 we present the model. In Section 3 we derive risk-sharing,
market prices of risk, and wealth dynamics when the risky assets are claims on the next instant’s
cashflow. In Section 4 we show that the results carry through to long-maturity assets, and we
compute expected returns, volatilities and correlations of such assets. In Section 5 we explore the
implications of our model for liquidity risk. In Section 6 we show that the analysis of the previous
sections, which assumes assets in zero supply, extends to positive supply. Section 7 concludes, and
all proofs are in the Appendix.
6
Isaenko (2008) studies a related model in which long-term traders maximize CARA utility and there are transaction costs.
7
Longstaff and Wang (2015) show that the hump-shaped pattern extends to expected excess returns. Garleanu
and Pedersen (2011) also find hump-shaped volatilities and expected returns. These findings, however, are shown
via numerical examples rather than general proofs. See also Liu, Lu, Sun, and Yan (2017) for a model in which
arbitrageurs render anomalies that they discover endogenously more correlated and this endogenous risk is humpshaped in wealth.

5

2

Model

Time t is continuous and goes from zero to infinity. Uncertainty is described by the N -dimensional
Brownian motion Bt . There is a riskless asset whose instantaneous return is constant over time
and equal to r > 0. This return is exogenous in our model and could be derived from a linear and
riskless production technology. There are N risky assets with cashflows
dDt = D̄dt + σ ⊤ dBt ,

(2.1)

and D̄ is a constant N × 1 vector, σ is a constant and invertible N × N matrix, and ⊤ denotes
transpose. The cashflows (2.1) are i.i.d. The i.i.d. assumption is for simplicity, and we can introduce
persistence without significant changes to our analysis. We denote by St the N × 1 vector of riskyasset prices at time t, and by s the N × 1 vector consisting of asset supplies measured in terms of

number of shares. The prices St are determined endogenously in equilibrium. We set Σ ≡ σ ⊤ σ.

There are two sets of agents, hedgers and arbitrageurs. Each set forms a continuum with
measure one. Hedgers receive a random endowment u⊤ dDt at t + dt, where u is a constant N × 1
vector. Because the endowment is correlated with the risky assets’ cashflows, it can be hedged

by trading in these assets. We consider two specifications for hedgers’ preferences. Under both
specifications, the hedgers’ wealth does not affect their risk aversion and demand for insurance. We
intentionally simplify the model in this respect, so that we can focus on the supply of insurance,
which is time-varying because of the wealth-dependent risk aversion of arbitrageurs.

• Specification 1: Long-lived hedgers. Hedgers maximize negative-exponential utility over
intertemporal consumption:
−Et

Z

∞

−α
c̄ −ρ̄(t′ −t)
r t′

e

e

dt

′

t



where c̄t′ is consumption at t′ ≥ t,

(2.2)

,
α
r

is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion, and ρ̄ is the

subjective discount rate.
• Specification 2: Short-lived hedgers. Hedgers maximize a mean-variance objective over
instantaneous changes in wealth:
Et (dvt ) −

α
Vart (dvt ),
2

(2.3)

where dvt is the change in wealth between t and t + dt, and α is a risk-aversion coefficient.
6

The risk-aversion coefficient

α
r

under Specification 1 is over consumption, and it yields a risk-

aversion coefficient α over wealth, same to that under Specification 2. The interpretation of hedgers
under Specification 1 is straightforward: they are infinitely lived agents. Under Specification 2,
hedgers can instead be interpreted as overlapping generations living over infinitesimal periods. The
generation born at time t is endowed with initial wealth v̄, and receives the additional endowment
u⊤ dDt at t + dt. It consumes all its wealth at t + dt and dies. If preferences over consumption are
described by the VNM utility U , this yields the objective (2.3) with the risk-aversion coefficient
′′

(v̄)
.
α = − UU ′ (v̄)

Under the overlapping generations interpretation, Specification 2 introduces the friction that future generations of hedgers cannot trade with the current generation. Markets are hence incomplete—
alhtough they are complete for the current generation of hedgers and for arbitrageurs because the
number N of risky assets is equal to the number of Brownian motions. Under Specification 1,
markets are complete for all hedgers and arbitrageurs. While generating a form of incompleteness,
Specification 2 has the advantage of being more tractable. We refer to Specification 1 as long-lived
hedgers, and to Specification 2 as short-lived hedgers.
Arbitrageurs maximize power utility over intertemporal consumption. When the coefficient γ
of relative risk aversion is different than one, the arbitrageurs’ objective at time t is
Et

Z

∞

t

!
c1−γ
′
′
t
e−ρ(t −t) dt′ ,
1−γ

(2.4)

where ct′ is consumption at t′ ≥ t and ρ is the subjective discount rate. When γ = 1, the objective
becomes
Et

Z

t

∞

−ρ(t′ −t)

log(ct′ )e

dt

′



(2.5)

.

We assume that ρ > r. As we explain in Section 3.3, this assumption ensures that arbitrageurs do
not accumulate infinite wealth over time, in which case wealth effects become irrelevant.
We solve for the equilibrium in steps. In Section 3 we derive risk-sharing, market prices of
risk, and wealth dynamics. These derivations can be performed independently of those for price
dynamics. Indeed, in Section 3 we replace the risky assets paying a infinite stream of cashflows
by “short-maturity” assets paying the next instant’s cashflow. Short-maturity assets are a useful
expositional device: risk-sharing, market prices of risk, and wealth dynamics are identical as with
the long-maturity assets introduced earlier, as we show in Section 4, but the derivations are simpler
7

because there are no price dynamics. In Section 4 we compute the price dynamics of long-maturity
assets, and these assets’ expected returns, volatilities, and correlations. In both Sections 3 and 4
we assume that risky assets are in zero supply, i.e., s = 0. Even with zero supply, there is aggregate
risk because of the hedgers’ endowment, and risk premia are non-zero and time-varying.
We allow supply to be positive in Section 6. We show that when hedgers are long-lived, risksharing and asset prices are the same as in the equilibrium derived in Sections 3 and 4, provided that
we replace u in that equilibrium by s + u. That is, only the aggregate of the supply u coming from
hedgers and the supply s coming from issuers matters, and not the relative composition. When
hedgers are short-lived, this equivalence does not hold. Yet, key aspects of asset-price behavior
derived in Sections 3 and 4 generalize.
For zero supply our model could represent futures markets, with the assets being futures contracts and the arbitrageurs being the speculators. It could also represent the market for insurance
against aggregate risks, e.g., weather or earthquakes, with the assets being insurance contracts and
the arbitrageurs being the insurers. For positive supply, our model could represent stock or bond
markets, with the arbitrageurs being hedge funds or other agents absorbing demand or supply
imbalances.

3

Equilibrium with Short-Maturity Assets

A new set of N short-maturity assets can be traded at each time t. The assets available at time t
pay dDt at t + dt. We denote by πt dt the N × 1 vector of prices at which the assets trade at t, and
by dRt ≡ dDt − πt dt the N × 1 vector of returns that the assets earn between t and t + dt. Eq.
(2.1) implies that the instantaneous expected returns of the short-maturity assets are
Et (dRt )
= D̄ − πt ,
dt

(3.1)

and the instantaneous covariance matrix of returns is
Vart (dRt )
Et (dRt dRt⊤ )
=
= σ ⊤ σ = Σ.
dt
dt

(3.2)

Note that dRt is also a return in excess of the riskless asset since investing πt dt in the riskless asset
yields return rπt (dt)2 , which is negligible relative to dRt . Note also that dRt is a return per share
rather than per dollar invested: computing the return per dollar would require dividing dRt by

8

the price πt dt. When using dollar rather than share returns in the rest of this paper, we will be
mentioning that explicitly.

3.1

Optimization

Consider first the optimization problem of a long-lived hedger. The hedger’s budget constraint is
⊤
dvt = rvt dt + x⊤
t (dDt − πt dt) + u dDt − c̄t dt,

(3.3)

where xt is the hedger’s position in the risky assets at time t and vt is the hedger’s wealth. The first
term in the right-hand side of (3.3) is the return from investing in the riskless asset, the second term
is the return from investing in the risky assets, the third term is the endowment, and the fourth
term is consumption. We solve the hedger’s optimization problem using dynamic programming
and conjecture the value function
V (vt , wt ) = −e−[αvt +F (wt )] ,

(3.4)

where F (wt ) is a scalar function of wt . The hedger’s value function over wealth has the same
negative-exponential form as the utility function over consumption, with the risk-aversion coefficient
being α rather than

α
r.

In addition, the value function depends on the wealth of arbitrageurs since

the latter affects asset prices πt . Arbitrageur wealth is the only state variable in our model.

Proposition 3.1 Given the value function (3.4), the optimal policy of a long-lived hedger at time
t is to consume
c̄t = rvt +

r
[F (wt ) − log(r)]
α

(3.5)

and hold a position
xt =

Σ−1 (D̄ − πt )
F ′ (wt )yt
−u−
α
α

(3.6)

in the risky assets.

The hedger’s optimal demand for the risky assets consists of three components, which correspond to the three terms in the right-hand side of (3.6). The first term is a standard mean-variance
demand. It consists of an investment in the tangent portfolio, scaled by the hedger’s risk-aversion
9

coefficient α. The tangent portfolio is the inverse of the covariance matrix Σ of asset returns times
the vector D̄ − πt of expected returns. The second term is a demand to hedge endowment risk.

It consists of a short position in the portfolio u, which characterizes the sensitivity of hedgers’
endowment to asset returns. Selling short an asset n for which un > 0 yields a high payoff when
dDnt is low, which when is the endowment is also low. The third term is an intertemporal hedging
demand as in Merton (1971). Changes in arbitrageur wealth, the only state variable in our model,
affect the terms at which hedgers can obtain insurance, and must be hedged against. Intertemporal
hedging is accomplished by holding a portfolio with weights proportional to the sensitivity of arbitrageur wealth to asset returns. That sensitivity is simply the portfolio yt of arbitrageurs. Hence,
the intertemporal hedging demand is a scaled version of yt , as the third term in (3.6) confirms.
When the hedger is short-lived, the budget constraint (3.3) does not include consumption,
and the hedger’s optimal demand for the risky assets does not include the intertemporal hedging
component. The other two terms in (3.6), however, remain the same. Hence, the case of a shortlived hedger can be nested into that of a long-lived hedger by setting the function F (wt ) to zero.

Proposition 3.2 The optimal policy of a short-lived hedger at time t is to hold a position
xt =

Σ−1 (D̄ − πt )
−u
α

(3.7)

in the risky assets.

Consider next the maximization problem of an arbitrageur. The arbitrageur’s budget constraint
is
dwt = rwt dt + yt⊤ (dDt − πt dt) − ct dt,

(3.8)

where yt is the arbitrageur’s position in the risky assets at time t and wt is the arbitrageur’s wealth.
The first term in the right-hand side of (3.8) is the return from investing in the riskless asset, the
second term is the return from investing in the risky assets, and the third term is consumption.
The arbitrageur’s value function depends not only on his own wealth wt , but also on the aggregate
wealth of all arbitrageurs since the latter affects asset prices πt . In equilibrium own wealth and
aggregate wealth coincide because all arbitrageurs are symmetric and in measure one. For the
purposes of optimization, however, we need to make the distinction. We reserve the notation wt for
aggregate wealth and denote own wealth by ŵt . We likewise use (ct , yt ) for aggregate consumption

10

and position in the assets, and denote own consumption and position by (ĉt , ŷt ). We conjecture the
value function
V (ŵt , wt ) = q(wt )

ŵt1−γ
1−γ

(3.9)

for γ 6= 1, and
V (ŵt , wt ) =

1
log(ŵt ) + q1 (wt )
ρ

(3.10)

for γ = 1, where q(wt ) and q1 (wt ) are scalar functions of wt . We set q(wt ) =

1
ρ

for γ = 1.

Proposition 3.3 Given the value function (3.9) and (3.10), the optimal policy of an arbitrageur
at time t is to consume
− γ1

ĉt = q(wt )

(3.11)

ŵt

and hold a position
ŷt =

Σ−1 (D̄ − πt )
γ
ŵt

+

q ′ (wt )yt
γ
ŵt q(wt )

(3.12)

in the risky assets.
The arbitrageur’s optimal consumption is proportional to his wealth ŵt , with the proportion1

ality coefficient q(wt )− γ being a function of aggregate arbitrageur wealth wt . The arbitrageur’s
optimal demand for the risky assets consists of two components, which correspond to the two terms
in the right-hand side of (3.12) and are analogous to those for hedgers. The first term consists of
an investment in the tangent portfolio, scaled by the arbitrageur’s coefficient of absolute risk aversion

γ
ŵt .

The second term is an intertemporal hedging demand. The arbitrageur hedges against

changes in aggregate arbitrageur wealth since these affect asset prices. Moreover, this hedging is
accomplished by holding a portfolio with weights proportional to the aggregate portfolio yt of all
arbitrageurs.

3.2

Equilibrium Characterization and Existence

Since in equilibrium all arbitrageurs are symmetric and in measure one, their aggregate position
coincides with each arbitrageur’s position and the same is true for wealth. Setting ŷt = yt and
11

ŵt = wt in (3.12), we find that the aggregate position of arbitrageurs is
yt =

Σ−1 (D̄ − πt )
,
A(wt )

(3.13)

where
A(wt ) ≡

q ′ (wt )
γ
−
.
wt
q(wt )

(3.14)

Arbitrageurs’ investment in the tangent portfolio is scaled by A(wt ), which can be interpreted as a
coefficient of dynamic risk aversion. It is the sum of the static coefficient of absolute risk aversion
γ
wt ,

′

(wt )
which corresponds to the intertemporal hedging demand and hence
and of the term − qq(w
t)

reflects dynamic considerations. Suppose, for example, that q(wt ) is decreasing, a property which
holds for γ < 1, as we show in Theorem 3.1. Eq. (3.12) then implies that the intertemporal hedging
demand is negative and lowers the arbitrageurs’ position. The negative hedging demand is reflected
in (3.13) through a larger coefficient of dynamic risk aversion A(wt ).
A similar calculation can be made for hedgers using the market-clearing equation
xt + yt = 0.

(3.15)

Setting yt = −xt in (3.6), we find that the aggregate position of hedgers is
xt =

Σ−1 (D̄ − πt ) − αu
.
α − F ′ (wt )

(3.16)

Substituting (3.13) and (3.16) into (3.15), we find that asset prices πt are
πt = D̄ −

αA(wt )
Σu.
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(3.17)

Substituting (3.17) back into (3.13), we find that the arbitrageurs’ position in the risky assets in
equilibrium is
yt =

α
u.
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(3.18)

Arbitrageurs buy a fraction of the portfolio u, which is the portfolio that hedgers want to sell to
hedge their endowment risk. They buy a larger fraction of u, hence supplying more insurance
12

to hedgers, when their coefficient of dynamic risk aversion A(wt ) is smaller and the hedgers’ riskaversion coefficient α is larger. The degree of insurance supplied by arbitrageurs also depends on the
hedgers’ intertemporal hedging demand, as reflected through the function F ′ (wt ). When hedgers
are short-lived, F (wt ) = 0 and hence F ′ (wt ) = 0. When instead they are long-lived, our numerical
solutions indicate that F ′ (wt ) > 0. Therefore, the hedgers’ intertemporal hedging motive makes
them demand more insurance from arbitrageurs. The intuition is that hedgers seek to hedge against
the event that arbitrageurs will become poorer in the future because in that event insurance will
be supplied at worse terms. To preserve their wealth when arbitrageurs become poorer, hedgers
must reduce their exposure to the portfolio held by arbitrageurs. Hence, they must demand more
insurance from arbitrageurs.
Expected asset returns D̄ − πt are proportional to the covariance with the portfolio u, which is
the single priced risk factor in our model. The risk premium

αA(wt )
α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt )

of that factor depends

on arbitrageur wealth, and is hence time-varying. The arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio, defined as the
expected return of their portfolio divided by the portfolio’s standard deviation, also depends on
their wealth. Using (3.17) and (3.18), we find that the Sharpe ratio is
√
y ⊤ (D̄ − πt )
αA(wt )
SRt ≡ tq
=
u⊤ Σu.
′ (w )
α
+
A(w
)
−
F
⊤
t
t
yt Σyt

(3.19)

Substituting the hedgers’ optimal policy from Proposition 3.1 into the Bellman equation, and
using the dynamics that arbitrageur wealth follows in equilibrium, we can derive an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) for the function F (wt ). Following the same procedure for arbitrageurs,
we can derive an ODE for the function q(wt ). To state these ODEs and subsequent results, we
define the parameter z > 0 by
z≡

α2 u⊤ Σu
.
2(ρ − r)

(3.20)

This parameter is larger when the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient α or endowment variance u⊤ Σu
are larger, or the arbitrageurs’ subjective discount rate ρ is smaller, or the riskless rate r is larger.

Proposition 3.4 In equilibrium, the function q(wt ) solves the ODE

−1
z A′ (wt ) + A(wt )2
q(wt ) γ − r
1=
A(wt )wt −
.
ρ−r
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
13

(3.21)

The function F (wt ) is equal to zero when hedgers are short-lived, and solves the ODE
1

rF (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ + ρ − ρ̄ q(wt )− γ − r ′
1=
+
F (wt )wt
ρ−r
ρ−r
−

z {F ′′ (wt ) − A(wt ) [2α + A(wt ) − 2F ′ (wt )]}
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2

(3.22)

when they are long-lived.

Solving for equilibrium when hedgers are short-lived amounts to solving the ODE (3.21) with
the function F (wt ) set to zero. That ODE involves the functions q(wt ) and A(wt ). Since, however,
A(wt ) depends on q(wt ) and q ′ (wt ), as described in (3.14), (3.21) can be written as a second-order
ODE in the single function q(wt ). That ODE involves non-linear terms in both q(wt ) and q ′ (wt ).
Solving for equilibrium when hedgers are long-lived amounts to solving the ODEs (3.21) and (3.22).
These can be written as a system of second-order non-linear ODEs in q(wt ) and F (wt ). We derive
boundary conditions for the two ODEs through a small set of economic properties which we assume
should hold when wt goes to zero and to infinity. We next state and motivate these properties.
When wt goes to zero and to infinity, expected asset returns should converge to finite limits:
if the limits were infinite, insurance would become infinitely costly, and hedgers would not only
refrain from buying it but would also be willing to supply it. Since expected returns converge to
finite limits, a hedger’s value function should do the same, holding the hedger’s wealth vt constant,
because utility is negative exponential. Since the value function is given by (3.4), F (wt ) should
converge to finite limits when wt goes to zero and to infinity.
That expected returns converge to finite limits when wt goes to zero and to infinity does not
imply that an arbitrageur’s value function should do the same, holding the arbitrageur’s own wealth
ŵt constant. Indeed, because arbitrageurs have power utility, their value function can become
infinite when expected returns are large enough. For wt going to infinity, however, the finite limit
of dollar expected returns is the riskless rate r, as arbitrageurs eliminate all risk premia. Moreover,
because the arbitrageurs’ subjective discount rate ρ exceeds r, their value function does converge
to a finite limit, and so does q(wt ). The limit of q(wt ) must further be positive: since q(wt ) is the
marginal utility of wealth of an arbitrageur with wealth ŵt = 1, and the arbitrageur can always
invest in the riskless asset, q(wt ) must exceed a positive bound. This is the boundary condition
for q(wt ) at infinity. The boundary condition at zero is through A(wt ). Since arbitrageurs have
power utility and risk premia are non-zero, their position in the risky assets as a fraction of their
14

wealth should converge to a finite non-zero limit (while converging to zero in absolute terms). Eq.
(3.13) then implies that A(wt )wt should converge to a positive limit. Note that all the boundary
conditions that we impose concern the existence of finite limits rather than the limits’ exact values.
Theorem 3.1 provides a comprehensive analysis of the equilibrium when hedgers are short-lived,
and a partial analysis when they are long-lived. In the short-lived case, we show that a solution to
the ODE (3.21) with F (wt ) = 0 and the boundary conditions on q(wt ) and A(wt ) exists. We also
characterize monotonicity properties of the solution and show that the limits at zero and infinity
are uniquely determined. In the long-lived case, we have not been able to show existence and
monotonicity properties. We show, however, that the limits at zero and infinity are the same as in
the short-lived case.

Theorem 3.1 When hedgers are short-lived, a solution to the ODE (3.21) with F (wt ) = 0 and
positive limits of A(wt )wt at zero and q(wt ) at infinity exists. The solution has the following
properties:
• The function A(wt ) is decreasing.
• limwt →∞ A(wt )wt = γ and limwt →∞ q(wt ) =

1 

γ.
r+ ρ−r
γ

• If γ < 1, then

1
wt

> A(wt ) >

γ
wt

and q(wt ) is decreasing.

• If γ > 1, then

1
wt

< A(wt ) <

γ
wt

and q(wt ) is increasing.

• If γ < K, where K < 1 is the unique positive solution of
γ
G(γ) ≡ 1 − γ −
z




rγ
+ 1 = 0,
ρ−r

(3.23)

then limwt →0 A(wt )wt = K and limwt →0 q(wt ) = ∞.
• If γ > K, then limwt →0 A(wt )wt = γ and limwt →0 q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞).
Suppose next that hedgers are long-lived, and that a solution to the system of ODEs (3.21) and
(3.22) with positive limits of A(wt )wt at zero and q(wt ) at infinity, and finite limits of F (wt ) at
zero and infinity, exists. Suppose additionally that F ′ (wt )wt and F ′′ (wt )wt2 have (finite or infinite)
limits at zero and infinity. The solution has the following properties:
15

• The limits of A(wt )wt and q(wt ) at zero and infinity are as in the case of short-lived hedgers.
• limwt →0 F (wt ) = log(r) +

αu⊤ D̄+ρ̄−r−z(ρ−r)
r

and limwt →∞ F (wt ) = log(r) +

αu⊤ D̄+ρ̄−r
.
r

• The limits of [A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]wt at zero and infinity are the same as those of A(wt )wt .
The basic idea of our existence proof is to start with a finite interval [ǫ, M ] and show that there
exists a unique solution to the ODE (3.21) with the limits of A(wt )wt at zero and infinity imposed
as boundary conditions at ǫ and M , respectively. We next show that when ǫ converges to zero and
M to infinity, that solution converges to a solution over (0, ∞). Our construction yields a unique
solution over (0, ∞), although it does not rule out that other solutions (constructed differently)
may exist. Uniqueness of our constructed solution allows us to examine how that solution moves
in response to exogenous parameters. Our existence proof concerns only short-lived hedgers; when
stating results on long-lived hedgers in the rest of this paper, we assume that a solution to the
system of ODEs (3.21) and (3.22) as described in Theorem 3.1 exists.
In Section 3.3 we derive economic implications of the results shown in Theorem 3.1, as well as
some additional properties. We examine how positions and returns depend on arbitrageur wealth
(Section 3.3.1), how dynamic risk aversion differs from its static counterpart (Section 3.3.2), and
what the long-run dynamics of arbitrageur wealth are (Section 3.3.3).

3.3
3.3.1

Equilibrium Properties
Wealth Effects

Theorem 3.1 shows that when hedgers are short-lived, an increase in the wealth wt of arbitrageurs
causes arbitrageur dynamic risk aversion A(wt ) to decline. A decline in A(wt ) results in more
insurance supplied to hedgers: arbitrageur positions become more positive for positive elements of
u, which correspond to assets that hedgers want to sell, and more negative for negative elements of
u, which correspond to assets that hedgers want to buy. Expected asset returns, which reflect the
cost of the insurance, become smaller in absolute value: less positive for positive elements of u and
less negative for negative elements of u. The same is true for the market prices of the Brownian
risks, i.e., the expected returns per unit of risk exposure, and for the arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio.

Corollary 3.1 When hedgers are short-lived, an increase in arbitrageur wealth wt :
16

(i) Raises the position of arbitrageurs in each asset in absolute value.
(ii) Lowers the expected return of each asset in absolute value.
(iii) Lowers the market price of each Brownian risk in absolute value.
(iv) Lowers the arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio.
The results of Corollary 3.1 are consistent with the empirical findings of Kang, Rouwenhorst,
and Tang (2017). That paper finds that speculators in commodity futures markets act as momentum
traders, buying when prices go up and selling when they go down. Moreover, following purchases
by speculators expected returns are low, while they are high following speculator sales. These
findings are consistent with Corollary 3.1, provided that arbitrageurs hold long positions in the
risky assets, which is the case when u has positive elements. Indeed, when arbitrageurs are long,
their wealth increases when assets earn high returns. Kang, Rouwenhorst, and Tang (2017) show
that speculators are long on average for almost all of the commodities in their sample. Corollary
3.1 has the additional implication that following a positive shock to the price of one commodity
(holding other prices constant), speculators should buy all commodities and the expected returns
on all commodities should decrease. This prediction is not tested in Kang, Rouwenhorst, and Tang
(2017), but could perhaps be investigated as well.
When hedgers are long-lived, changes in the wealth of arbitrageurs affect not only their dynamic
risk aversion A(wt ) but also the hedgers’ intertemporal hedging demand, whose strength is captured
by the function F ′ (wt ) > 0. Recall that long-lived hedgers seek to hedge against the event that
arbitrageurs will become poorer in the future because in that event insurance will be supplied to
them at worse terms. Moreover, because of that intertemporal hedging motive, hedgers demand
more insurance. Our numerical solutions indicate that when arbitrageur wealth wt increases, both
A(wt ) and F ′ (wt ) decrease. In the case of F ′ (wt ), this is because the terms of insurance become
less sensitive to wt for larger values of wt .
The interplay between increased supply of insurance (lower A(wt )) and declining demand for
it (lower F ′ (wt )) can give rise to non-monotonic patterns. Consider, for example, arbitrageur
positions, which increase in absolute value when A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) declines, as shown in (3.18). When
the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient α is high, positions are hump-shaped in wt : they increase in
absolute value for small values of wt as A(wt ) declines, and decrease for larger values of wt as
F ′ (wt ) declines. When instead α is low, the variation in F ′ (wt ) is dominated by that in A(wt ), and
positions increase in absolute value for all values of wt , as in Corollary 3.1.
17

Figure 1 illustrates the behavior of arbitrageur dynamic risk aversion and positions. The plots
to the left show dynamic risk aversion A(wt ). The plots in the middle show the position ynt in
an asset n, expressed as a fraction of the position un that hedgers want to hedge. All these plots
concern the case where hedgers are long-lived. The plots to the right express positions relative to
the case where hedgers are short-lived. The blue solid line represents the baseline case, which is
the same in all plots. The plots at the top show that positions increase with wt in the baseline case
but become hump-shaped when the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient α increases. For the larger
value of α, arbitrageurs can over-insure hedgers, buying the full position that they want to hedge
and holding an additional long position. Over-insurance introduces a large deviation relative to
the case of short-lived hedgers, as the top-right figure shows. The plots at the bottom show that
arbitrageurs provide less insurance to hedgers when their risk-aversion coefficient γ increases.

3.3.2

Dynamic Risk Aversion

Recall from (3.14) that the dynamic risk aversion A(wt ) of arbitrageurs is the sum of the static coefficient of absolute risk aversion

γ
wt ,

′

(wt )
and of the term − qq(w
which corresponds to the intertemporal
t)

hedging demand. In this section we examine, drawing on the results of Theorem 3.1, how dynamic
and static risk aversion differ, or equivalently what the properties of intertemporal hedging demand
are. We start with the case of short-lived hedgers, and examine how the results carry through to
long-lived hedgers at the end of this section.
For γ < 1, the intertemporal hedging demand raises A(wt ) above

γ
wt ,

while the opposite is

true for γ > 1. The difference between the two cases lies in the behavior of the marginal utility
of arbitrageur wealth, which is q(wt ) for an arbitrageur with wealth ŵt = 1. For γ < 1, q(wt ) is
decreasing in wt , meaning that the arbitrageur has higher marginal utility in states where aggregate
arbitrageur wealth wt is low. This is because in the low-wt states expected returns are high, and
hence the arbitrageur earns a high return on wealth. By seeking to preserve wealth in those states,
so to earn the high return by investing it, the arbitrageur scales back his positions, behaving as more
risk-averse than in the absence of intertemporal hedging. For γ > 1 instead, q(wt ) is increasing in
wt , meaning that the arbitrageur has lower marginal utility in low-wt states. This is because the
high return on wealth in those states is associated with high utility of future consumption. Hence,
it is discounted by low marginal utility, and the latter effect dominates for γ > 1.
When utility is logarithmic (γ = 1), the intertemporal hedging demand is zero, and hence

18

Arbitrageurs position

Dynamic risk aversion

Arbitrageurs position, ratio

1.5
15

1.5
1

/0
/1

10

/0
/1

/0
/1

1

5

0.5
0.5

0

0
0

1

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

0

0

1

30

0.8

1

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

!

Arbitrageurs position

40

! / 2"3
!/0

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

!

Dynamic risk aversion

20

1

!

Arbitrageurs position, ratio

1
! / 2"3
!/0

0.6

! / 2"3
!/0

0.5
0.4
10
0.2
0

0
0

1

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

0
!

1

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

0
!

1

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

!

Figure 1: Arbitrageur dynamic risk aversion A(wt ) and positions yt as a function
of arbitrageur wealth wt . The plots to the left show A(wt ). The plots in the middle
show ynt for an asset n, expressed as a fraction of the position un that hedgers want
to hedge. All these plots concern the case where hedgers are long-lived. The plots to
the right express positions relative to the case where hedgers are short-lived. All plots
assume two symmetric and uncorrelated√risky assets, and set the annualized standard
deviation of the hedgers’ endowment u⊤ Σu to 15%, the arbitrageurs’ subjective
discount rate ρ to 4%, and the riskless rate r to 2%. In the baseline case, represented
by the blue solid line in all plots, the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient α is set to
2 and the arbitrageurs’ relative risk-aversion coefficient γ to 0.5. (By normalizing
the hedgers’ wealth to one, via a choice
√ of numeraire, we can interpret α as their
coefficient of relative risk aversion and u⊤ Σu as the annualized standard deviation
of their endowment as a fraction of their wealth.) Under these choices, the parameters
z and K are 2.25 and 0.59, respectively. The plots at the top examine the effect of
raising α to 4, and the plots at the bottom examine the effect of raising γ to 2.

A(wt ) =

1
wt .

Although the intertemporal hedging demand raises A(wt ) for γ < 1, A(wt ) remains

smaller than for γ = 1. Conversely, although the intertemporal hedging demand lowers A(wt ) for
γ > 1, A(wt ) remains larger than for γ = 1. These comparisons do not imply, however, that the
relative contribution of the intertemporal hedging demand to A(wt ) is small; we next point out
that it is large in some cases.

19

When wt goes to infinity, A(wt ) ≈

γ
wt .

Hence, A(wt ) is driven purely by the static component,

and the relative contribution of the intertemporal hedging demand converges to zero. The same
result holds when wt goes to zero if γ exceeds a threshold K ∈ (0, 1). If instead γ < K, A(wt ) ≈
Hence, the contribution of the intertemporal hedging demand to A(wt ) is
and

K−γ
K

K−γ
wt

K
wt .

in absolute terms

in relative terms. If, in particular, γ is close to zero, A(wt ) is almost purely driven by

the intertemporal hedging demand. The difference between the cases γ > K and γ < K lies in the
behavior of the marginal utility q(wt ) when wt goes to zero. If γ > K, then q(wt ) converges to
′

(wt )
a finite limit and hence the ratio of − qq(w
to
t)

γ
wt

′

must converge to zero. If instead γ < K, then

(wt )
can be larger than
q(wt ) converges to infinity and hence − qq(w
t)

γ 8
wt .

Eq. (3.23) implies that the threshold K increases with the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient α
and endowment variance u⊤ Σu. Hence, when hedgers are more risk averse or their endowment is
more volatile, arbitrageurs with γ < K also become more risk averse for wt close to zero. Theorem
3.2 generalizes these results to any γ < 1 and wt , and shows that the opposite results hold for
γ > 1.

Theorem 3.2 Suppose that hedgers are short-lived. For any given level of arbitrageur wealth wt ,
the following comparative statics hold:
(i) An increase in the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient α raises arbitrageur dynamic risk aversion
A(wt ) if γ < 1, and lowers it if γ > 1.
(ii) An increase in the hedgers’ endowment variance u⊤ Σu raises arbitrageur dynamic risk aversion A(wt ) if γ < 1, and lowers it if γ > 1.

The intuition for Theorem 3.2 is that for larger values of α and u⊤ Σu, expected returns are
more sensitive to changes in arbitrageur wealth wt , rising more steeply when wt declines. Hence,
arbitrageurs with γ < 1 have a marginal utility that also rises more steeply following declines in
wt . This makes them even more willing to preserve wealth in the low-wt states, and raises their
dynamic risk aversion A(wt ). Arbitrageurs with γ > 1, by contrast, have a marginal utility that
drops more steeply following declines in wt , and this lowers A(wt ).
8

The region γ < K in which q(wt ) converges to infinity when wt goes to zero is a subset of the region γ < 1 in
which q(wt ) is decreasing. The former region is also the one in which the value function of an arbitrageur facing the
time-invariant expected returns that arise in equilibrium when wt = 0 (no arbitrageurs) is infinite.

20

The comparative statics of A(wt ) yield comparative statics for arbitrageur positions and Sharpe
ratios. Most surprising among those is that arbitrageurs can supply less insurance to hedgers when
the latter become more risk averse. Following an increase in α, supplying insurance becomes more
profitable for arbitrageurs. If arbitrageur risk aversion included only the static component, which
does not depend on α, arbitrageurs would therefore supply more insurance. Because of the intertemporal hedging demand, however, the dynamic risk aversion of arbitrageurs with γ < 1 increases.
Moreover, this effect can dominate, inducing arbitrageurs to supply less insurance. Arbitrageurs
with γ ≥ 1 instead supply more insurance because their dynamic risk aversion decreases. When

γ ≤ 1, arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio increases because both hedgers and arbitrageurs become more
risk averse. The comparative statics with respect to u⊤ Σu are along similar lines.

Corollary 3.2 Suppose that hedgers are short-lived. For any given level of arbitrageur wealth wt ,
the following comparative statics hold:
(i) An increase in the hedgers’ risk aversion coefficient α raises the arbitrageurs’ position in
absolute value when γ ≥ 1 and lowers it when γ < K, z < 1 and wt is small. It raises the

arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio when γ ≤ 1.

(ii) An increase in the variance u⊤ Σu of hedgers’ endowment raises the arbitrageurs’ position in
absolute value when γ > 1 and lowers it when γ < 1. It raises the arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio
when γ ≤ 1.
When hedgers are long-lived, an increase in α lowers the arbitrageurs’ position in absolute value
when γ < K, z < 1 and wt is small.

The result that an increase in α can induce the arbitrageurs to supply less insurance to hedgers
carries through to long-lived hedgers. This is because the asymptotic behavior of A(wt ) for wt
close to zero is the same as with short-lived hedgers. Our numerical solutions indicate that the
remaining comparative statics in Theorem 3.2 and Corollary 3.2 also extend to long-lived hedgers.

3.3.3

Stationary Distribution

We next derive the long-run dynamics of arbitrageur wealth.

21

Proposition 3.5 If z > 1, then arbitrageur wealth has a long-run stationary distribution with
density

d(wt ) = R
∞
0

[α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt )]2
A(wt )
[α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt )]2
A(wt )


A(ŵt ) −
hR 
w
exp 1 t A(ŵt ) −
exp

hR

wt
1

[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2
zA(ŵt )
[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2
zA(ŵt )





dŵt

i

i
dŵt dwt

(3.24)

over the support (0, ∞). If z < 1, then wealth converges to zero in the long run.
Arbitrageur wealth has a non-degenerate stationary density if the parameter z defined in (3.20)
exceeds one. That is, the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient α and endowment variance u⊤ Σu must
be large enough relative to the difference between the arbitrageurs’ subjective discount rate ρ and
the riskless rate r. Note that this result is valid both when hedgers are short-lived and when they
are long-lived.
The existence of a non-degenerate stationary density is related to the dynamics of arbitrageur
wealth being self-correcting: when wealth drops, the arbitrageurs’ future expected returns increase
causing wealth to grow faster, and vice-versa. To explain the relationship and why the condition
z > 1 is required, we recall the standard Merton (1971) portfolio optimization problem in which
an infinitely-lived investor with CRRA coefficient γ can invest in a riskless rate r and in N risky
assets whose returns have expectation given by a vector µ and covariance given by a matrix Σ. The
investor’s wealth converges to infinity in the long run when
1
r + µ⊤ Σ−1 µ > ρ,
2

(3.25)

i.e., the riskless rate plus one-half of the squared Sharpe ratio achieved from investing in the risky
assets exceeds the investor’s subjective discount rate ρ. When instead (3.25) holds in the opposite
direction, wealth converges to zero. Intuitively, wealth converges to infinity when the investor
accumulates wealth at a rate that exceeds sufficiently the rate at which he consumes.
Our model differs from the Merton problem because the arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio is endogenously determined in equilibrium and decreases in their wealth (Corollary 3.1). Using (3.19) to
substitute for the arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio, we can write (3.25) as
1
r+
2



αA(wt )
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

2

u⊤ Σu > ρ.

(3.26)

Transposing the result from the Merton problem thus suggests that there are three possibilities for
the long-run dynamics of arbitrageur wealth. If (3.26) is satisfied for all values of wt , then wealth
22

converges to infinity. If (3.26) is violated for all values of wt , then wealth converges to zero. If,
finally, (3.26) is violated for large values but is satisfied for small values, neither convergence occurs
and wealth has a non-degenerate stationary density.
Since Theorem 3.1 shows that A(wt ) converges to zero when wt goes to infinity, (3.26) is satisfied
for large values of wt if r > ρ. Our assumption ρ > r hence implies that (3.26) is violated for large
wt , and rules out that wealth converges to infinity in the long run. To examine whether (3.26) is
satisfied for small values of wt , we recall from Theorem 3.1 that A(wt ) is of order

1
wt

for wt close to

2 u⊤ Σu

zero, and that limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = 0. Hence, (3.26) is satisfied for small wt if r + α

2

> ρ. This

condition is equivalent to z > 1, which is exactly what Proposition 3.5 requires for a non-degenerate
stationary density to exist. Proposition 3.6 computes the density in closed form when hedgers are
short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic utility (γ = 1).

Proposition 3.6 Suppose that hedgers are short-lived, arbitrageurs have logarithmic utility (γ =
1), and z > 1. The stationary density d(wt ):
(i) Is decreasing in wt if z <

27
8 .

(ii) Is bimodal in wt otherwise: decreasing in wt for wt ∈ (0, m1 ), increasing in wt for wt ∈
(m1 , m2 ), and again decreasing in wt for wt ∈ (m2 , ∞). The thresholds m1 < m2 are the two
positive roots of
(αwt )3 + 3(αwt )2 + (3 − 2z)αwt + 1 = 0.

(3.27)

(iii) Shifts to the right in the monotone likelihood ratio sense when α or u⊤ Σu increase.

The stationary density has two possible shapes. When z is not much larger than one, it is
decreasing in arbitrageur wealth wt , and so values of wt close to zero are more likely than larger
values. When instead z is sufficiently larger than one, the stationary density becomes bimodal,
with the two maxima being zero and an interior point m2 of the support. Values of wt close to the
maxima are more likely than intermediate values, meaning that the economy spends more time at
these values than in the middle. The intuition is that when the hedgers’ risk-aversion coefficient
α and endowment variance u⊤ Σu are large, arbitrageurs earn high expected returns for providing
insurance, and their wealth grows fast. Therefore, large values of wt can be more likely in steady
state than intermediate values. At the same time, while expected returns are highest when wealth
23

is small, wealth grows away from small values slowly in absolute terms. Therefore, small values of
wt are more likely than intermediate values.
Using the long-run stationary distribution, we can perform “unconditional” comparative statics.
For example, rather than examining how the arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio depends on α conditionally
on wt , we can examine how it depends on α unconditionally, in expectation over the stationary
distribution of wt . The unconditional comparative statics can differ from the conditional ones.
For example, while an increase in α and u⊤ Σu raises the conditional Sharpe ratio when γ ≤ 1
(Corollary 3.2), it can lower its unconditional expectation. Intuitively, for larger values of α and
u⊤ Σu, arbitrageur wealth grows faster, and its stationary density shifts to the right (Proposition
3.6). Therefore, while the conditional Sharpe ratio increases, its unconditional expectation can
decrease because large values of wealth, which yield low Sharpe ratios, become more likely.

4

Equilibrium with Long-Maturity Assets

We conjecture that in equilibrium the price vector St of the long-maturity assets follows the Ito
process
⊤
dSt = µSt dt + σSt
dBt ,

(4.1)

where µSt is a N × 1 vector and σSt is a N × N matrix. We denote by dRt ≡ dSt + dDt − rSt dt

the N × 1 vector of returns that the long-maturity assets earn between t and t + dt in excess of the

riskless asset. Note as in the case of short-maturity assets, dRt is a return per share rather than

per dollar invested. Eqs. (2.1) and (4.1) imply that the instantaneous expected excess returns of
the long-maturity assets are
Et (dRt )
= µSt + D̄ − rSt ,
dt

(4.2)

and the instantaneous covariance matrix of returns is
Vart (dRt )
= (σSt + σ)⊤ (σSt + σ).
dt

4.1

(4.3)

Equivalence with Short-Maturity Assets

With long-maturity assets, the budget constraint (3.3) of a long-lived hedger becomes
dvt = rvt dt + Xt⊤ (dSt + dDt − rSt dt) + u⊤ dDt − c̄t dt,
24

(4.4)

where Xt is the hedger’s position in the risky assets at time t. The budget constraint of a shortlived hedger is derived from (4.4) by excluding consumption. The budget constraint (3.8) of an
arbitrageur becomes
dwt = rwt dt + Yt⊤ (dSt + dDt − rStdt) − ct dt,

(4.5)

where Yt is the arbitrageur’s position in the risky assets at time t. The market clearing equation
(3.15) becomes
Xt + Yt = 0.

(4.6)

Because the market is complete with long-maturity assets, as it is with short-maturity assets, the
two asset structures generate the same allocation and the same pricing of risk.

Lemma 4.1 An equilibrium (St , Xt , Yt ) with long-maturity assets can be constructed from an equilibrium (πt , xt , yt ) with short-maturity assets by:
(i) Choosing the price process St such that
 −1

−1
σ⊤
(D̄ − πt ) = (σSt + σ)⊤
(µSt + D̄ − rSt ).

(4.7)

(ii) Choosing the asset positions Xt of hedgers and Yt of arbitrageurs such that
σxt = (σSt + σ)Xt ,

(4.8)

σyt = (σSt + σ)Yt .

(4.9)

In the equilibrium with long-maturity assets the dynamics of arbitrageur wealth, the exposures of
hedgers and arbitrageurs to the Brownian shocks, the market prices of the Brownian risks, and the
arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratio are the same as in the equilibrium with short-maturity assets.

Eqs. (4.8) and (4.9) construct positions of hedgers and arbitrageurs in the long-maturity assets
so that the exposures to the underlying Brownian shocks are the same as with short-maturity
assets. Eq. (4.7) constructs a price process such that the market prices of the Brownian risks are
also the same. Given this price process, risk exposures are optimal and clear the markets, because
these properties also hold with short-maturity assets.

25

4.2

Asset Prices and Returns

The prices St of the long-maturity assets are a function of arbitrageur wealth wt , which is the only
state variable in our model. Using Ito’s lemma to compute the drift µSt and diffusion σSt of the
price process as a function of the dynamics of wt , and substituting into (4.7), we can determine
S(wt ) up to an ODE for a scalar function.
Proposition 4.1 The prices of the long-maturity assets are given by
S(wt ) =

D̄
+ g(wt )Σu,
r

(4.10)

where the scalar function g(wt ) solves the ODE


α2 u⊤ Σu
αA(wt )
− γ1
′′
g
(w
)
+
r
−
q(w
)
. (4.11)
g ′ (wt )wt − rg(wt ) =
t
t
′
2
2[α + A(wt ) − F (wt )]
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
The assets’ expected excess returns are
h
i
αA(wt )
Et (dRt )
⊤
=
u
Σuf
(w
)
+
1
Σu,
t
dt
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(4.12)

and the covariance matrix of returns is
h
i
Vart (dRt )
= f (wt ) u⊤ Σuf (wt ) + 2 Σuu⊤ Σ + Σ,
dt

(4.13)

where
f (wt ) ≡

αg ′ (wt )
.
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(4.14)

The ODE (4.11) is linear in g(wt ). The boundary conditions that we require are that g(wt )
converges to finite limits at zero and infinity. As with the ODEs in Section 3, we only assume the
existence of finite limits rather than the limits’ exact values. Theorem 4.1 shows that a solution
g(wt ) to the ODE (4.11) exists when hedgers are short-lived, is negative and increasing in wt , and
converges to − αr and to zero, respectively, when wt goes to zero and to infinity. The theorem also
shows that when hedgers are long-lived, the limits are as in the short-lived case.
Theorem 4.1 When hedgers are short-lived, a solution to the ODE (4.11) with finite limits at zero
and infinity exists. The solution has the following properties:
26

• The function g(wt ) is negative and increasing.
• limwt →0 g(wt ) = − αr and limwt →∞ g(wt ) = 0.
When hedgers are long-lived, the limits of g(wt ) at zero and infinity are the same as when they are
short-lived, provided that a solution to the ODE (4.11) with finite limits exists.

Proposition 4.1 shows that asset prices (given in (4.10)) are the sum of two terms. The first
term,

D̄
r,

is the present value of the assets’ expected cashflows D̄, discounted at the riskless rate

r. Prices would equal that present value if arbitrageurs had infinite wealth since they would then
eliminate all risk premia, rendering the expected dollar returns on all assets equal to r. The second
term, g(wt )Σu, reflects the risk premia arising from arbitrageur wealth wt being finite. Consider
an asset n that covaries positively with the portfolio u that hedgers want to sell, i.e., (Σu)n > 0.
In the absence of arbitrageurs, that asset would trade at a discount relative to

D̄n
r .

Arbitrageurs

cause that discount to decrease, and the more so the wealthier they are. Hence, the asset price
Sn =

D̄n
r

+ g(wt )(Σu)n increases in wt and converges to

D̄n
r

when wt goes to infinity. Theorem 4.1

shows that g(wt ) is indeed increasing and converges to zero at infinity.
Since changes in arbitrageur wealth wt affect the prices of long-maturity assets, they also impact the assets’ returns. Proposition 4.1 shows that the covariance matrix of asset returns (given
in (4.13)) is the sum of a “fundamental” component Σ, driven purely by shocks to assets’ under

lying cashflows dDt , and an “endogenous” component f (wt ) f (wt )u⊤ Σu + 2 Σuu⊤ Σ, introduced
because cashflow shocks affect wt which affects returns. Endogenous risk does not arise with shortmaturity assets since their returns are risky only because of the payoff dDt , which is not sensitive
to changes in wt .
The endogenous covariance between an asset pair (n, n′ ) depends on whether the corresponding
components of the vector Σu have the same or opposite signs. Suppose, for example, that (Σu)n > 0
and (Σu)n′ > 0, in which case both assets would trade at a discount in the arbitrageurs’ absence.
An increase in arbitrageur wealth wt causes the prices of both assets to increase, resulting in positive
endogenous covariance. Suppose instead that (Σu)n < 0, in which case demand from hedgers would
cause asset n to trade at a premium in the arbitrageurs’ absence. Asset n’s price would then drop
following an increase in wt , resulting in negative endogenous covariance with asset n′ .

27

Endogenous risk is small at both extremes of the wealth distribution and larger in the middle.
When arbitrageur wealth wt is close to zero, arbitrageurs hold small positions in absolute terms
(i.e., not as a fraction of wt ). Therefore, changes in wt are small and have a small impact on prices.
When instead wt is close to infinity, arbitrageurs absorb the entire portfolio u that hedgers want
to sell. Changes in wt are hence larger, but prices are insensitive to those changes. These effects
can be seen in the expression (4.14) for f (wt ): this function is small for small wt because A(wt )
is large (resulting in small positions by arbitrageurs), and for large wt because g ′ (wt ) is small (low
price sensitivity to wt ). Since the endogenous variance is larger in the middle than in the extremes,
total variance can be hump-shaped in wt . Total covariance and correlation can be hump-shaped
or inverse hump-shaped depending on whether the endogenous covariance is positive or negative,
respectively. Proposition 4.2 confirms the hump shapes (i.e., shows that there is only one hump)
in the case where hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic utility.
Proposition 4.2 The effects of a change in arbitrageur wealth wt on the volatility of asset returns
and on return covariance and correlation converge to zero when wt goes to zero and to infinity.
When hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic utility, an increase in wt has:
(i) A hump-shaped effect on the volatility of asset returns. The hump peaks at a value that is
common to all assets.
(ii) The same hump-shaped effect on the covariance between the returns of assets n and n′ if
(Σu)n (Σu)n′ > 0, and the opposite, i.e., inverse hump-shaped, effect if (Σu)n (Σu)n′ < 0.
(iii) The same hump-shaped effect on the correlation between the returns of assets n and n′ if
(Σu)n (Σu)n′ Σn′ n′ − (Σu)2n′ Σnn′
(Σu)n (Σu)n′ Σnn − (Σu)2n Σnn′
+
> 0, (4.15)
f (wt ) [f (wt )u⊤ Σu + 2] (Σu)2n + Σnn f (wt ) [f (wt )u⊤ Σu + 2] (Σu)2n′ + Σn′ n′
and the opposite, i.e., inverse hump-shaped, effect if (4.15) holds in the opposite direction.

The effect on correlations is more complicated than that on covariances because it includes
the effect on volatilities. Suppose that changes in arbitrageur wealth move the prices of assets n
and n′ in the same direction, and hence have a hump-shaped effect on their covariance. Because,
however, the effect on volatilities, which are in the denominator, is also hump-shaped, the overall
effect on the correlation can be inverse hump-shaped. Intuitively, arbitrageurs can cause assets to
become less correlated because the increase in volatilities that they cause can swamp the increase
in covariance.
28

A hump-shaped pattern is possible for expected excess returns as well. This is more surprising
because Corollary 3.1 shows that an increase in arbitrageur wealth wt lowers the market prices of
the Brownian risks, which are equal to expected excess returns per unit of risk exposure. Offsetting
this effect, is that for wt to the left of the volatility hump, an increase in wt raises volatility because
it raises endogenous risk. The latter effect can dominate and cause expected excess returns to
increase with wt for small values of wt . Proposition 4.3 shows that when hedgers are short-lived,
the latter effect always dominates for γ < K, and can dominate for larger values of γ as well
provided that the parameter z is sufficiently large.
Proposition 4.3 Suppose that hedgers are short-lived. For small arbitrageur wealth wt , an increase
in wt raises the expected excess return of each asset in absolute value, if γ < K. If γ > K, then
the same result holds provided that z >

γ





r
γ+1
ρ−r

γ+1

.

Figure 2 plots the Sharpe ratios, expected excess returns, volatilities and correlations of longmaturity assets as a function of arbitrageur wealth for long-lived hedgers and for γ = 0.5 and 2.
Consistent with Propositions 4.2 and 4.3, shown for short-lived hedgers, volatility and correlation
are hump-shaped in arbitrageur wealth, and the hump-shape carries through to expected excess
returns. The comparison across the two values of γ is also interesting. As one would expect, Sharpe
ratios increase in γ. Expected excess returns, however, can be larger for the smaller value of γ. This
is because when arbitrageurs are less risk-averse, they establish larger positions, and this generates
more endogenous risk. As in Proposition 4.3, the effect of larger endogenous risk on expected excess
returns can dominate that of smaller Sharpe ratios.

5

Liquidity Risk

In this section we explore the implications of our model for liquidity risk. We assume long-maturity
assets, as in the previous section, and define liquidity based on the impact that hedgers have on
prices. Consider an increase in the parameter un that characterizes hedgers’ willingness to sell asset
n. This triggers a decrease
∂Snt
∂un

∂Xnt
∂un

in the quantity of the asset held by the hedgers, and a decrease

in the asset price. Asset n has low liquidity if the price change per unit of quantity traded is

large. That is, the illiquidity of asset n is defined by
λnt ≡

∂Snt
∂un
∂Xnt
∂un

(5.1)

.

29

Sharpe ratio

Expected return

0.3

0.025
/ 0"1
/2

/ 0"1
/2

0.02

0.2
0.015
0.01
0.1
0.005
0

0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

2.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

!

Return volatility

2.5
!

Return correlation
0.4

0.1

/ 0"1
/2

0.3
/ 0"1
/2

0.2

0.05
0.1
0

0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

2.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

!"#$% &' "()*$("+!,(-.

!

2.5
!

Figure 2: Assets’ Sharpe ratios, expected excess returns, volatilities, and correlations

as a function of arbitrageur√wealth wt . The plots assume two symmetric and uncorrelated risky assets, and set u⊤ Σu = 15%, α = 2, ρ = 4% and r = 2%. In the baseline
case, represented by the blue solid line, γ is set to 0.5. The plots examine the effect of
raising γ to 2. The baseline case is identical to that in Figure 1, which also examines
the effect of raising γ to 2 (on dynamic risk aversion and positions).

Defining illiquidity as price impact follows Kyle (1985). Kyle and Xiong (2001), Xiong (2001), and
Johnson (2008) perform similar constructions to ours in asset-pricing settings by defining illiquidity
as the derivative of price with respect to supply.

Proposition 5.1 Illiquidity λnt is equal to

A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
⊤
′
−g(wt ) 1 +
+ u Σug (wt ) Σnn .
α


(5.2)

It converges to infinity when arbitrageur wealth wt goes to zero, and to zero when wt goes to
infinity. When hedgers are short-lived, illiquidity is positive for all wt ∈ (0, ∞). When, in addition,
arbitrageurs have logarithmic utility (γ = 1), illiquidity decreases in wt .

30

Proposition 5.1 identifies a time-series and a cross-sectional dimension of illiquidity. In the
time-series, illiquidity varies in response to changes in arbitrageur wealth. Our numerical solutions
indicate that illiquidity is a decreasing function of wealth, a finding that Proposition 5.1 confirms
in the case where hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic utility. The timeseries variation of illiquidity is common across assets and corresponds to the term multiplying Σnn
in (5.2). In the cross-section, illiquidity is higher for assets with more volatile cashflows. The
dependence of illiquidity on an asset n is through Σnn , the asset’s cashflow variance. The timeseries and cross-sectional dimensions of illiquidity interact: assets with more volatile cashflows have
higher illiquidity for any given level of wealth, and the time-variation of their illiquidity is more
pronounced.
We next compute the covariance between asset returns and aggregate illiquidity. Since illiquidity varies over time because of arbitrageur wealth, and with an inverse relationship, the covariance of
the return vector with illiquidity is equal to the covariance with wealth times a negative coefficient.
Proposition 4.1 implies, in turn, that the covariance of the return vector with wealth is proportional to Σu. This is the covariance between asset cashflows and the cashflows of the portfolio u,
which characterizes hedgers’ supply. The intuition for the proportionality is that when arbitrageurs
realize losses, they sell a fraction of u, and this lowers asset prices according to the covariance with
u. Therefore, the covariance between asset returns and aggregate illiquidity Λt ≡
Covt (dΛt , dRt )
= C Λ (wt )Σu,
dt

PN

n=1

N

λnt

is
(5.3)

where C Λ (wt ) is a negative coefficient. Assets that suffer the most when aggregate illiquidity
increases and arbitrageurs sell a fraction of the portfolio u, are those corresponding to large components (Σu)n of Σu. They have volatile cashflows (high Σnn ), or are in high supply by hedgers
(high un ), or correlate highly with assets with those characteristics.
Using Proposition 5.1, we can compute two additional liquidity-related covariances: the covariance between an asset’s illiquidity and aggregate illiquidity, and the covariance between an
asset’s illiquidity and aggregate return. We take the aggregate return to be that of the portfolio
u, which characterizes hedgers’ supply. Acharya and Pedersen (2005) show theoretically, within a
model with exogenous transaction costs, that both covariances are linked to expected returns in
the cross-section. In our model, the time-variation of the illiquidity of an asset n is proportional to
the asset’s cashflow variance Σnn . Therefore, the covariances between the asset’s illiquidity on one
hand, and aggregate illiquidity or return on the other, are proportional to Σnn .

31

Corollary 5.1 In the cross-section of assets:
(i) The covariance between asset n’s return dRnt and aggregate illiquidity Λt is proportional to
the covariance (Σu)n between the asset’s cashflows and the cashflows of the hedger-supplied
portfolio u.
(ii) The covariance between asset n’s illiquidity λnt and aggregate illiquidity Λt is proportional to
the variance Σnn of the asset’s cashflows.
(iii) The covariance between asset n’s illiquidity λnt and aggregate return u⊤ dRt is proportional
to the variance Σnn of the asset’s cashflows.
When hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic utility (γ = 1), the proportionality
coefficient C Λ (wt ) in the first relationship is negative, and those in the second and third relationships
are positive and negative, respectively.
We next determine the link between liquidity-related covariances and expected returns. Eq.
(4.12) shows that the expected excess return of an asset n is proportional to (Σu)n . This is exactly
proportional to the covariance between the asset’s return and aggregate illiquidity. Thus, aggregate
illiquidity is a priced risk factor that explains expected returns perfectly. Intuitively, assets are
priced by the portfolio of arbitrageurs, who are the marginal agents. Moreover, the covariance
between asset returns and aggregate illiquidity identifies that portfolio perfectly. This is because
(i) changes in aggregate illiquidity are driven by arbitrageur wealth, and (ii) the portfolio of trades
that arbitrageurs perform when their wealth changes is proportional to their existing portfolio and
impacts returns proportionately to the covariance with that portfolio.
The covariances between an asset’s illiquidity on one hand, and aggregate illiquidity or returns
on the other, are less informative about expected returns. Indeed, these covariances are proportional
to cashflow variance Σnn , which is only a component of (Σu)n . Thus, these covariances proxy for
the true priced risk factor but imperfectly so.
Corollary 5.2 In the cross-section of assets, expected excess returns are proportional to the covariance between returns and aggregate illiquidity. When hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have
logarithmic utility (γ = 1), the proportionality coefficient ΠΛ (wt ) in this relationship is negative.
The premium associated to the illiquidity risk factor is the expected excess return per unit of
covariance with the factor. Hence, it coincides with the proportionality coefficient ΠΛ (wt ) in the
32

relationship between expected excess returns and covariance of returns with aggregate illiquidity.
Both the premium of the illiquidity risk factor and the covariance of returns with aggregate
illiquidity vary over time in response to changes in arbitrageur wealth wt . When wt is low, illiquidity
is high and highly sensitive to changes in wealth. Because of that effect, assets’ covariance with
illiquidity is large in absolute value when wt is small, and decreases when wt increases. Conversely,
because the premium of the illiquidity risk factor is the expected excess return per unit of covariance,
it is small in absolute value when wt is small and increases when wt increases.9

Proposition 5.2 The common component C Λ (wt ) of assets’ covariance with aggregate illiquidity,
and the premium ΠΛ (wt ) of the illiquidity risk factor have the following properties:
(i) C Λ (wt ) converges to minus infinity when arbitrageur wealth wt goes to zero, and to zero when
wt goes to infinity.
(ii) ΠΛ (wt ) converges to zero when wt goes to zero. When hedgers are short-lived, ΠΛ (wt ) converges to minus infinity when wt goes to infinity.

Aggregate illiquidity explains expected returns perfectly in our model because it is a monotone
function of arbitrageur wealth wt . Hence, any other monotone function of wt would also have this
property. Recent empirical papers on intermediary asset pricing, such as Adrian, Etula, and Muir
(2014) and He, Kelly, and Manela (2017), have used the leverage of specific groups of financial
intermediaries as a risk factor, and have shown that it can price a large cross-section of assets. The
findings of these papers are exactly consistent with our model, insofar as leverage is a monotone
function of wt .10 Our modelling approach suggests that these findings may be explained even with
minimal frictions, e.g., no borrowing constraints. On the other hand, introducing frictions may
give better guidance on which function of wt to use as a risk factor.
9
Since the premium of the illiquidity risk factor depends on wt , it can be viewed as a function of illiquidity itself,
which is a monotone decreasing function of wt .
10
A natural measure of leverage in our model is the total risk exposure of arbitrageurs as a fraction of their wealth.
Since the exposure of arbitrageurs to the Brownian risks is σyt = (σSt + σ)Yt , (3.13) implies that leverage is

1⊤ σyt
α1⊤ σu
=
.
wt
αwt + A(wt )wt − F ′ (wt )wt
Lemma A.8, stated and proven in the Appendix, shows that this measure of leverage is decreasing in wt when hedgers
are short-lived and γ ≤ 1. Our numerical solutions suggest that this result holds more generally. A countercyclical leverage is consistent with the empirical finding of He, Kelly, and Manela (2017), and the theory of He and
Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), but is inconsistent with Adrian, Etula, and Muir
(2014).

33

6

Positive Supply

Our analysis so far assumes that the long-maturity assets are in zero supply (s = 0). Proposition 6.1
shows that this assumption is without loss of generality when hedgers are long-lived: risk-sharing
and asset prices are the same as when assets are in zero supply, provided that we replace u by s + u.
The intuition is that the stream of random endowments u⊤ dDt that a long-lived hedger receives
over time is equivalent to an endowment of u shares in the long-maturity assets. Thus, hedgers
generate a supply u, which is added to the supply s coming from the asset issuers. If instead asset
issuers generate no supply and hedgers generate s + u, then hedgers reduce their demand by s.
Their overall risk exposure, however, as well as the risk exposure of arbitrageurs and the prices of
the assets, remain the same.

Proposition 6.1 Suppose that hedgers are long-lived and that long-maturity assets are in positive
supply s. If (St , Xt , Yt ) is an equilibrium, then (St , Xt − s, Yt ) is an equilibrium when assets are
in zero supply (s = 0) and u is replaced by s + u. In both equilibria, the exposures of hedgers and
arbitrageurs to the Brownian shocks and the prices of the assets are the same.

When hedgers are short-lived, the equivalence between positive-supply and zero-supply equilibria does not hold. This is because any given short-lived hedger receives a random endowment
only in the next instant, so that endowment is not equivalent to one in the long-maturity assets.
Prices and expected returns, however, have the same general form as with zero supply.

Proposition 6.2 Suppose that hedgers are short-lived and that long-maturity assets are in positive
supply s. Then, the prices of the assets are given by
S(wt ) =

D̄
+ g(wt )Σ(s + u),
r

(6.1)

where the scalar function g(wt ) solves the ODE (C.44). The assets’ expected excess returns are
h
i
Et (dRt )
αA(wt )
⊤
=
(s
+
u)
Σ(s
+
u)f
(w
)
+
1
Σ(s + u),
t
dt
α + A(wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs
where
f (wt ) ≡

αg ′ (wt )
.
α + A(wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs
34

(6.2)

The price of an asset n, given in (6.1), is the sum of the price

D̄n
r

that would arise if arbitrageurs

had infinite wealth, and of a discount that is proportional to the asset’s covariance (Σ(s + u))n with
aggregate supply s + u. Changes in arbitrageur wealth affect the discount, and hence their effect
is proportional to the covariance. Since the asset’s expected return, given in (6.2), is proportional
to the same covariance, aggregate illiquidity is a priced risk factor and explains expected returns
perfectly, as in the case of zero supply. The equivalence between positive and zero supply does
not hold for short-lived hedgers because the proportionality coefficients (e.g., the function g(wt ))
depend on both s and u rather than only on their sum.

7

Conclusion

We develop a dynamic model of liquidity provision, in which hedgers can trade multiple risky
assets with arbitrageurs. Arbitrageurs have CRRA utility over consumption, and their capital
matters because of wealth effects. We strip out frictions such as asymmetric information and
borrowing constraints. At the same time, we depart from most frictionless asset-pricing models
by fixing the riskless rate and by suppressing wealth effects for the arbitrageurs’ counterparties.
Under this combination of assumptions, we prove general analytical results on equilibrium prices
and allocations. We characterize, in particular, how arbitrageurs’ risk aversion, the endogenous
risk that they generate, and the pricing of that risk, depend on arbitrageur wealth and hedger
characteristics. We also show that arbitrageur wealth is the single priced risk factor, and that
aggregate illiquidity, which declines in wealth, captures that factor.
One important extension of our model is to allow the supply u coming from hedgers to be
time-varying and stochastic. Such an extension would give our measure of illiquidity (5.1) stronger
empirical content because that measure is based on supply shocks. We could also compare our
measure to measures commonly used in empirical work, e.g., Amihud (2002) and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), and identify their properties when volume arises both because of supply shocks
affecting liquidity demanders and wealth effects affecting liquidity providers. In a similar spirit,
supply shocks may generate a tighter relationship between volatility and our measure of illiquidity.
Indeed, volatility in our model is driven by wealth effects of arbitrageurs and is hump-shaped in
wealth, while illiquidity is defined based on supply shocks affecting hedgers and is decreasing in
wealth.
Extending our model to stochastic u could strengthen our interpretation of arbitrageurs as
specialized liquidity providers. Indeed, a common view of liquidity providers (e.g., Grossman and
35

Miller (1988)) is that they absorb temporary imbalances between demand and supply. A natural
interpretation of these imbalances within our model is as shocks to u. In the presence of these
shocks, liquidity provision becomes distinct from sharing the aggregate risk in the economy, which
also includes the supply s coming from issuers. To model this idea, we would need to introduce
additional agents to the model who absorb part of s but are unable to identify shocks to u or trade
on them. Under such an extension, the result of Section 6 that s and u are symmetric in terms
of their effects on prices and expected returns would break down. Arbitrageur wealth or variables
related to it, such as illiquidity, may remain the single priced risk factor, however.

36

References
Acharya, Viral, Lars Lochstoer, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2013, Limits to arbitrage and hedging:
Evidence from commodity markets, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 441–465.
Acharya, Viral, and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, Asset pricing with liquidity risk, Journal of Financial
Economics 77, 375–410.
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial intermediaries and the cross-section
of asset returns, The Journal of Finance 69, 2557–2596.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects, Journal
of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Aragon, George, and Philip Strahan, 2012, Hedge funds as liquidity providers: Evidence from the
Lehman bankruptcy, Journal of Financial Economics 103, 570587.
Basak, Suleyman, and Anna Pavlova, 2013, Asset prices and institutional investors, American
Economic Review 103, 1728–1758.
Bhamra, Harjoat, and Raman Uppal, 2009, The effect of introducing a non-redundant derivative
on the volatility of stock-market returns when agents differ in risk aversion, Review of Financial
Studies 22, 2303–2330.
Bogachev, Vladimir, Nikolai Krylov, Michael Röckner, and Stanislav Shaposhnikov, 2015, FokkerPlanck-Kolmogorov Equations . vol. 207 (American Mathematical Society Providence).
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review
of Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial sector,
American Economic Review 104, 379–421.
Chabakauri, Georgy, 2013, Asset pricing with heterogeneous investors and portfolio constraints,
Review of Financial Studies 26, 3104–3141.
Chan, Lewis, and Leonid Kogan, 2002, Catching up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous preferences
and the dynamics of asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 110, 1255–1285.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity,
Journal of Financial Economics 56, 3–28.

37

Comerton-Forde, Carole, Terrence Hendershott, Charles Jones, Pamela Moulton, and Mark
Seasholes, 2010, Time variation in liquidity: The role of market-maker inventories and revenues,
Journal of Finance 65, 295–331.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets, Journal
of Financial Economics 86, 475–512.
Dumas, Bernard, 1989, Two-person dynamic equilibrium in the capital market, Review of Financial
Studies 2, 157–88.
Ehling, Paul, and Christian Heyerdahl-Larsen, 2013, Correlations, working paper Norwegian School
of Management BI.
Franzoni, Francesco, Eric Nowak, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, Private equity performance and
liquidity risk, Journal of Finance 67, 2341–2373.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Stavros Panageas, 2014, Young, old, conservative and bold: The implications of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Pedersen, 2011, Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the
law of one price, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1980–2022.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361–407.
, 2017, The dynamics of financially constrained arbitrage, Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Grossman, Sanford, and Merton Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of Finance
43, 617–637.
Hameed, Allaudeen, Wenjin Kang, and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Stock Market Declines and Liquidity,
Journal of Finance 65, 257–293.
Hasbrouck, Joel, and Duane Seppi, 2001, Common factors in prices, order flows and liquidity,
Journal of Financial Economics 59, 383–411.
He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from
many asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 1–35.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary asset pricing, American Economic
Review 103, 1–43.

38

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 2001, LAPM: A liquidity-based asset pricing model, Journal
of Finance 56, 1837–1867.
Huberman, Gur, and Dominika Halka, 2001, Systematic liquidity, Journal of Financial Research
24, 161–178.
Isaenko, Sergey, 2008, Equilibrium theory of stock market crashes, working paper Concordia University.
Johnson, Timothy, 2008, Volume, liquidity, and liquidity risk, Journal of Financial Economics 87,
388–417.
Jylha, Petri, and Matti Suominen, 2011, Speculative capital and currency carry trades, Journal of
Financial Economics 99, 60–75.
Kang, Wenjin, Geert Rouwenhorst, and Ke Tang, 2017, The role of hedgers and speculators in
liquidity provision to commodity futures markets, working paper Yale School of Management.
Kyle, Albert, 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1336.
Kyle, Albert S., and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of Finance 56, 1401–
1440.
Liu, Qi, Lei Lu, Bo Sun, and Hongjun Yan, 2017, A model of anomany discovery, working paper
DePaul University.
Longstaff, Francis, and Jiang Wang, 2015, Asset pricing and the credit market, Review of Financial
Studies 25, 3169–3215.
Merton, Robert, 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,
Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373–413.
Murray, Francis J, and Kenneth S Miller, 2013, Existence theorems for ordinary differential equations (Courier Corporation).
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal of
Political Economy 111, 642–685.
Sadka, Ronnie, 2010, Liquidity risk and the cross-section of hedge fund returns, Journal of Financial
Economics 98, 54–71.

39

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jiang Wang, 2013, Market liquidity—theory and empirical evidence, in
George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, ed.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance (North Holland, Amsterdam).
Wang, Jiang, 1996, The term structure of interest rates in a pure exchange economy with heterogeneous investors, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 75–110.
Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence trading with wealth effects: an amplification mechanism in financial
markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247–292.

40

APPENDIX
A

Proofs of the Results in Section 3

Proof of Proposition 3.1: The Bellman equation is


1
1
⊤
⊤
⊤
ρ̄V = max u(c̄t ) + Vv µvt + Vvv σvt σvt + Vw µwt + Vww σwt σwt + Vvw σvt σwt ,
c̄t ,xt
2
2

(A.1)

α

where u(c̄t ) = e− r c̄t , (µvt , σvt ) are the drift and diffusion of the hedger’s wealth vt , and (µwt , σwt )
are the drift and diffusion of arbitrageur wealth. Substituting dDt from (2.1) into (3.3) and (3.8),
we find that the drifts and diffusions are
⊤
µvt = rvt − c̄t + x⊤
t (D̄ − πt ) + u D̄,

(A.2)

σvt = σ(xt + u),

(A.3)

for the hedger, and
µwt = rwt − ct + yt⊤ (D̄ − πt ),

(A.4)

σwt = σyt ,

(A.5)

for arbitrageurs.
Substituting (3.4) and (A.2)-(A.5) into (A.1), we can write the latter equation as
n
h
i
α
⊤
− ρ̄e−[αvt +F (wt )] = max −e− r c̄t + αe−[αvt +F (wt )] rvt − c̄t + x⊤
(
D̄
−
π
)
+
u
D̄
t
t
c̄t ,xt

h
i
1
− α2 e−[αvt +F (wt )] (xt + u)⊤ Σ(xt + u) + F ′ (wt )e−[αvt +F (wt )] rwt − ct + yt⊤ (D̄ − πt )
2

 −[αvt +F (wt )] ⊤
1  ′′
′
2
′
−[αvt +F (wt )]
⊤
yt Σyt − αF (wt )e
(xt + u) Σyt .
+ F (wt ) − F (wt ) e
2

(A.6)

The first-order conditions with respect to c̄t and xt yield (3.5) and (3.6), respectively.

Proof of Proposition 3.2: We can write the hedger’s maximization problem as
n
α ⊤ o
max µvt − σvt
σvt ,
xt
2

(A.7)

41

where µvt is given by (A.2) with c̄t = 0, and σvt is given by (A.3). Using (A.2) and (A.3), we find
that the problem (A.7) is equivalent to
n
o
α
max x⊤
(D̄ − πt ) − (xt + u)⊤ Σ(xt + u) .
t
xt
2

(A.8)

The first-order condition with respect to xt yields (3.7).

Proof of Proposition 3.3: The Bellman equation is


1
1
⊤
⊤
⊤
ρV = max u(ĉt ) + Vŵ µŵt + Vŵŵ σŵt σŵt + Vw µwt + Vww σwt σwt + Vŵw σŵt σwt ,
ĉt ,ŷt
2
2
where u(ĉt ) =

ĉt1−γ
1−γ

(A.9)

for γ 6= 1 and u(ĉt ) = log(ĉt ) for γ = 1, (µŵt , σŵt ) are the drift and diffusion of

the arbitrageur’s own wealth ŵt , and (µwt , σwt ) are the drift and diffusion of the arbitrageurs’ aggregate wealth. The quantities (µwt , σwt ) are given by (A.4) and (A.5), respectively. The quantities
(µŵt , σŵt ) are given by the counterparts of these equations with hat signs, i.e.,
µŵt = r ŵt − ĉt + ŷt⊤ (D̄ − πt ),

(A.10)

σŵt = σ ŷt .

(A.11)

When γ 6= 1, we substitute (3.9), (A.4), (A.5), (A.10) and (A.11) into (A.9) to write it as
(

 1
ŵt1−γ
ĉ1−γ
t
ρq(wt )
= max
+ q(wt )ŵt−γ r ŵt − ĉt + ŷt⊤ (D̄ − πt ) − q(wt )γ ŵt−γ−1 ŷt⊤ Σŷt
ĉt ,ŷt
1−γ
1−γ
2
 1
ŵt1−γ 
ŵt1−γ ⊤
′
⊤
′′
+q (wt )
rwt − ct + yt (D̄ − πt ) + q (wt )
yt Σyt + q ′ (wt )ŵt−γ ŷt⊤ Σyt
1−γ
2
1−γ

)

. (A.12)

The first-order conditions with respect to ĉt and ŷt yield (3.11) and (3.12), respectively. When
γ = 1, we substitute (3.10), (A.4), (A.5), (A.10) and (A.11) into (A.9) to write it as




1
1 
1 ⊤
ρ
log(ŵt ) + q1 (wt ) = max log(ĉt ) +
r ŵt − ĉt + ŷt⊤ (D̄ − πt ) −
ŷ Σŷt
ĉt ,ŷt
ρ
ρŵt
2ρŵt2 t


 1
′
⊤
′′
⊤
+q1 (wt ) rwt − ct + yt (D̄ − πt ) + q1 (wt )yt Σyt .
(A.13)
2
The first-order conditions with respect to ĉt and ŷt yield (3.11) and (3.12), respectively, for q(wt ) =
1
ρ.

42

Proof of Proposition 3.4: Since in equilibrium ĉt = ct and ŵt = wt , (3.11) implies that
− γ1

ct = q(wt )

(A.14)

wt .

Substituting (3.17) and (3.18) into (3.12) and using the definition of A(wt ) in (3.14), we find
ŷt =

αŵt
u.
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]wt

(A.15)

When γ 6= 1, we substitute (3.11), (3.17), (3.18), (A.14), and (A.15) into the arbitrageur’s
Bellman equation (A.12). The terms in ŵt cancel, and the resulting equation is



α2 u⊤ ΣuA(wt )
(1 − γ)q(wt )
1− γ1
− γ1
′
ρq(wt ) =q(wt )
+ q (wt ) +
rwt − q(wt ) wt +
wt
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2


α2 u⊤ Σu
1 ′′
γ(1 − γ)q(wt ) 2(1 − γ)q ′ (wt )
.
(A.16)
+
q (wt ) −
+
2
wt
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
wt2
Dividing both sides by q(wt ) and rearranging, we find
 ′


1
q (wt ) 1 − γ 
− γ1
+
rwt − q(wt )− γ wt
ρ =q(wt ) +
q(wt )
wt

 ′


1 q ′′ (wt ) γ(1 − γ) 2(1 − γ)q ′ (wt )
q (wt ) 1 − γ
α2 u⊤ Σu
+
−
+
+
2
+
A(w
)
t
2 q(wt )
q(wt )wt
q(wt )
wt
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
wt2


1
=r + q(wt )− γ − r A(wt )wt
1
+
2



q ′′ (wt ) γ(1 + γ) 2γq ′ (wt )
+
− 2A(wt )2
−
q(wt )
q(wt )wt
wt2



α2 u⊤ Σu
,
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2

(A.17)

where the last step follows from the definition of A(wt ) in (3.14). Differentiating (3.14), we find
A′ (wt ) = −
=−

γ
q ′′ (wt ) q ′ (wt )2
+
−
q(wt )
q(wt )2
wt2
γ(1 + γ) q ′′ (wt ) 2γq ′ (wt )
−
+
+ A(wt )2 ,
q(wt )
q(wt )wt
wt2

(A.18)

where the second step follows again from (3.14). Substituting (A.18) into (A.17), we find



1 ′
α2 u⊤ Σu
−1
ρ = r + q(wt ) γ − r A(wt )wt −
A (wt ) + A(wt )2
.
2
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
Rearranging (A.19) and using the definition of z in (3.20), we find the ODE (3.21).
43

(A.19)

When γ = 1, q(wt ) =

1
ρ

and A(wt ) =

1
wt .

The ODE (3.21) holds for these values. The

arbitrageur’s Bellman equation (A.13) yields an ODE involving q1 (wt ). To derive it we substitute
(3.11), (3.17), (3.18), (A.14), (A.15), q(wt ) =

1
ρ

and A(wt ) =

1
wt

into (A.13). The terms in ŵt

cancel, and the resulting equation is


ρq1 (wt ) = log(ρ) + q1′ (wt ) +

1
+
2



q1′′ (wt ) −

1
ρwt2

1
ρwt







rwt − ρwt + h

α2 u⊤ Σu w1t
α+

1
wt

α2 u⊤ Σu

h

α+

1
wt




i2 
− F ′ (wt )

i2 .
− F ′ (wt )

(A.20)

Using (3.5) and (3.6), we can write the terms in the first line of the hedger’s Bellman equation
(A.6) as
h
i
α
⊤
− e− r c̄t + αe−[αvt +F (wt )] rvt − c̄t + x⊤
(
D̄
−
π
)
+
u
D̄
t
t
= −re−[αvt +F (wt )] + αe−[αvt +F (wt )]

hr

α

i
′
⊤
[log(r) − F (wt )] + u⊤ D̄ + αx⊤
Σ(x
+
u)
+
F
(w
)x
Σy
.
t
t
t
t
t

Substituting into (A.6), we can write that equation as
h
i
1
ρ̄ =r + rF (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ − α2 (xt − u)⊤ Σ(xt + u) − F ′ (wt ) rwt − ct + yt⊤ (D̄ − πt )
2
−


1  ′′
F (wt ) − F ′ (wt )2 yt⊤ Σyt + αF ′ (wt )u⊤ Σyt .
2

(A.21)

The last four terms in the right-hand side of (A.21) are equal to
h
i
1
1 2 ⊤
′
⊤
− α2 x⊤
Σx
+
α
u
Σu
−
F
(w
)
rw
−
c
+
A(w
)y
Σy
t
t
t
t
t t
t
t
2
2


1  ′′
F (wt ) − F ′ (wt )2 yt⊤ Σyt + αF ′ (wt )u⊤ Σyt
2
h
i
1
1
= − α2 yt⊤ Σyt + α2 u⊤ Σu − F ′ (wt ) rwt − ct + A(wt )yt⊤ Σyt
2
2

−

−


1  ′′
F (wt ) − F ′ (wt )2 yt⊤ Σyt + αF ′ (wt )u⊤ Σyt
2

= −F ′ (wt )(rwt − ct ) −

α2 u⊤ Σu
2 [α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2

h

2

i
× α2 − α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) + 2F ′ (wt )A(wt ) + F ′′ (wt ) − F ′ (wt )2 − 2F ′ (wt ) α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
= −F ′ (wt )(rwt − ct ) −

α2 u⊤ Σu {F ′′ (wt ) − A(wt ) [2α + A(wt ) − 2F ′ (wt )]}
,
2 [α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
44

where the first step follows from (3.13), the second from (3.15), and the third from (3.18). Substituting into (A.21) and simplifying, we find
ρ̄ =r + rF (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ − F ′ (wt )(rwt − ct )
−

α2 u⊤ Σu {F ′′ (wt ) − A(wt ) [2α + A(wt ) − 2F ′ (wt )]}
2 [α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2

.

(A.22)

Substituting ct from (A.14) and rearranging, we find (3.22).
Proof of Theorem 3.1: We start with the case where hedgers are short-lived. The second-order
ODE (3.21) for q(wt ) is equivalent to the system of two first-order ODEs for (q(wt ), A(wt )):


γ
q ′ (wt ) = q(wt )
− A(wt ) ,
(A.23)
wt
!
− γ1
2
q(w
)
[α
+
A(w
)]
−
r
t
t
A(wt )wt − 1 ,
(A.24)
A′ (wt ) = −A(wt )2 +
z
ρ−r
1

which follow from rearranging (3.14) and (3.21), respectively. Using the functions Q(wt ) ≡ q(wt )− γ

and R(wt ) ≡ A(wt )wt , we can convert the system of (A.23) and (A.24) into one for (Q(wt ), R(wt )):
Q′ (wt ) =

Q(wt ) [R(wt ) − γ]
,
γwt

R′ (wt )wt = R(wt ) [1 − R(wt )] +

(A.25)
[αwt + R(wt )]2
z




Q(wt ) − r
R(wt ) − 1 .
ρ−r

(A.26)

Since the function
(wt , Q, R) −→

R(1−R)
wt

+

Q(R−γ)
wt 
(αwt +R)2 Q−r
zwt
ρ−r R


−1

!

is continuously differentiable for (w, Q, R) ∈ (0, ∞) × (−∞, ∞) × (−∞, ∞), it is locally Lipschitz
in that set. Hence, for any ǫ > 0, the system of (A.25) and (A.26) has a unique solution in a
neighborhood of ǫ with initial conditions Q(ǫ) > 0 and R(ǫ) > 0. We can extend that solution
maximally to the left and to the right of ǫ, over an interval I. That solution satisfies Q(wt ) > 0 for
all wt ∈ I because of (A.25). We next derive properties of solutions to the system of (A.25) and
(A.26), as well as the existence result, through a number of lemmas.
Lemma A.1 (Limits at zero and infinity) Consider a solution Q(wt ) > 0 and R(wt ) to the
system of (A.25) and (A.26), defined over the interval (0, ∞).
45

• If limwt →0 R(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞), then this limit is equal to K if γ < K and to γ if γ > K. In the
former case limwt →0 Q(wt ) = 0 and in the latter case limwt →0 Q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞).
• If limwt →∞ Q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞), then this limit is equal to r +

ρ−r
γ ,

and limwt →∞ R(wt ) = γ.

Proof: To derive the limits at zero, we start by observing that the finiteness of limwt →0 R(wt )
implies that if limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt exists then it must be zero. Indeed, if limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt 6= 0, then
|R′ (wt )| ≥

ℓ
wt

for wt < ǫ and for positive ǫ and ℓ. Since, however, for wt < ǫ

R(wt ) = R(ǫ) +

Z

wt
ǫ

R′ (ŵt )dŵt ⇒ |R(wt ) − R(ǫ)| ≥

Z

ǫ
wt

ℓ
dŵt = ℓ log
ŵt



ǫ
wt



,

limwt →0 R(wt ) would be plus or minus infinity, a contradiction.
If limwt →0 R(wt ) < γ, then (A.25) implies limwt →0 Q(wt ) = ∞. The latter equation, to-

gether with (A.26) and limwt →0 R(wt ) 6= 0, imply limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt = ∞, a contradiction. If
limwt →0 R(wt ) > γ, then (A.25) implies limwt →0 Q(wt ) = 0 and (A.26) implies
′

lim R (wt )wt = lim R(wt )G

wt →0

wt →0




lim R(wt ) .

wt →0

(A.27)

Setting limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt = 0 in (A.27), and using limwt →0 R(wt ) 6= 0, we find G (limwt →0 R(wt )) =
0. Since the quadratic polynomial G(γ) defined in (3.23) has the unique positive root K, limwt →0 R(wt ) =
K. Suppose, finally, that limwt →0 R(wt ) = γ and limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt exists. Setting limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt =
0 in (A.26), we find
γ2
γ(1 − γ) +
z




limwt →0 Q(wt ) − r
γ+1 =0
ρ−r


γ limwt →0 Q(wt ) − r
⇔1−γ +
γ + 1 = 0.
z
ρ−r

(A.28)

Since K is the unique positive root of G(γ) and the quadratic term of G(γ) is negative, (A.28) has
a positive solution for limwt →0 Q(wt ) if γ > K.
If γ > K, then the case limwt →0 R(wt ) > γ is not possible because it would imply limwt →0 R(wt ) =
K < γ. Hence, limwt →0 R(wt ) = γ and limwt →0 Q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞). If γ < K, then the case
limwt →0 R(wt ) = γ is not possible because it would imply limwt →0 Q(wt ) < 0. Hence, limwt →0 R(wt ) =
K and limwt →0 Q(wt ) = 0.
46

To complete the proof for the limits at zero, we need to show that in the case limwt →0 R(wt ) =
γ, limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt exists. From (A.26), this is equivalent to showing that limwt →0 Q(wt ) exists. We proceed by contradiction and assume that limwt →0 Q(wt ) does not exist, and hence
lim supwt →0 Q(wt ) > lim inf wt →0 Q(wt ). This means that as wt goes to zero Q(wt ) oscillates more
and more rapidly between maxima and minima whose distance is bounded away from zero. Differentiating (A.25) at a maximizer and at a minimizer of Q(wt ), we find
 ′

R(wt ) − γ
R (wt ) R(wt ) − γ
′′
′
Q (wt ) = Q (wt )
+ Q(wt )
−
γwt
γwt
γwt2
=

=

Q(wt )R′ (wt )
γwt
h
Q(wt ) γ(1 − γ) +

(αwt +γ)2
z
γwt2



Q(wt )−r
ρ−r γ

i
−1

,

(A.29)

where the second step follows from R(wt ) = γ, which holds at a maximizer and a minimizer of
Q(wt ) because of (A.25), and the third step follows from (A.26). Since Q′′ (wt ) < 0 at a maximizer,
(A.29) implies
(αwt + γ)2
γ(1 − γ) +
z




Q(wt ) − r
γ − 1 < 0.
ρ−r

Taking the limit along a sequence of maximizers as wt goes to zero, we find
γ2
γ(1 − γ) +
z




lim supwt →0 Q(wt ) − r
γ − 1 ≤ 0.
ρ−r

(A.30)

Since Q′′ (wt ) > 0 at a minimizer, (A.29) likewise implies that
γ2
γ(1 − γ) +
z




lim inf wt →0 Q(wt ) − r
γ − 1 ≥ 0.
ρ−r

(A.31)

Eqs. (A.30) and (A.31) imply that lim supwt →0 Q(wt ) ≤ lim inf wt →0 Q(wt ), a contradiction.
Consider next the limits at infinity. If limwt →∞ R(wt ) exists, then it has to equal γ, otherwise
(A.25) would imply that limwt →∞ Q(wt ) is either zero or infinity. Moreover,
limwt →∞ Q(wt ) − r
ρ−r
γ − 1 = 0 ⇒ lim Q(wt ) = r +
,
wt →∞
ρ−r
γ
47

otherwise (A.26) would imply that limwt →0 R′ (wt ) is plus or minus infinity, which contradicts the
finiteness of limwt →0 R(wt ).
To complete the proof for the limits at infinity, we need to show that limwt →∞ R(wt ) exists. We proceed by contradiction and assume that limwt →∞ R(wt ) does not exist, and hence
lim supwt →∞ R(wt ) > lim inf wt →∞ R(wt ). Since R(wt ) oscillates between values close to lim supwt →∞ R(wt )
and values close to lim inf wt →∞ R(wt ), there exists ξ ∈ (lim inf wt →∞ R(wt ), lim supwt →∞ R(wt )) and
a sequence {wtn }n∈N converging to infinity such that R(wtn ) = ξ and R′ (wtn ) alternates between

being non-positive and non-negative. Eq. (A.26) implies, however, that for large n, the sign of
R′ (wtn ) is the same as of
limwt →∞ Q(wt ) − r
ξ − 1,
ρ−r
which does not change and can be chosen to be non-zero by varying ξ, a contradiction.
Lemma A.2 (Single crossing of solutions) Consider two solutions (Q1 (wt ), R1 (wt )) and
(Q2 (wt ), R2 (wt )) to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) with initial conditions Q1 (ǫ) > Q2 (ǫ) > 0
and R1 (ǫ) = R2 (ǫ) > 0 for ǫ > 0. The solutions compare as follows:
• Q1 (wt ) > Q2 (wt ) for all wt for which the solutions are defined.
• R1 (wt ) > R2 (wt ) for all wt > ǫ, and R1 (wt ) < R2 (wt ) for all wt < ǫ.
Proof: We first show the inequalities for wt > ǫ. Since Q1 (ǫ) > Q2 (ǫ) > 0, (A.26) implies
R1′ (ǫ) > R2′ (ǫ). Since, in addition, R1 (ǫ) = R2 (ǫ), R1 (wt ) > R2 (wt ) for wt close to and larger than
ǫ. Proceeding by contradiction, suppose that there exists wt > ǫ such that Q1 (wt ) ≤ Q2 (wt ) or
R1 (wt ) ≤ R2 (wt ). The infimum m within that set is strictly larger than ǫ since Q1 (wt ) > Q2 (wt )
and R1 (wt ) > R2 (wt ) for wt close to and larger than ǫ. Since the same inequalities hold for all
wt ∈ (ǫ, m), Q1 (m) ≥ Q2 (m) and R1 (m) ≥ R2 (m), with one of these inequalities being an equality.
Integrating (A.25) from ǫ to m, we find
log



Q(m)
Q(ǫ)



=

Z

m
ǫ

R(wt ) − γ
dwt .
γwt

(A.32)

Since R1 (wt ) > R2 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m), (A.32) implies Q1 (m) > Q2 (m). Hence, R1 (m) must
be equal to R2 (m). Since R1 (wt ) > R2 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m), R1′ (m) ≤ R2′ (m). Eq. (A.26) then
implies Q1 (m) ≤ Q2 (m), a contradiction.
48

The inequalities for wt < ǫ follow from a similar argument. Since R1 (ǫ) = R2 (ǫ) and R1′ (ǫ) >
R2′ (ǫ), R1 (wt ) < R2 (wt ) for wt close to and smaller than ǫ. Proceeding by contradiction, suppose
that there exists wt < ǫ such that Q1 (wt ) ≤ Q2 (wt ) or R1 (wt ) ≥ R2 (wt ). The supremum m within
that set is strictly smaller than ǫ since Q1 (wt ) > Q2 (wt ) and R1 (wt ) < R2 (wt ) for wt close to
and smaller than ǫ. Since the same inequalities hold for all wt ∈ (m, ǫ), Q1 (m) ≥ Q2 (m) and
R1 (m) ≤ R2 (m), with one of these inequalities being an equality. Since R1 (wt ) < R2 (wt ) for
all wt ∈ (m, ǫ), (A.32) implies Q1 (m) > Q2 (m). Hence, R1 (m) must be equal to R2 (m). Since

R1 (wt ) < R2 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (m, ǫ), R1′ (m) ≤ R2′ (m). Eq. (A.26) then implies Q1 (m) ≤ Q2 (m), a
contradiction.

Lemma A.3 (Existence in finite interval) For any ǫ > 0 and M > ǫ large enough, there exists
a unique solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) that is defined over an interval including [ǫ, M ]
and that satisfies R(ǫ) = max{γ, K}, R(M ) = γ and Q(ǫ) > 0.

Proof: We will consider solutions to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) with R(ǫ) = max{γ, K}, and
show that by varying Q(ǫ) we can vary R(M ) from negative values to large positive values. We
will then use a continuity argument to find a suitable Q(ǫ), and the single-crossing argument in
Lemma A.2 to show that such a Q(ǫ) is unique.
Consider the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) with initial conditions R(ǫ) =
max{γ, K} and Q(ǫ) = 0, and extend it maximally to the right of ǫ, over an interval I. Since
Q(ǫ) = 0, (A.25) implies Q(wt ) = 0 for all wt ∈ I. Eq. (A.25) implies that R′ (ǫ) has the same sign
as


(αw + max{γ, K})2 r max{γ, K}
+1
max{γ, K} (1 − max{γ, K}) −
z
ρ−r
(max{γ, K})2
< max{γ, K} (1 − max{γ, K}) −
z
= max{γ, K}G (max{γ, K}) .




r max{γ, K}
+1
ρ−r
(A.33)

If γ ≤ K, then (A.33) is equal to zero because K is a root of G(γ), as implied by (3.23). If γ > K,
then (A.33) is negative because K is the unique positive root of G(γ) and the quadratic term of
G(γ) is negative. In both cases, R′ (ǫ) < 0 and hence R(wt ) < max{γ, K} for wt close to and larger
than ǫ.

49

We next show that R(wt ) must lie between max{γ, K} and the unique negative root of G(γ),
which we denote by K ′ . Proceeding by contradiction, suppose that there exists wt > ǫ such that
R(wt ) > max{γ, K}. The infimum m within that set is strictly larger than ǫ since R(wt ) <
max{γ, K} for wt close to and larger than ǫ. Since R(wt ) < max{γ, K} for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m),

R(m) = max{γ, K}, and hence R′ (m) ≥ 0. Eq. (A.25), however, implies that R′ (m) has the same
sign as

(αm + max{γ, K})2
max{γ, K} (1 − max{γ, K}) −
z




r max{γ, K}
+1 ,
ρ−r

which is negative from the previous argument, a contradiction. Hence, R(wt ) ≤ {γ, K} for all

wt ∈ I. To show that R(wt ) ≥ K ′ for all wt ∈ I, we similarly proceed by contradiction and
suppose that there exists wt > ǫ such that R(wt ) < K ′ . The infimum m within that set is strictly

larger than ǫ, and satisfies R(m) = K ′ and R′ (m) ≤ 0. Eq. (A.25), however, implies that R′ (m)
has the same sign as


(αm + K ′ )2 rK ′
K 1−K −
+1
z
ρ−r


 K ′2 rK ′
> K′ 1 − K′ −
+1
z
ρ−r

= K ′ G K ′ = 0,
′

′



where the second step follows because G(K ′ ) = 0 implies

rK ′
ρ−r

+1 =

z(K ′ −1)
K′

> 0, and the fourth

step follows from K ′ being a root of G(γ). Hence R′ (m) > 0, a contradiction.
Since R(wt ) lies within a bounded interval, the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26)
with initial conditions R(ǫ) = max{γ, K} and Q(ǫ) = 0 can be extended to infinity, i.e., I = [ǫ, ∞).
Since, R(wt ) is bounded and Q(wt ) = 0 for all wt ∈ I,
r limwt →∞ R(wt )
r−ρ
+ 1 = 0 ⇒ lim R(wt ) =
< 0,
wt →∞
ρ−r
r
otherwise (A.26) would imply that limwt →∞ R′ (wt ) is plus or minus infinity, which contradicts the
boundedness of R(wt ).
Consider next the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) with initial conditions R(ǫ) =
max{γ, K} and Q(ǫ) = r +

(1+z)(ρ−r)
max{γ,K} ,

and extend it maximally to the right of ǫ, over an interval
50

I. Eq. (A.25) implies that R′ (ǫ) has the same sign as
(αw + max{γ, K})2
max{γ, K} (1 − max{γ, K}) +
z




Q(ǫ) − r
max{γ, K} − 1
ρ−r

= max{γ, K} (1 − max{γ, K}) + (αw + max{γ, K})2
> max{γ, K} (1 − max{γ, K}) + (max{γ, K})2 = max{γ, K} > 0,

(A.34)

where the second step follows from the definition of Q(ǫ). Hence, R′ (ǫ) > 0. We next show that
R′ (wt ) > 0 for all wt ∈ I. Proceeding by contradiction, suppose that there exists wt > ǫ such that

R′ (wt ) ≤ 0. The infimum m within that set is strictly larger than ǫ, and satisfies R′ (m) = 0. Since
R′ (wt ) > 0 for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m), R(wt ) > max{γ, K} and hence (A.25) implies Q(m) > Q(ǫ). Eq.
(A.25) implies that R′ (m) has the same sign as


[αm + R(m)]2 Q(m) − r
R(m) − 1
R(m)[1 − R(m)] +
z
ρ−r


[αm + R(m)]2 Q(ǫ) − r
> R(m)[1 − R(m)] +
R(m) − 1
z
ρ−r


[αm + R(m)]2 (1 + z)R(m)
= R(m)[1 − R(m)] +
−1
z
max{γ, K}
> R(m)[1 − R(m)] + [αm + R(m)]2
> R(m)[1 − R(m)] + R(m)2 = R(m) > 0,

(A.35)

where the second step follows from Q(m) > Q(ǫ), the third step from the definition of Q(ǫ), and
the fourth step from R(m) > max{γ, K}. Hence, R′ (m) > 0, a contradiction. Since R′ (wt ) > 0
for all wt ∈ I, R(wt ) increases to a limit, which must be infinite. Indeed, if the limit were

finite, limwt →∞ R′ (wt ) = 0, in which case (A.26) would imply limwt →∞ Q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞). This is a
contradiction: because limwt →∞ R(wt ) > γ, (A.25) implies limwt →∞ Q(wt ) = ∞. Note that R(wt )
can reach its infinite limit when wt goes to a finite value m, in which case the interval I is bounded.
We denote by Γ(Q) the value of R(M ) for the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26)
with initial conditions R(ǫ) = max{γ, K} and Q(ǫ) = Q. If limwt →m R(wt ) = ∞ for m ≤ M , then
we set R(M ) = ∞. For large enough M , the function Γ(Q) satisfies Γ(0) < 0 because for the

solution with initial conditions R(ǫ) = max{γ, K} and Q(ǫ) = 0, limwt →∞ R(wt ) = r−ρ
r < 0. The


function Γ(Q) also satisfies Γ r + (1+z)(ρ−r)
> γ because for the solution with initial conditions
max{γ,K}

R(ǫ) = max{γ, K} and Q(ǫ) = r +

(1+z)(ρ−r)
max{γ,K} ,

limwt →m R(wt ) = ∞, where m > ǫ is the upper end
51

of the interval I. Lemma A.2 implies that for Q1 > Q2 , Γ(Q1 ) > Γ(Q2 ) if Γ(Q2 ) is finite, and
Γ(Q1 ) = ∞ if Γ(Q2 ) = ∞. Continuity of the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) with
respect to the initial conditions implies that Γ(Q) is continuous in Q at any point where Γ(Q) is
finite. Hence, Γ(Q) is finite in an interval [0, Q̄) and is infinite in [Q̄, ∞). Moreover, it is continuous
an increasing in Q ∈ [0, Q̄), and satisfies limQ→Q̄ Γ(Q) = ∞. Therefore, for large enough M , there
exists a unique Q̂ ∈ [0, Q̄) such that Γ(Q̂) = γ. The solution to the the system of (A.25) and (A.26)
with initial conditions R(ǫ) = max{γ, K} and Q(ǫ) = Q̂ has the properties in the lemma.

Lemma A.4 (Bounds) For any ǫ > 0 and M > ǫ large enough, the solution to the system of
(A.25) and (A.26) constructed in Lemma A.3 satisfies the following inequalities:

• If γ < 1, then 1 > R(wt ) > γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ).
• If γ > 1, then 1 < R(wt ) < γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ).
Proof: Consider first the case γ < 1. To show that R(wt ) < 1 for all wt ∈ [ǫ, M ], we proceed by
contradiction and assume that there exists wt ∈ (ǫ, M ) such that R(wt ) ≥ 1. In that case, R(wt )
reaches its maximum value over the closed interval [ǫ, M ] at an interior point m, and R(m) ≥ 1.
Since m is interior, R′ (m) = 0, and (A.26) implies


[αm + R(m)]2 Q(m) − r
R(m)[1 − R(m)] +
R(m) − 1 = 0
z
ρ−r
⇒

Q(m) − r
zR(m)[R(m) − 1]
R(m) − 1 =
≥ 0.
ρ−r
[αm + R(m)]2

(A.36)

Differentiating (A.26) at m and using R′ (m) = 0, we find


2α[αm + R(m)] Q(m) − r
[αm + R(m)]2 Q′ (m)R(m)
′′
R (m)m =
R(m) − 1 +
z
ρ−r
z
ρ−r


2α[αm + R(m)] Q(m) − r
[αm + R(m)]2 Q(m)[R(m) − γ]R(m)
=
R(m) − 1 +
,
z
ρ−r
z
(ρ − r)γm
(A.37)
where the second step follows from (A.25). The first term in (A.37) is non-negative because of
(A.36). The second term is positive because R(m) ≥ 1 > γ. Hence, R′′ (m) > 0, which contradicts
m being an interior maximizer of R(wt ).
52

To show that R(wt ) > γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ), we proceed by contradiction and assume that there
exists wt ∈ (ǫ, M ) such that R(wt ) ≤ γ. In that case, R(wt ) takes its minimum value over the closed
interval [ǫ, M ] at an interior point m (and possibly at ǫ and M as well), and R(m) ≤ γ. Suppose first
that R(m) = γ. Proceeding as in (A.36) we find

Q(m)−r
ρ−r R(m) − 1

< 0, and proceeding as in (A.37)

we find R′′ (m) < 0, which contradicts m being an interior minimizer of R(wt ). Suppose next that
R(m) < γ. Since R(ǫ) ≥ γ and R(M ) = γ, there exist (wt , ŵt ) such that ǫ ≤ wt < m < ŵt ≤ M
and R(wt ) = R(ŵt ) = γ. The supremum m1 and the infimum m2 within the corresponding sets
satisfy m1 < m < m2 , R(m1 ) = R(m2 ) = γ, R(wt ) < γ for all wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ), R′ (m1 ) ≤ 0 and

R′ (m2 ) ≥ 0. Using (A.26) and R(m1 ) = R(m2 ) = γ, we find that the inequalities R′ (m1 ) ≤ 0 and

R′ (m2 ) ≥ 0 imply

(αm1 + γ)2
z


Q(m1 ) − r
Q(m1 ) − r
γ−1 ≤0⇒
γ−1≤
ρ−r
ρ−r


(αm2 + γ)2 Q(m2 ) − r
Q(m2 ) − r
γ(1 − γ) +
γ−1 ≥0⇒
γ−1≥
z
ρ−r
ρ−r

γ(1 − γ) +



zγ(γ − 1)
,
(αm1 + γ)2

(A.38)

zγ(γ − 1)
,
(αm2 + γ)2

(A.39)

respectively. Since γ < 1, (A.38) and (A.39) imply Q(m1 ) < Q(m2 ). This is a contradiction
because (A.26) and R(wt ) < γ for all wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ) imply Q(m1 ) > Q(m2 ).
The inequalities in the case γ > 1 follow from similar arguments. Suppose, by contradiction,
that there exists wt ∈ (ǫ, M ) such that R(wt ) ≥ γ. In that case, R(wt ) reaches its maximum
value over the closed interval [ǫ, M ] at an interior point m (and possibly at ǫ and M as well), and
R(m) ≥ γ. Proceeding as in (A.36) we find

Q(m)−r
ρ−r R(m)

− 1 > 0, and proceeding as in (A.37) we

find R′′ (m) > 0, which contradicts m being an interior maximizer of R(wt ).
Suppose next, by contradiction, that there exists wt ∈ (ǫ, M ) such that R(wt ) ≤ 1. In that
case, R(wt ) reaches its minimum value over the closed interval [ǫ, M ] at an interior point m, and
R(m) ≤ 1. Suppose first that R(m) = 1. Proceeding as in (A.36) we find

Q(m)−r
ρ−r R(m)

− 1 = 0,

and proceeding as in (A.37) we find R′′ (m) < 0, which contradicts m being an interior minimizer
of R(wt ). Suppose next that R(m) < 1. Since R(ǫ) = R(M ) = γ > 1, there exist (wt , ŵt ) such that
ǫ < wt < m < ŵt < M and R(wt ) = R(ŵt ) = 1. The supremum m1 and the infimum m2 within the
corresponding sets satisfy m1 < m < m2 , R(m1 ) = R(m2 ) = 1, R(wt ) < 1 for all wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ),
R′ (m1 ) ≤ 0 and R′ (m2 ) ≥ 0. Using (A.26) and R(m1 ) = R(m2 ) = 1, we find that the inequalities

53

R′ (m1 ) ≤ 0 and R′ (m2 ) ≥ 0 imply
Q(m1 ) − r
− 1 ≤ 0,
ρ−r

(A.40)

Q(m2 ) − r
γ − 1 ≥ 0,
ρ−r

(A.41)

respectively, and hence Q(m1 ) ≤ Q(m2 ). This is a contradiction because (A.26) and R(wt ) < 1 < γ
for all wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ) imply Q(m1 ) > Q(m2 ).
Lemma A.5 (Existence in [0, ∞]) A solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26), defined over
the interval (0, ∞), and such that limwt →0 R(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞) and limwt →∞ Q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞), exists.
This solution satisfies the inequalities in Lemma A.4 for all wt ∈ (0, ∞).
Proof: We will construct the solution over (0, ∞) as the simple limit of solutions over finite intervals
[ǫ, M ]. We first derive the limit when M goes to infinity, holding ǫ > 0 constant, and then derive
the limit of those limits when ǫ goes to zero.
Fix ǫ > 0 and denote by (Qǫ,M (wt ), Rǫ,M (wt )) the solution constructed in Lemma A.3 for
M > ǫ large enough. Consider first the case γ < 1. Since for M2 > M1 , Rǫ,M2 (M1 ) > γ (as
implied by Lemma A.4) and Rǫ,M1 (M1 ) = γ, Lemma A.2 implies Qǫ,M2 (ǫ) > Qǫ,M1 (ǫ), and hence
Qǫ,M2 (wt ) > Qǫ,M1 (wt ) and Rǫ,M2 (wt ) > Rǫ,M1 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M1 ]. This means that the
functions M → Qǫ,M (wt ) and M → Rǫ,M (wt ), defined for given wt > ǫ and for M > wt , are
increasing. The latter function is bounded above by one (as implied by Lemma A.4). The former
′
function is also bounded above. Indeed, since Rǫ,M (M ) = γ and Rǫ,M
(M ) ≤ 0 (which follows from

Rǫ,M (M ) = γ and Rǫ,M (wt ) > γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M )), (A.26) implies
Qǫ,M (M ) − r
zγ(γ − 1)
ρ−r
γ−1≤
< 0 ⇒ Qǫ,M (M ) < r +
.
2
ρ−r
(αM + γ)
γ
Since, in addition, Qǫ,M (wt ) is increasing in wt ∈ (ǫ, M ) (which follows from (A.25) and because
Rǫ,M (wt ) > γ), Qǫ,M (wt ) < r +

ρ−r
γ

for all wt < M . Being increasing and bounded above, the

functions M → Qǫ,M (wt ) and M → Rǫ,M (wt ) converge to limits when M goes to infinity. These
limits, denoted by Qǫ (wt ) and Rǫ (wt ), respectively, satisfy r+ ρ−r
γ ≥ Qǫ (wt ) ≥ 0 and 1 ≥ Rǫ (wt ) ≥ γ
for all wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞).
54

Consider next the case γ < 1. Since for M2 > M1 , Rǫ,M2 (M1 ) < γ (as implied by Lemma A.4)
and Rǫ,M1 (M1 ) = γ, Lemma A.2 implies Qǫ,M2 (ǫ) < Qǫ,M1 (ǫ), and hence Qǫ,M2 (wt ) < Qǫ,M1 (wt )
and Rǫ,M2 (wt ) < Rǫ,M1 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M1 ]. This means that the functions M → Qǫ,M (wt )
and M → Rǫ,M (wt ) are decreasing. The former function is bounded below by zero and the latter
function is bounded below by one (as implied by Lemma A.4). Hence, the two functions converge
to limits when M goes to infinity. These limits, denoted by Qǫ (wt ) and Rǫ (wt ), respectively, satisfy


z(γ−1)
r + ρ−r
1
+
≥ Qǫ (wt ) ≥ 0 and 1 ≤ Rǫ (wt ) ≤ γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞). The upper bound
γ
γ
′
on Qǫ (wt ) can be derived by noting that since Rǫ,M (ǫ) = γ and Rǫ,M
(ǫ) ≤ 0 (which follows from

Rǫ,M (ǫ) = γ and Rǫ,M (wt ) < γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M )), (A.26) implies
Qǫ,M (ǫ) − r
zγ(γ − 1)
ρ−r
γ−1≤
⇒ Qǫ,M (ǫ) < r +
2
ρ−r
(αǫ + γ)
γ



z(γ − 1)
1+
γ



.

Since, in addition, Qǫ,M (wt ) is decreasing in wt ∈ (ǫ, M ) (which follows from (A.25) and because


z(γ−1)
+
1
for all wt > ǫ.
Rǫ,M (wt ) < γ), Qǫ,M (wt ) < r + ρ−r
γ
γ
We next show that the limits Qǫ (wt ) and Rǫ (wt ), viewed as functions of wt , are solutions to the
system of (A.25) and (A.26). We denote by Q∗ǫ (wt ) and Rǫ∗ (wt ) the limits of the functions M →

′
Q′ǫ,M (wt ) and M → Rǫ,M
(wt ), respectively. These limits exist because the limits of M → Qǫ,M (wt )
′
and M → Rǫ,M (wt ) exist, and because (Q′ǫ,M (wt ), Rǫ,M
(wt )) are linked to (Qǫ,M (wt ), Rǫ,M (wt ))

through (A.25) and (A.26). Consider wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞) and a small neighborhood B around it. Since
(Qǫ,M (m), Rǫ,M (m)) are bounded uniformly for all m ∈ B and for all M , (A.25) and (A.26) imply
′′ (m)), as
′
(m)). The same is also true for (Q′′ǫ,M (m), Rǫ,M
that the same is true for (Q′ǫ,M (m), Rǫ,M

can be seen by differentiating (A.25) and (A.26). Denoting the bound on Q′′ǫ,M (m) by Q̄ǫ,B and
using the intermediate value theorem, we find that for all m ∈ B,
Qǫ,M (m) − Qǫ,M (wt )
− Q′ǫ,M (wt ) = Q′ǫ,M (m′ ) − Q′ǫ,M (wt ) ≤ Q̄ǫ,B |m′ − wt | < Q̄ǫ,B |m − wt |,
m − wt
(A.42)
where m′ is between m and wt . Taking limits in (A.42) when M goes to infinity, we find
Qǫ (m) − Qǫ (wt )
− Q∗ǫ (wt ) ≤ Q̄ǫ,B |m − wt |.
m − wt
55

(A.43)

Eq. (A.43) implies that Qǫ (wt ) is differentiable in wt and its derivative Q′ǫ (wt ) is Q∗ǫ (wt ). Likewise,
Rǫ (wt ) is differentiable in wt and its derivative Rǫ′ (wt ) is Rǫ∗ (wt ). Taking limits in (A.25) and
(A.26), written for (Qǫ,M (wt ), Rǫ,M (wt )), when M goes to infinity, we find that (Qǫ (wt ), Rǫ (wt ))
are solutions to (A.25) and (A.26).
We next take the limits of Qǫ (wt ) and Rǫ (wt ) when ǫ goes to zero, and show that these limits,
denoted by Q(wt ) and R(wt ), respectively, are bounded and solve the system of (A.25) and (A.26).
The steps parallel those when limits are taken for given ǫ and for M going to infinity, but additional
complications arise. Consider first the case K < γ < 1. Since for ǫ2 < ǫ1 and for M large enough,
Rǫ2 ,M (ǫ1 ) > γ (as implied by Lemma A.4) and Rǫ1 ,M (ǫ1 ) = γ, Lemma A.2 (applied with M
rather than ǫ as starting value) implies Qǫ2 ,M (M ) < Qǫ1 ,M (M ), and hence Qǫ2 ,M (wt ) < Qǫ1 ,M (wt )
and Rǫ2 ,M (wt ) > Rǫ1 ,M (wt ) for all wt ∈ [ǫ1 , M ). Taking limits when M goes to infinity, we find
Qǫ2 (wt ) ≤ Qǫ1 (wt ) and Rǫ2 (wt ) ≥ Rǫ1 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ1 , ∞). Hence, the functions ǫ → Qǫ (wt )
and ǫ → Rǫ (wt ), defined for given wt > ǫ, are increasing and decreasing, respectively. Their limits
and bounds are constructed as in the first part of the proof (M goes to infinity).
Consider next the case γ > 1. Since for ǫ2 < ǫ1 and for M large enough, Rǫ2 ,M (ǫ1 ) < γ (as
implied by Lemma A.4) and Rǫ1 ,M (ǫ1 ) = γ, Lemma A.2 implies Qǫ2 ,M (M ) > Qǫ1 ,M (M ), and hence
Qǫ2 ,M (wt ) > Qǫ1 ,M (wt ) and Rǫ2 ,M (wt ) < Rǫ1 ,M (wt ) for all wt ∈ [ǫ1 , M ). Taking limits when M
goes to infinity, we find Qǫ2 (wt ) ≥ Qǫ1 (wt ) and Rǫ2 (wt ) ≤ Rǫ1 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ1 , ∞). Hence,
the functions ǫ → Qǫ (wt ) and ǫ → Rǫ (wt ), defined for given wt > ǫ, are decreasing and increasing,
respectively. Their limits and bounds are constructed as in the first part of the proof.
Consider finally the case γ < K. This case is trickier: unlike when K < γ < 1, Rǫ2 ,M (ǫ1 ) for
ǫ2 < ǫ1 can be larger or smaller than max{γ, K}, and hence can be larger or smaller than Rǫ1 ,M (ǫ1 ).
The key observation is that if there exist ǫ2 < ǫ1 such that Rǫ2 ,M (ǫ1 ) is larger than max{γ, K}, then
the function ǫ → Rǫ,M (ǫ1 ) is decreasing for ǫ < ǫ2 . Indeed, if that function were not decreasing,
then there would exist ǫ4 < ǫ3 ≤ ǫ2 such that Rǫ3 ,M (wt ) and Rǫ4 ,M (wt ) would cross twice, for a
wt < M and for wt = M , contradicting Lemma A.2. Hence, there are two possibilities for ǫ close
to zero: either the function ǫ → Rǫ,M (ǫ1 ) is decreasing, or it is increasing. In either case, we follow
the first part of the proof to construct the limits and bounds. The argument that the limits Q(wt )
and R(wt ), viewed as functions of wt , are solutions to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) is as in the
first part of the proof, for all values of γ.
We next show that limwt →0 R(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞) and limwt →∞ Q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞). Consider first the
56

limits at zero. When γ < 1, R(wt ) ≥ γ and hence (A.25) implies that Q(wt ) is increasing. When
γ < 1, R(wt ) ≤ γ and hence (A.25) implies that Q(wt ) is decreasing. In both cases, Q(wt ) is
monotone, and because it is bounded it converges to a finite limit when wt goes to zero. Suppose,
by contradiction, that limwt →0 R(wt ) does not exist. This means that as wt goes to zero R(wt )
oscillates more and more rapidly between maxima and minima whose distance is bounded away
from zero. Since R′ (wt ) = 0 at the maxima, (A.26) implies
1 − lim sup R(wt ) −
wt →0

lim supwt →0 R(wt )
z




limwt →0 Q(wt ) − r
lim sup R(wt ) + 1 = 0,
ρ−r
wt →0

(A.44)

after taking the limit along a sequence of maxima as wt goes to zero. Likewise, since R′ (wt ) = 0 at
the minima, (A.26) implies
lim inf wt →0 R(wt )
1 − lim inf R(wt ) −
wt →0
z




limwt →0 Q(wt ) − r
lim inf R(wt ) + 1 = 0,
wt →0
ρ−r

(A.45)

after taking the limit along a sequence of minima as wt goes to zero. Eqs. (A.44) and (A.45) imply
lim supwt →0 R(wt ) = lim inf wt →0 R(wt ), a contradiction. Since R(wt ) ≥ min{γ, 1}, limwt →0 R(wt ) ∈
(0, ∞). Consider next the limits at infinity. Since Q(wt ) is bounded and monotone, it converges
to a finite limit, which is non-negative because Q(wt ) is non-negative. If limwt →∞ Q(wt ) = 0, then
(A.26) and max{γ, 1} ≥ R(wt ) ≥ min{γ, 1} for all wt ∈ (0, ∞) imply limwt →∞ R′ (wt ) = −∞, which
contradicts R(wt ) ≥ min{γ, 1}. Hence, limwt →∞ Q(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞).
We finally show that the inequalities in Lemma A.4 hold. The steps are similar to those in
Lemma A.4, after replacing ǫ by zero and M by infinity, and noting that the boundary conditions for
R(wt ) remain the same because of Lemma A.1. The only change concerns the proof that R(wt ) > γ
for γ < 1. If in that proof the supremum m1 is zero, limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt = 0 implies that (A.38)
holds as an equality.

Lemma A.6 (Decreasing A(wt )) For the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) constructed
in Lemma A.5, A(wt ) is decreasing. The same property holds for the solution constructed in Lemma
A.3, if γ < 1. If γ > 1, then the same property holds if, in addition, M is large enough and
wt ∈ [ǫ, M0 ] for any M0 > ǫ which is kept fixed as M grows.
Proof: We first show the property for the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) constructed
in Lemma A.5. We next extend the proof to the solution constructed in Lemma A.3.
57

Suppose, by contradiction, that there exist m2 > m1 > 0 such that A(m1 ) ≤ A(m2 ). If

A(m1 ) < A(m2 ), then there exists m3 ∈ (m1 , m2 ) such that A′ (m3 ) > 0. Consider the set of

wt < m3 such that A′ (ŵt ) > 0 for all ŵt ∈ (wt , m3 ). The infimum m within that set is strictly smaller

than m3 since A′ (wt ) > 0 for all wt close to m3 . It is also positive because limwt →0 A(wt ) = ∞

(which follows from limwt →0 R(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞)), and it satisfies A′ (m) = 0 and A′′ (m) ≥ 0. Consider
next the set of wt > m3 such that A′ (ŵt ) > 0 for all ŵt ∈ (m3 , wt ). The supremum m̂ within

that set is strictly larger than m3 . It is also finite because limwt →0 A(wt ) = 0 (which follows from
limwt →0 R(wt ) ∈ (0, ∞)), and it satisfies A′ (m̂) = 0 and A′′ (m̂) ≤ 0. Moreover, by the definition of
m and m̂, A′ (wt ) > 0 for all wt ∈ (m, m̂).

If A(m1 ) = A(m2 ), then points m̂ > m > 0 with the properties A′ (m) = A′ (m̂) = 0, A′′ (m) ≥ 0,

A′′ (m̂) ≤ 0, and A′ (wt ) > 0 for all wt ∈ (m, m̂), can again be constructed, except that the latter

inequality can be weak. To perform the construction, we distinguish the case where there exists
wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ) such that A(wt ) 6= A(m1 ) = A(m2 ) and replace m1 or m2 by wt , and the case where
A(wt ) = A(m1 ) = A(m2 ) for all wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ) and take m = m1 and m̂ = m2 .
Using Q(wt ) instead of q(wt ), we can write (A.24) as
[α + A(wt )]2
A (wt ) = −A(wt ) +
z
′

2




Q(wt ) − r
A(wt )wt − 1 .
ρ−r

(A.46)

Differentiating (A.46) at a point where A′ (wt ) = 0, and using (A.25), we find


R(wt )−γ
2
Q(w
)
t
Q(w
)
−
r
[α
+
A(w
)]
γwt
t
t

A(wt )wt +
A(wt ) .
A′′ (wt ) =
z
ρ−r
ρ−r
Hence, the sign of A′′ (wt ) at such a point is the same as of
H(wt ) ≡ Q(wt )

R(wt ) − γ
Q(wt )R(wt )
+ Q(wt ) − r =
− r.
γ
γ

58

(A.47)

Using (A.25) and (A.26), we find that for wt ∈ (m, m̂),
Q′ (wt )R(wt ) + Q(wt )R′ (wt )
γ



Q(wt ) [R(wt ) − γ]R(wt )
[αwt + R(wt )]2 Q(wt ) − r
=
+ R(wt )[1 − R(wt )] +
R(wt ) − 1
γwt
γ
z
ρ−r


Q(wt ) [R(wt ) − γ]R(wt )
2
≥
+ R(wt )[1 − R(wt )] + R(wt )
γwt
γ

H ′ (wt ) =

=

Q(wt )R(wt )2
> 0,
γ 2 wt

where the third step follows by using A′ (wt ) ≥ 0 for wt ∈ (m, m̂) and (A.46). Since A′′ (m) ≥ 0,
H(m) ≥ 0. Since H(wt ) is increasing in (m, m̂), H(m̂) > 0, and hence A′′ (m̂) > 0, a contradiction.

We next extend the proof to the solution constructed in Lemma A.3. Suppose that γ < 1. Since
R(ǫ) = max{γ, K} ≥ R(M ) = γ, there exists mǫ > ǫ such that R(mǫ ) = R(ǫ) and R′ (mǫ ) ≤ 0.

Since R′ (mǫ ) ≤ 0, (A.26) implies

Q(ǫ) − r
Q(mǫ ) − r
R(mǫ ) − 1 < 0 ⇒
R(mǫ ) − 1 < 0,
ρ−r
ρ−r
where the second step follows because Q(wt ) is increasing for γ < 1. Eq. (A.46) then implies
A′ (ǫ) < 0. Since, R(wt ) > R(M ) = γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ), R′ (M ) ≤ 0 and hence A′ (M ) < 0.

Using A′ (ǫ) < 0 and A′ (M ) < 0, we can define m and m̂ by proceeding as above, and derive a
contradiction. Suppose next that γ > 1. Since R(wt ) < R(ǫ) = γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ), R′ (ǫ) ≤ 0

and hence A′ (ǫ) < 0. Since, in addition, for any given wt , the values of Q(wt ) and R(wt ) under
the solution over [ǫ, M ] converge to the values under the solution over [ǫ, ∞) when M goes to
infinity, A(M0 ) is close to its positive limit under the solution over [ǫ, ∞) for M large enough. It
is, therefore, larger than A(M ) =

γ
M

for M large enough. Using A′ (ǫ) < 0 and A(M0 ) > A(M ), we

can define m and m̂ by proceeding as above, and derive a contradiction.
The results in Theorem 3.1 for the case of short-lived hedgers follow from the lemmas proved
so far. Lemma A.5 yields the existence of a solution with the required boundary conditions. The
same lemma yields the comparisons between A(wt ),

1
wt

and

γ
wt .

The monotonicity of q(wt ) follows

from these comparisons and (A.23). Lemma A.6 yields the monotonicity of A(wt ). Lemma A.1
yields the limits at zero and infinity.

59

We next turn to the case where hedgers are long-lived. The system of ODEs consists of (A.25),
[αwt + R(wt ) − F ′ (wt )wt ]2
R (wt )wt = R(wt ) [1 − R(wt )] +
z
′




Q(wt ) − r
R(wt ) − 1 , (A.48)
ρ−r

which replaces (A.26), and
1=

rF (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ + ρ − ρ̄ Q(wt ) − r ′
+
F (wt )wt
ρ−r
ρ−r

z F ′′ (wt )wt2 − R(wt ) [2αwt + R(wt ) − 2F ′ (wt )wt ]
−
,
[αwt + R(wt ) − F ′ (wt )wt ]2
− γ1

which is (3.22) written in terms of Q(wt ) = q(wt )

(A.49)

and R(wt ) = A(wt )wt .

The analysis in Lemma A.1 on the limits of Q(wt ) and R(wt ) at zero and infinity carries
through. For the limits at zero, we need to observe additionally that because limwt →0 F (wt ) is
finite, the limit of F ′ (wt )wt (which is assumed to exist) is zero. For the limits at infinity, we need
to observe additionally that because limwt →∞ F (wt ) is finite, the limit of F ′ (wt )wt (which is assumed
to exist) is zero. Lemma A.1 provides the argument for limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt (in the case of R(wt )).
The argument for limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt is similar: if limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt 6= 0, then |F ′ (wt )| ≥

ℓ
wt

for

wt > M and for positive M and ℓ. Since, however, for wt > M
F (wt ) = F (M ) +

Z

wt
M

′

F (ŵt )dŵt ⇒ |F (wt ) − F (M )| ≥

Z

wt
M

w 
ℓ
t
dŵt = ℓ log
,
ŵt
M

limwt →∞ R(wt ) would be plus or minus infinity, a contradiction. Since the limits of F ′ (wt )wt at
zero and infinity are zero, the limits of [A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]wt at zero and infinity are the same as those
of A(wt )wt , and hence are the same as in Lemma A.1.
The limits of F (wt ) at zero and infinity follow from (A.49), the limits of Q(wt ) and R(wt ),
limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = 0, limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt = 0, limwt →0 F ′′ (wt )wt2 = 0 and limwt →∞ F ′′ (wt )wt2 = 0.
The latter two properties follow using similar arguments as for F ′ (wt )wt . If limwt →0 F ′′ (wt )wt2 6= 0,
then |F ′′ (wt )| ≥

ℓ
wt2

for wt < ǫ and for positive ǫ and ℓ. Since, however, for wt < ǫ
′

F (wt ) = F (ǫ) + F (ǫ)(wt − ǫ) +

Z

wt
ǫ

⇒ |F (wt ) − F (ǫ) − F ′ (ǫ)(wt − ǫ)| ≥

F ′′ (ŵt )(wt − ŵt )dŵt
Z

ǫ
wt

  

ℓ
ǫ
ǫ − wt
(
ŵ
−
w
)d
ŵ
=
ℓ
log
−
,
t
t
t
wt
ǫ
ŵt2
60

limwt →0 F (wt ) would be plus or minus infinity, a contradiction. The argument for limwt →∞ F ′′ (wt )wt2 =
0 is a similar adaptation of that used to establish limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt = 0.

Proof of Corollary 3.1: Part (i) follows from A(wt ) being decreasing in wt , F (wt ) = 0 and (3.18).
Part (ii) follows from the former two properties, (3.1) and (3.17). Part (iii) follows from the same
two properties and because (3.17) implies that the market prices of risk are given by
 −1
ηt ≡ σ ⊤
(D̄ − πt ) =

αA(wt )
σu.
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(A.50)

Part (iv) follows from the same two properties and (3.19).

We next prove two useful lemmas on the monotonicity of R(wt ) and αwt + R(wt ).

Lemma A.7 (Monotonicity of R(wt )) For the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) constructed in Lemma A.5, and for that constructed in Lemma A.3:
• If γ < K, then R(wt ) is either decreasing for all values of wt , or is hump-shaped.
• If K < γ < 1, then R(wt ) is hump-shaped.
• If γ > 1, then R(wt ) is inverse hump-shaped.
Proof: We show the monotonicity properties for the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26)
constructed in Lemma A.5. The proof for the solution constructed in Lemma A.3 follows by the
same arguments and because the limits of R(wt ) at zero and infinity under the former solution are
the same as the boundary conditions at ǫ and M , respectively, under the latter solution.
Consider first the case K < γ < 1. Since limwt →0 R(wt ) = limwt →∞ R(wt ) = γ and 1 >
R(wt ) > γ for all wt ∈ (0, ∞), there exists wt ∈ (0, ∞) at which R(wt ) is maximized. If R(wt ) is
not hump-shaped, then there exist m1 < m2 < m3 such that R(m1 ) > R(m2 ) and R(m2 ) < R(m3 ).
ˆ i ) for i = 1, 2, 3, such that m̂1 < m1 < m̂
ˆ 1 ≤ m̂2 < m2 <
We can then choose ξ ∈ (γ, 1) and (m̂i , m̂
ˆ 2 ≤ m̂3 < m3 < m̂
ˆ 3 , R(m̂i ) = R(m̂
ˆ i ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, 3, R′ (m̂i ) > 0 and R′ (m̂
ˆ i ) < 0 for i = 1, 3,
m̂
ˆ 2 ) > 0, R(wt ) > ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂i , m̂
ˆ i ) for i = 1, 3, and R(wt ) < ξ for all
R′ (m̂2 ) < 0 and R′ (m̂

61

ˆ 2 ). Eq. (A.26) implies that R̂ξ (m̂i ) > 0 and R̂ξ (m̂
ˆ i ) < 0 for i = 1, 3, and R̂ξ (m̂
ˆ 2) < 0
wt ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ) > 0, where the function R̂ξ (wt ) is defined by
and R̂ξ (m̂
R̂ξ (wt ) ≡ ξ(1 − ξ) +

(αwt + ξ)2
z




Q(wt ) − r
ξ−1 .
ρ−r

(A.51)

ˆ 1 ), m′ ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ) and m′ ∈ (m̂3 , m̂
ˆ 3 ) such that R̂ξ (m′ ) = 0 for
Therefore, there exist m′1 ∈ (m̂1 , m̂
2
3
i
i = 1, 2, 3, R̂ξ′ (m′1 ) ≤ 0, R̂ξ′ (m′2 ) ≥ 0 and R̂ξ′ (m′3 ) ≤ 0. Differentiating (A.51) and using (A.26) and
ˆ i ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, 3, we find
R(m̂i ) = R(m̂
R̂ξ′ (wt )

2α(αwt + ξ)
=
z




(αwt + ξ)2 Q(wt )[R(wt ) − γ]
Q(wt ) − r
ξ−1 +
ξ.
ρ−r
z
(ρ − r)γwt

(A.52)

If R̂ξ (wt ) = 0, then we can write (A.52) as

R̂ξ′ (wt ) = −

2αξ(1 − ξ) (αwt +
+
αwt + ξ
z

ξ)2

h

r + (ρ − r)



1
ξ

−

z(1−ξ)
(αwt +ξ)2

(ρ − r)γwt

i

[R(wt ) − γ]

ξ.

(A.53)

Since R̂ξ (m′i ) = 0 and R̂ξ′ (m′i ) ≤ 0 for i = 1, 3, (A.53) implies
(αm′i

+
2αz

ξ)3

h

r + (ρ − r)



1
ξ

−

z(1−ξ)
(αm′i +ξ)2

i

[R(m′i ) − γ]

(1 − ξ)(ρ − r)γm′i

≤1

(A.54)

for i = 1, 3. Likewise, since R̂ξ (m′2 ) = 0 and R̂ξ′ (m′2 ) ≥ 0, (A.53) implies
(αm′2

+ ξ)3

2αz

h

r + (ρ − r)



1
ξ

−

z(1−ξ)
(αm′2 +ξ)2

i

[R(m′2 ) − γ]

(1 − ξ)(ρ − r)γm′2

≥ 1.

Consider the function



(αwt + ξ)3
1
z(1 − ξ)
Hξ (wt ) ≡
r + (ρ − r)
−
wt
ξ (αwt + ξ)2


ρ−r
ξ
= r+
(α3 wt2 + 3α2 ξwt + 3αξ 2 ) − (ρ − r)z(1 − ξ)α + hξ ,
ξ
wt
where
hξ ≡



ρ−r
r+
ξ




ξ − (ρ − r)z(1 − ξ) .
2

62

(A.55)

ˆ 2 )) and
If hξ ≤ 0, then Hξ (wt ) is increasing in wt . Since γ < R(m′2 ) < ξ (because m′2 ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 3 )), (A.55) implies that (A.54) for i = 3 should hold as
R(m′3 ) > ξ > γ (because m′3 ∈ (m̂3 , m̂
a strict inequality in the opposite direction, a contradiction. If hξ > 0, then Hξ (wt ) is inverse
hump-shaped in wt . If Hξ (m′3 ) ≥ Hξ (m′2 ), then the previous argument yields a contradiction.

Therefore, Hξ (m′3 ) < Hξ (m′2 ), which means that m′2 is in the decreasing part of Hξ (wt ) and hence
ˆ
Hξ (m′1 ) > Hξ (m′2 ). Since R(m′1 ) > ξ > γ (because m′1 ∈ (m̂1 , m̂1)),
(A.54) for i = 1 implies that
(A.55) should hold as a strict inequality in the opposite direction, a contradiction.
Consider next the case γ > 1. Since limwt →0 R(wt ) = limwt →∞ R(wt ) = γ and 1 < R(wt ) < γ
for all wt ∈ (0, ∞), there exists wt ∈ (0, ∞) at which R(wt ) is minimized. If R(wt ) is not inverse
hump-shaped, then there exist m1 < m2 < m3 such that R(m1 ) < R(m2 ) and R(m2 ) > R(m3 ).
ˆ i ) for i = 1, 2, 3, such that m̂1 < m1 < m̂
ˆ 1 ≤ m̂2 < m2 <
We can then choose ξ ∈ (1, γ) and (m̂i , m̂
ˆ 2 ≤ m̂3 < m3 < m̂
ˆ 3 , R′ (m̂i ) < 0 and R′ (m̂
ˆ i ) > 0 for i = 1, 3, R′ (m̂2 ) > 0 and R′ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) < 0,
m̂
ˆ i ) for i = 1, 3, and R(wt ) > ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ). Eq. (A.26)
R(wt ) < ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂i , m̂
ˆ i ) > 0 for i = 1, 3, and R̂ξ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) > 0 and R̂ξ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) < 0. Therefore,
implies that R̂ξ (m̂i ) < 0 and R̂ξ (m̂
ˆ 1 ), m′ ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ) and m′ ∈ (m̂3 , m̂
ˆ 3 ) such that R̂ξ (m′ ) = 0 for i = 1, 2, 3,
there exist m′1 ∈ (m̂1 , m̂
2
3
i
R̂ξ′ (m′1 ) ≤ 0, R̂ξ′ (m′2 ) ≥ 0 and R̂ξ′ (m′3 ) ≤ 0. Eqs. (A.54) and (A.55) still hold, with both R(mi ) − γ
and 1 − ξ being negative. If hξ ≤ 0, in which case Hξ (wt ) is increasing in wt , then γ > R(m′2 ) > ξ,

R(m′3 ) < ξ < γ, and (A.55) imply that (A.54) for i = 3 should hold as a strict inequality in the
opposite direction, a contradiction. If hξ > 0, in which case Hξ (wt ) is inverse hump-shaped in
wt , then the previous argument implies that Hξ (m′3 ) < Hξ (m′2 ), which means that m′2 is in the
decreasing part of Hξ (wt ) and hence Hξ (m′1 ) > Hξ (m′2 ). Since R(m′1 ) < ξ < γ, (A.54) for i = 1
implies that (A.55) should hold as a strict inequality in the opposite direction, a contradiction.
Consider finally the case γ < K. Since limwt →0 R(wt ) = K and limwt →∞ R(wt ) = γ, R(wt ) is
maximized at its zero limit or at a wt ∈ (0, ∞). If R(wt ) is not decreasing or hump-shaped, then
there exist m1 < m2 < m3 such that R(m1 ) > R(m2 ) and R(m2 ) < R(m3 ). If R(m2 ) ≥ K, then we
can proceed as in the case K < γ < 1 to find a contradiction. If R(m2 ) < K, then we can choose
ˆ i ) for i = 2, 3, such that m̂2 < m2 < m̂
ˆ 2 ≤ m̂3 < m3 < m̂
ˆ 3 , R′ (m̂2 ) < 0
ξ ∈ (γ, K) and (m̂i , m̂
ˆ 2 ) > 0, R′ (m̂3 ) > 0 and R′ (m̂
ˆ 3 ) < 0, R(wt ) < ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ), and R(wt ) > ξ
and R′ (m̂
ˆ 3 ). (Note that (m̂1 , m̂
ˆ 1 ) may not exist because ξ < K = limw →0 R(wt ).) Eq.
for all wt ∈ (m̂3 , m̂
t
ˆ 2 ) < 0, R̂ξ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) > 0, R̂ξ (m̂3 ) > 0 and R̂ξ (m̂
ˆ 3 ) < 0. Therefore, there exist
(A.26) implies that R̂ξ (m̂
63

ˆ 2 ) and m′ ∈ (m̂3 , m̂
ˆ 3 ) such that R̂ξ (m′ ) = 0 for i = 2, 3, R̂′ (m′ ) ≥ 0 and R̂′ (m′ ) ≤ 0.
m′2 ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
3
2
3
i
ξ
ξ
Eqs. (A.54) for i = 3 and (A.55) still hold. Moreover, hξ < 0 because hξ is increasing in ξ, ξ < K,
and hK = 0 as implied by (3.23). Therefore, Hξ (wt ) is increasing in wt , and (A.55) implies that
(A.54) for i = 3 should hold as a strict inequality in the opposite direction, a contradiction.

Lemma A.8 (αwt + R(wt ) increasing) For the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) constructed in Lemma A.5, αwt +R(wt ) is increasing if γ ≤ 1. The same property holds for the solution
constructed in Lemma A.3, provided that ǫ and M are small and large enough, respectively, and
that wt ∈ [ǫ, M0 ] for any M0 > ǫ which is kept fixed as ǫ shrinks and M grows.
Proof: We first show the property for the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) constructed
in Lemma A.5. We next extend the proof to the solution constructed in Lemma A.3. We assume
γ < 1: for γ = 1, the property trivially holds because R(wt ) = 1.
Consider first the case K < γ < 1. Since R(wt ) is hump-shaped (Lemma A.7), R′ (wt ) > −α
for all wt ∈ (0, ŵt ), where ŵt exceeds the maximizer of R(wt ). Denote by m the supremum of the

set of ŵt such that R′ (wt ) > −α for all wt ∈ (0, ŵt ). If m is infinite, then αwt + R(wt ) is increasing.

Suppose, by contradiction, that m is finite. By its definition, m satisfies R′ (m) = −α, and since

R′ (wt ) > −α for all wt < m, it also satisfies R′′ (m) ≤ 0. Differentiating (A.26) at m and using
R′ (m) = −α, we find

R′′ (m)m − α = −α[1 − 2R(m)] +

[αm +

R(m)]2
z

d





Q(wt )−r
ρ−r R(wt )

dwt

wt =m

⇒ R′′ (m)m = 2αR(m) +

[αm + R(m)]2 ′
L (m),
z(ρ − r)

(A.56)

where L(wt ) ≡ [Q(wt ) − r]R(wt ). To derive a contradiction, it suffices to show that L′ (m) ≥ 0,
since (A.56) would then imply R′′ (m) > 0.
Using (A.25), we find
L′ (wt ) = Q(wt )

R(wt ) − γ
R(wt ) + [Q(wt ) − r]R′ (wt ).
γwt

(A.57)

Eqs. (A.57), R(wt ) > γ for all wt ∈ (0, ∞), and R′ (m) = −α < 0 imply L′ (m) ≥ 0 if Q(m) ≤ r. To
show that L′ (m) ≥ 0 also if Q(m) > r, we proceed by contradiction, and suppose that L′ (m) < 0.
64

Since R′ (m) = −α < 0, (A.26) implies
Q(m) − r
R(m) − 1 < 0 ⇒ L(m) < ρ − r.
ρ−r
Since, in addition, Lemma A.1 implies that limwt →∞ L(wt ) = ρ − r, there exists wt large enough

so that L(wt ) > L(m) > 0. These inequalities, together with L′ (m) < 0, imply that L(wt ) has a
local minimum in (m, ∞). We can, therefore, choose ξ ∈ (0, L(m)), and m2 > m1 > m such that
L(mi ) = ξ, L′ (m1 ) < 0 and L′ (m2 ) > 0. Using (A.25), we can write (A.57) as

L′ (wt ) = Q(wt )

R(wt ) − γ
R(wt )+[Q(wt )−r]
γwt

R(wt )[1 − R(wt )] +

[αwt +R(wt )]2
z

wt



Q(wt )−r
ρ−r R(wt ) −


1

.

(A.58)
Since
L(wt ) = ξ ⇒ Q(wt ) =

ξ
+ r,
R(wt )

(A.59)

we can substitute Q(wt ) in L′ (wt ) to write the inequalities L′ (m1 ) < 0 and L′ (m2 ) > 0 as L̂ξ (m1 ) <
0 and L̂ξ (m2 ) > 0, respectively, where the function L̂ξ (wt ) is defined by
R(wt ) − γ
L̂ξ (wt ) ≡ r
+
γ




1
[αwt + R(wt )]2 ρ − r − ξ
−1 ξ−
ξ.
γ
R(wt )2
ρ−r

(A.60)

Since Q(wt ) is increasing, (A.59) implies R(m1 ) > R(m2 ). Since A(wt ) is decreasing (Lemma A.6),
αwt +R(wt )
R(wt )

=

α
A(wt )

+ 1 is increasing. Since, in addition, ξ ∈ (0, ρ − r), (A.60) implies L̂ξ (m1 ) >

L̂ξ (m2 ), a contradiction. Therefore, L′ (m) ≥ 0, which in turn implies that m is infinite.
Consider next the case γ < K. To show the result it suffices to show that R′ (wt ) > −α for wt
close to zero, since we can then define the supremum m and proceed as in the case K < γ < 1.
To show that R′ (wt ) > −α for wt close to zero, we study the behavior of (Q(wt ), R(wt )). Since
limwt →0 R(wt ) = K, (A.25) implies
Q(wt ) ≈ Q(ǫ)

 w  K−γ
t

γ

(A.61)

ǫ

65

for small ǫ and wt . If

K−γ
γ

> 1 ⇔ K > 2γ, then Q(wt ) is of order smaller than wt , and we look for

a differentiable R(wt ). Using (A.26), R(0) = K and L’Hospital’s rule, we find


2[α + R′ (0)]K
rK
K 2 rR′ (0)
′
′
R (0) = R (0)(1 − 2K) −
+1 −
z
ρ−r
z ρ−r


rK
2αK
z
ρ−r + 1
′


⇒ R (0) = −
> −α.
rK
K2 r
2K + 2K
+
1
+
z
ρ−r
z ρ−r
If

K−γ
γ

< 1 ⇔ K < 2γ, then Q(wt ) is of order larger than wt , and we look for R(wt ) that is of the
 K−γ 
K−γ
form K + gw γ + o w γ . Substituting into (A.26), we find
g




K−γ
K−γ
K − γ K−γ
w γ = K + gw γ
1 − K − gw γ
γ




K−γ 2 
 K−γ

αwt + K + gw γ
K−γ
Q(ǫ) wǫt γ − r 

+
K + gw γ
− 1 .
z
ρ−r
Identifying terms in w

K−γ
γ

, we find

K −γ
2gK
g
= g(1 − 2K) −
γ
z




rK
K 2 Q(ǫ)
+1 +
ρ−r
z
K−γ
γ

⇒g=

1
K 3 Q(ǫ)( ǫ )
z
ρ−r

K−γ
γ

− (1 − 2K) +

2K
z



rK
ρ−r

1
ǫ

 K−γ
γ

ρ−r

K − rg
1


+1 +

K2 r
z ρ−r

=

K−γ
γ

K 2 Q(ǫ)( ǫ )
z
ρ−r
1
K r
+
γ
z ρ−r

,

where the last step follows from (3.23). Since g > 0, R(wt ) is increasing for wt close to zero, which
means that R′ (wt ) ≥ 0 > −α.
We next extend the proof to the solution constructed in Lemma A.3. Consider first the case
K < γ < 1. Suppose, by contradiction, that the supremum m of the set of ŵt such that R′ (wt ) > −α
for all wt ∈ [ǫ, ŵt ) is smaller than M0 . To derive a contradiction, it suffices to show that L′ (m) ≥ 0.
Recall from Lemma A.5 that for any given wt , the values of Q(wt ) and R(wt ) under the solution over
[ǫ, M ] converge to the values under the solution over [ǫ, ∞) when M goes to infinity. Since m ≤ M0
and M0 is kept fixed when M grows large, L(m) is close to its positive limit under the solution over
[ǫ, ∞) for M large enough. Hence, L(m) < ρ − r. Moreover, same arguments as in Lemmas A.1 and
A.5 imply that under the solution over [ǫ, ∞), limwt →∞ Q(wt ) = r +
66

ρ−r
γ

and limwt →∞ R(wt ) = γ

(as is the case under the solution over (0, ∞)). Hence, there exists wt large enough such that L(wt )
is close to ρ − r and hence larger than L(m). We can then derive a contradiction, proceeding as

above. Consider next the case γ < K. Since R′ (wt ) > −α for small wt under the solution over
(0, ∞), the same inequality holds under the solution over [ǫ, M ] for ǫ small enough by continuity.
We can then derive a contradiction, proceeding as above.

Proof of Theorem 3.2: The comparative statics in the theorem can be stated equivalently in
terms of R(wt ): R(wt ) is increasing in α and u⊤ Σu if γ < 1, and is decreasing in α and u⊤ Σu if
γ > 1. We show the latter comparative statics on the solution constructed in Lemma A.3, which is
over the finite interval [ǫ, M ]. We fix any M0 > ǫ, and show that the comparative statics hold for all
wt ∈ (ǫ, M0 ), provided that ǫ and M are small and large enough, respectively. Since for any given
wt ∈ (0, ∞), (Q(wt ), R(wt )) for the solution over (0, ∞) are obtained as limits of (Q(wt ), R(wt ))
for the solution over [ǫ, M ] when ǫ goes to zero and M goes to infinity, the inequalities established
for (ǫ, M0 ) carry through to (0, ∞).
The comparative statics with respect to u⊤ Σu are equivalent to those with respect to z, and
we show the latter. We start with the case K < γ < 1, and denote the solution to the system of
(A.25) and (A.26) by the subscript z. Since Rz (ǫ) = γ for all z, differentiating (A.26) with respect
to z, we find
"

 ∂Qz (ǫ) #
(αǫ + γ)2
1 Qz (ǫ) − r
∂Rz′ (ǫ)
ǫ=
−
γ − 1 + ∂z γ .
∂z
z
z
ρ−r
ρ−r

(A.62)

We will show that (i) Rz (wt ) < Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close to and larger than z and for all wt > ǫ in a
neighborhood of ǫ, and (ii) Rz (wt ) ≤ Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close to and larger than z, for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M0 ),
and for M large enough. These results will be shown by contradiction.
Suppose that Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close to and larger than z and for all wt > ǫ in a
neighborhood of ǫ. Since Rz (M ) = Rẑ (M ) = γ, the set of wt > ǫ such that Rz (wt ) = Rẑ (wt ) is
non-empty. The infimum m within that set is strictly larger than ǫ since Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for all
wt > ǫ in a neighborhood of ǫ. Since Rẑ (wt ) crosses Rz (wt ) from above at ǫ,

67

∂R′z (ǫ)
∂z

≤ 0, and since

′

z (m)
it crosses Rz (wt ) from below at m, ∂R∂z
≥ 0.11 The counterpart of (A.62) at m is
"
#

 ∂Qz (m)
[αm + Rz (m)]2
1 Qz (m) − r
∂Rz′ (m)
m=
−
Rz (m) − 1 + ∂z Rz (m)
∂z
z
z
ρ−r
ρ−r

(A.63)




[αm + Rz (m)]2
1 Qz (m) − r
=
Rz (m) − 1
−
z
z
ρ−r
+

∂Qz (ǫ)
∂z

exp

R

m Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
ǫ
γwt



+ Qz (ǫ)

∂ exp

R
m
ǫ

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂z

ρ−r






Rz (m)
,

(A.64)

where the second step follows because integrating (A.25) from ǫ to m yields
Qz (m) = Qz (ǫ) exp

Eqs. (A.62) and

∂R′z (ǫ)
∂z

Z

m
ǫ


Rz (wt ) − γ
dwt .
γwt

(A.65)

≤ 0 imply


 ∂Qz (ǫ)
1 Qz (ǫ) − r
−
γ − 1 + ∂z γ ≤ 0
z
ρ−r
ρ−r
"

 ∂Qz (ǫ) #
1 Qz (ǫ) − r
Qz (m)Rz (m)
⇒ −
γ − 1 + ∂z γ
≤0
z
ρ−r
ρ−r
Qz (ǫ)γ
 ∂Qz (ǫ)
Qz (m) − r
Qz (m)
Rz (m) − 1 + ∂z
Rz (m)
ρ−r
ρ − r Qz (ǫ)




r
Qz (m)
1 Qz (m)Rz (m)
−1 +
− 1 Rz (m) ≤ 0
+
z
Qz (ǫ)γ
z(ρ − r) Qz (ǫ)

1
⇒−
z



 ∂Qz (ǫ)
Qz (m) − r
Qz (m)
Rz (m) − 1 + ∂z
Rz (m) < 0
ρ−r
ρ − r Qz (ǫ)


1 Qz (m) − r
⇒−
Rz (m) − 1
z
ρ−r

1
⇒−
z

+
⇒



∂Qz (ǫ)
∂z

exp

R
m
ǫ

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt



+ Qz (ǫ)

∂ exp

ρ−r

R
m
ǫ

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂z



Rz (m) < 0

∂Rz′ (m)
< 0,
∂z

11

For expositional simplicity, we are treating m as independent of ẑ for ẑ close to z. When m is a function m(ẑ)
∂R′z (m)
of ẑ, the property
≥ 0 holds for a non-empty set of m, e.g., for lim inf ẑ→z m(ẑ) and lim supẑ→z m(ẑ). Our
∂z
argument requires choosing one such m.

68

where the fourth step follows because Qz (wt ) is increasing and R(wt ) > γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ),
the fifth step follows from (A.65) and because Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m) implies
∂ exp

R
m
ǫ

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂z



≤ 0, and the sixth step follows from (A.64). This contradicts

∂R′z (m)
∂z

≥ 0.

Hence, it is not possible that Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for all wt > ǫ in a neighborhood of ǫ. This implies
that Rz (wt ) < Rẑ (wt ) for all wt > ǫ in a neighborhood of ǫ.12
Consider next the infimum m > ǫ within the set of wt > ǫ such that Rz (wt ) = Rẑ (wt ) and
Rz (ŵt ) > Rẑ (ŵt ) for all ŵt > wt in a neighborhood of wt . This set is non-empty because it
includes M . Our intended comparative statics result will follow if m ≥ M0 since in that case
Rz (wt ) ≤ Rẑ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M0 ). Suppose that m < M0 . Since Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for all
wt > m in a neighborhood of m, we can consider the infimum m̂ > m within the non-empty set of
wt > m such that Rz (wt ) = Rẑ (wt ). Since Rẑ (wt ) crosses Rz (wt ) from above at m,
and since it crosses Rz (wt ) from below at m̂,
Eqs. (A.63) and
−

1
z



∂R′z (m)
∂z

∂R′z (m̂)
∂z

≥ 0.

≤ 0 imply




∂Qz (m)
Qz (m) − r
∂z
Rz (m) − 1 ≤ −
.
ρ−r
Qz (m)(ρ − r)

The counterpart of (A.64) written between m and m̂ instead of between ǫ and m,
∂ exp

m

≤ 0,

 ∂Qz (m)
Qz (m) − r
Rz (m) − 1 + ∂z Rz (m) ≤ 0
ρ−r
ρ−r

1
⇒−
zQz (m)Rz (m)

R
m̂

∂R′z (m)
∂z

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

(A.66)
∂R′z (m̂)
∂z

≥ 0 and



≤ 0 (which follows from Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (m, m̂)) imply



 ∂Qz (m) exp R m̂ Rz (wt )−γ dw
t
∂z
γwt
m
1 Qz (m̂) − r
Rz (m̂) − 1 +
Rz (m̂) ≥ 0
−
z
ρ−r
ρ−r
∂z

1
⇒−
z




Qz (m̂) − r
Rz (m̂) − 1 +
ρ−r

1
⇒−
zQz (m̂)Rz (m̂)



∂Qz (m) Qz (m̂)
∂z
Qz (m)

ρ−r

Rz (m̂) ≥ 0


∂Qz (m)
Qz (m̂) − r
∂z
Rz (m̂) − 1 ≥ −
,
ρ−r
Qz (m)(ρ − r)

(A.67)

where the second step follows from the counterpart of (A.65) written between m and m̂ and the
third step follows by dividing both sides by Qz (m)Rz (m).
12

The implication follows by showing that not all the derivatives

69

(n)

∂Rz (ǫ)
∂z

are equal to zero.

Eqs. (A.66) and (A.67) imply Nz (m) ≤ Nz (m̂), where
1
Nz (wt ) ≡ −
zQz (wt )Rz (wt )




Qz (wt ) − r
Rz (wt ) − 1 .
ρ−r

Eq. (A.26) implies Nz (wt ) > 0 for all wt for which Rz′ (wt ) ≤ 0. The same inequality holds for all
wt for which Rz (wt ) > 0: this follows because Qz (wt ) is increasing and because for all wt such
that Rz (wt ) > 0, there exists ŵt > wt such that Rz (wt ) = Rz (ŵt ) and Rz′ (ŵt ) ≤ 0. Consider
now M large enough, and recall from Lemma A.5 that for any given wt , the values of Qz (wt ) and
Rz (wt ) under the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) over [ǫ, M ] converge to the values
under the solution over [ǫ, ∞) when M goes to infinity. Since m < M0 and M0 is kept fixed when
M grows large, Nz (m) is close to its positive limit under the solution over [ǫ, ∞) for M large
enough. Moreover, same arguments as in Lemmas A.1 and A.5 imply that under the solution
over [ǫ, ∞), limwt →∞ Qz (wt ) = r +
such that Qz (m) is close to r +

ρ−r
γ

ρ−r
γ

(as is the case under the solution over (0, ∞)). Picking m

for M large enough, and noting that Qz (wt ) is increasing and

Rz (wt ) > γ, we can bound Nz (wt ) from above by a small positive constant for all wt ≥ m and for
M large enough. Hence, for all wt ≥ m and for M large enough, Nz (wt ) is smaller than Nz (m)
minus a positive constant.

If the inequality Nz (m) ≤ Nz (m̂) is strict, then we can choose ξ ∈ (Nz (m), Nz (m̂)), m1 ∈

(m, m̂) and m2 ∈ (m̂, M ), such that Nz (mi ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, G′ (m1 ) ≥ 0 and G′ (m2 ) ≤ 0. Values

ξ > 0 and m1 < m2 such that Nz (mi ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, G′ (m1 ) ≥ 0 and G′ (m2 ) ≤ 0 can also be
chosen if Nz (m) = Nz (m̂). Indeed, if minwt ∈[m,m̂] Nz (wt ) < Nz (m) = Nz (m̂), then we choose ξ close
to and smaller than Nz (m) = Nz (m̂), m1 ∈ (m, m̂) and m2 ∈ (m̂, M ). If Nz (wt ) = Nz (m) = Nz (m̂)
for all wt ∈ (m, m̂), then we choose ξ = Nz (m) = Nz (m̂) and any m1 < m2 in (m, m̂). If, finally,
maxwt ∈[m,m̂] Nz (wt ) > Nz (m) = Nz (m̂), then we replace m̂ by the maximizer of Nz (wt ) in [m, m̂],
and proceed as in the case where the inequality is strict.
To compute Nz′ (wt ), we write Nz (wt ) as
Nz (wt ) = −

1
r
1
+
+
.
z(ρ − r) z(ρ − r)Qz (wt ) zQz (wt )Rz (wt )

Eqs. (A.25) and (A.26) imply

Nz′ (wt ) = −

r Rz (wt )−γ
ρ−r
γ

+

1
γ

−1+

[αwt +Rz (wt )]2
zRz (wt )2

zwt Qz (wt )
70



Qz (wt )−r
Rz (wt )
ρ−r


−1

.

Since
1
Nz (wt ) = ξ ⇒ Qz (wt ) =
1 + z(ρ − r)ξ




ρ−r
+r ,
Rz (wt )

(A.68)

we can substitute Qz (wt ) in Nz′ (wt ) to write the inequalities Nz′ (m1 ) ≥ 0 and Nz′ (m2 ) ≤ 0 as
N̂zξ (m1 ) ≤ 0 and N̂zξ (m2 ) ≥ 0, respectively, where the function N̂zξ (wt ) is defined by
N̂zξ (wt ) ≡

r Rz (wt ) − γ
1
[αwt + Rz (wt )]2 rRz (wt ) + ρ − r
+ −1−
ξ.
ρ−r
γ
γ
Rz (wt )2
1 + z(ρ − r)ξ

(A.69)

We will show that N̂zξ (m1 ) > N̂zξ (m2 ), which will yield a contradiction because N̂zξ (m1 ) ≤ 0 and
N̂zξ (m2 ) ≥ 0. As a first step to show that result, we will show that
αm1 + Rz (m1 ) < αm2 + Rz (m2 ).

(A.70)

then (A.70) follows from Rz (wt ) ∈ (γ, 1) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ). If m2 < m1 +

1−γ
α ,

then (A.70) follows from Lemma A.8 by noting that m1 < m̂ < m and setting M0 = m +

1−γ
α .

If m2 > m1 +

1−γ
α ,

Using (A.69), (A.70) and ξ > 0, we find

N̂zξ (m1 ) >

αm1 + Rz (m1 )
rRz (wt ) + ρ − r
r Rz (m1 ) − γ 1
+ − 1 − [αm2 + Rz (m2 )]
ξ.
ρ−r
γ
γ
Rz (m1 )
Rz (m1 )[1 + z(ρ − r)ξ]
(A.71)

Since Qz (wt ) is increasing, (A.68) implies Rz (m1 ) > Rz (m2 ). Since A(wt ) is decreasing (Lemma
A.6),

αwt +Rz (wt )
Rz (wt )

=

α
A(wt )

+ 1 is increasing. Since, in addition,

rRz (wt )+ρ−r
Rz (wt )

= r + Rρ−r
is decreasing
z (wt )

in Rz (wt ), and ξ > 0, (A.71) implies N̂zξ (m1 ) > N̂zξ (m2 ).
Consider next the case γ < K. Since Rz (ǫ) is increasing in z, Rz (wt ) < Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close
to and larger than z and for all wt > ǫ in a neighborhood of ǫ. Therefore, we are left to show
result (ii) of the case K < γ < 1, namely, Rz (wt ) ≤ Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close to and larger than z, for all
wt ∈ (ǫ, M0 ), and for M large enough. We define m as in that case, suppose that m < M0 , and
define m̂. We then follow the same arguments to derive a contradiction.
Consider finally the case γ > 1. We will show, proceeding by contradiction, that (i) Rz (wt ) >
Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close to and larger than z and for all wt > ǫ in a neighborhood of ǫ, and (ii) Rz (wt ) ≥
Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close to and larger than z, for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M0 ), and for M large enough.
71

Suppose that Rz (wt ) < Rẑ (wt ) for ẑ close to and larger than z and for all wt > ǫ in a
neighborhood of ǫ. Consider the infimum m > ǫ within the non-empty set of wt > ǫ such that
Rz (wt ) = Rẑ (wt ). Since Rẑ (wt ) crosses Rz (wt ) from below at ǫ,
Rz (wt ) from above at m,
1
−
z



∂R′z (m)
∂z

≤ 0. Eqs. (A.62) and

∂R′z (ǫ)
∂z

∂R′z (ǫ)
∂z

≥ 0, and since it crosses

≥ 0 imply

 ∂Qz (ǫ)
Qz (ǫ) − r
γ − 1 + ∂z γ ≥ 0
ρ−r
ρ−r

 ∂Qz (ǫ)
Qz (m) − r
Qz (m)
Rz (m) − 1 + ∂z
Rz (m)
ρ−r
ρ − r Qz (ǫ)




1 Qz (m)Rz (m)
r
Qz (m)
+
−1 +
− 1 Rz (m) ≥ 0
z
Qz (ǫ)γ
z(ρ − r) Qz (ǫ)

⇒−

1
z



 ∂Qz (ǫ)
Qz (m) − r
Qz (m)
Rz (m) − 1 + ∂z
Rz (m) > 0
ρ−r
ρ − r Qz (ǫ)


1 Qz (m) − r
Rz (m) − 1
⇒−
z
ρ−r

1
⇒−
z

+
⇒



∂Qz (ǫ)
∂z

exp

R
m
ǫ

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt



+ Qz (ǫ)

∂ exp

R
m
ǫ

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂z

ρ−r



Rz (m) > 0

∂Rz′ (m)
> 0,
∂z

where the third step follows because Qz (wt ) is decreasing and R(wt ) < γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ),
the fourth step follows from (A.65) and because Rz (wt ) < Rẑ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m) implies
∂ exp

R
m
ǫ

Rz (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂z



≥ 0, and the fifth step follows from (A.64). This contradicts

∂R′z (m)
∂z

≤ 0.

Hence, Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for all wt > ǫ in a neighborhood of ǫ.
Consider next the infimum m > ǫ within the non-empty set of wt > ǫ such that Rz (wt ) = Rẑ (wt )
and Rz (ŵt ) < Rẑ (ŵt ) for all ŵt > wt in a neighborhood of wt . Our intended comparative statics
result will follow if m ≥ M0 since in that case Rz (wt ) ≥ Rẑ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M0 ). Suppose
that m < M0 . Since Rz (wt ) > Rẑ (wt ) for all wt > m in a neighborhood of m, we can consider
the infimum m̂ > m within the non-empty set of wt > m such that Rz (wt ) = Rẑ (wt ). Since
Rẑ (wt ) crosses Rz (wt ) from below at m,
m̂,

∂R′z (m̂)
∂z

∂R′z (m)
∂z

≥ 0, and since it crosses Rz (wt ) from above at

≤ 0. Proceeding as in the case K < γ < 1, we can then show that Nz (m) ≥ Nz (m̂),

1
− z(ρ−r)
< Nz (wt ) < 0 for all wt ∈ [ǫ, M ], and Nz (wt ) exceeds Nz (m) plus a positive constant for all

72

1
wt larger than a fixed m and for M large enough. We can then choose ξ ∈ (− z(ρ−r)
, 0) and m1 < m2

such that Nz (mi ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, Nz′ (m1 ) ≤ 0 and Nz′ (m2 ) ≥ 0. The latter two inequalities can
be written as N̂zξ (m1 ) ≥ 0 and N̂zξ (m2 ) ≤ 0. We will show that N̂zξ (m1 ) < N̂zξ (m2 ), which will
yield a contradiction because N̂zξ (m1 ) ≥ 0 and N̂zξ (m2 ) ≤ 0. As a first step to show that result,
we will show that
Az (m1 ) > Az (m2 ).

(A.72)

If m2 > γm1 , then (A.72) follows from Rz (wt ) ∈ (1, γ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ). If m2 > γm1 , then
(A.72) follows from Lemma A.6 by noting that m1 < m̂ < m and setting M0 = γm1 . Using
αm1 +Rz (m1 )
Rz (m1 )

<

αm2 +Rz (m2 )
,
Rz (m2 )

N̂zξ (m1 ) <

1
which is implied from (A.72), and ξ ∈ (− z(ρ−r)
, 0), we find

r Rz (m1 ) − γ
1
[αm2 + Rz (m2 )]2 rRz (wt ) + ρ − r
+ −1−
ξ.
ρ−r
γ
γ
Rz (m2 )2
1 + z(ρ − r)ξ

(A.73)

Since Qz (wt ) is decreasing, (A.68) implies Rz (m1 ) < Rz (m2 ). Combining with (A.71) and ξ ∈
1
, 0), we find N̂zξ (m1 ) < N̂zξ (m2 ).
(− z(ρ−r)

We next derive comparative statics with respect to α. We start with the case K < γ < 1, and
denote the solution to the system of (A.25) and (A.26) by the subscript α. Since Rα (ǫ) = γ for all
α, differentiating (A.25) with respect to α and noting that z depends on α through (3.20), we find
"
#


∂Qα (ǫ)
∂Ra′ (ǫ)
(αǫ + γ)γ
2 Qα (ǫ) − r
ǫ=
−
γ − 1 + (αǫ + γ) ∂z
.
∂z
z
α
ρ−r
ρ−r

(A.74)

We will show that (i) Rα (wt ) < Rα̂ (wt ) for α̂ close to and larger than α and for all wt > ǫ in a
neighborhood of ǫ, and (ii) Rα (wt ) ≤ Rα̂ (wt ) for α̂ close to and larger than α, for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M0 ),
and for M large enough. These results will be shown by contradiction, using similar arguments as
for the comparative statics with respect to z.
Suppose that Rα (wt ) > Rα̂ (wt ) for α̂ close to and larger than α and for all wt > ǫ in a
neighborhood of ǫ. Consider the infimum m > ǫ within the non-empty set of wt > ǫ such that
Rα (wt ) = Rα̂ (wt ). Since Rα̂ (wt ) crosses Rα (wt ) from above at ǫ,

73

∂R′α (ǫ)
∂z

≤ 0, and since it crosses

Rα (wt ) from below at m,

∂R′α (m)
∂z

≥ 0. The counterpart of (A.74) at m is
"
#


∂Qα (m)
[αm + Rα (m)]Rα (m)
2 Qα (m) − r
∂Rz′ (m)
∂z
m=
Rα (m) − 1 + [αm + Rα (m)]
−
∂z
z
α
ρ−r
ρ−r
(A.75)



[αm + Rα (m)]Rα (m)
2 Qα (m) − r
=
Rα (m) − 1
−
z
α
ρ−r
+[αm + Rα (m)]

∂Qα (ǫ)
∂α

exp

R
m
ǫ

Rα (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt



+ Qα (ǫ)

∂ exp

R
m
ǫ

Rα (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂α

ρ−r




.


(A.76)
Eqs. (A.74) and

∂R′α (ǫ)
∂α

≤ 0 imply



∂Qα (ǫ)
2 Qα (ǫ) − r
γ − 1 + (αǫ + γ) ∂z ≤ 0
α
ρ−r
ρ−r
#
"


∂Qα (ǫ)
Qα (m)[αm + Rα (m)]
2 Qα (ǫ) − r
γ − 1 + (αǫ + γ) ∂z
≤0
⇒ −
α
ρ−r
ρ−r
Qα (ǫ)(αǫ + γ)

−


∂Qα (ǫ)
Qα (m) − r
Qα (m)
Rα (m) − 1 + [αm + Rα (m)] ∂α
ρ−r
ρ − r Qα (ǫ)




2 Qα (ǫ) − r
Qα (m)[αm + Rα (m)]
2 Qα (m) − r
Rα (m) − 1 −
γ−1
≤ 0. (A.77)
+
α
ρ−r
α
ρ−r
Qα (ǫ)(αǫ + γ)

2
⇒−
α



We will show that the term in the last line of (A.77) is positive. Since Aα (wt ) is decreasing (Lemma
A.6),
α
Aα (m) + 1
α
Aα (ǫ) + 1

=

Since, in addition,

[αm + Rα (m)]γ
αm + Rα (m)
Rα (m)
>1⇒
>
.
(αǫ + γ)Rα (m)
αǫ + γ
γ
Qα (ǫ)−r
ρ−r γ

− 1 < 0, the term in the last line of (A.77) is larger than




Qα (m)Rα (m)
Qα (m) − r
2 Qα (ǫ) − r
Rα (m) − 1 −
γ−1
ρ−r
α
ρ−r
Qα (ǫ)γ




2 Qα (m)Rα (m)
2r
Qα (m)
−1 +
− 1 Rα (m),
=
α
Qα (ǫ)γ
α(ρ − r) Qα (ǫ)

2
α



74

which is positive because Qz (wt ) is increasing and R(wt ) > γ for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ). Hence, (A.77)
implies

∂Qα (ǫ)
Qα (m) − r
Qα (m)
Rα (m) − 1 + [αm + Rα (m)] ∂α
<0
ρ−r
ρ − r Qα (ǫ)


2 Qα (m) − r
Rα (m) − 1
⇒−
α
ρ−r

2
−
α



+ [αm + Rα (m)]
⇒

∂Qα (ǫ)
∂α

exp

R
m

Rα (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

ǫ



+ Qα (ǫ)

∂ exp

R
m
ǫ

Rα (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂α



ρ−r

<0

∂Rα′ (m)
< 0,
∂α

where the second step follows from (A.65) (with subscript α rather than z) and because Rα (wt ) >
Rα̂ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m) implies
This contradicts

∂R′α (m)
∂α

∂ exp

R
m
ǫ

Rα (wt )−γ
dwt
γwt

∂α



≤ 0, and the third step follows from (A.64).

≥ 0. Hence, it is not possible that Rα (wt ) > Rα̂ (wt ) for all wt > ǫ in a

neighborhood of ǫ. Instead, Rα (wt ) < Rα̂ (wt ) for all wt > ǫ in a neighborhood of ǫ.
Consider next the infimum m > ǫ within the non-empty set of wt > ǫ such that Rα (wt ) =
Rα̂ (wt ) and Rα (ŵt ) > Rα̂ (ŵt ) for all ŵt > wt in a neighborhood of wt . Our intended comparative
statics result will follow if m ≥ M0 . Suppose that m < M0 . Since Rα (wt ) > Rα̂ (wt ) for all wt > m
in a neighborhood of m, we can consider the infimum m̂ > m within the non-empty set of wt > m
such that Rα (wt ) = Rα̂ (wt ). Since Rα̂ (wt ) crosses Rα (wt ) from above at m,
it crosses Rz (wt ) from below at m̂,

∂R′α (m̂)
∂α

∂R′α (m)
∂α

≤ 0, and since

≥ 0.

Proceeding as for the comparative statics with respect to z, we can show that Nα (m) ≤ Nα (m̂),
where
2
Nα (wt ) ≡ −
αQα (wt )[αm + Rα (wt )]




Qα (wt ) − r
Rα (wt ) − 1 ,
ρ−r

and that Nα (wt ) > 0 for all wt ∈ (ǫ, M ). Since
Nα (m)
Nz (m) [αm̂ + Rα (m̂)]Rα (m)
=
,
Nα (m̂)
Nz (m̂) [αm + Rα (m)]Rα (m̂)
and
[αm̂ + Rα (m̂)]Rα (m)
=
[αm + Rα (m)]Rα (m̂)

α
Aα (m̂)
α
Aα (m)

+1
+1

>1
75

because Aα (wt ) is decreasing (Lemma A.6), Nα (m) ≤ Nα (m̂) implies Nz (m) < Nz (m̂). Since, in
addition, Nz (wt ) is smaller than Nz (m) minus a positive constant for all wt larger than a fixed m
and for M large enough, the arguments used to establish the comparative statics with respect to
z yield a contradiction. The comparative statics with respect to α in the cases γ < K and γ > 1
follow by similarly adapting the arguments used to establish the comparative statics with respect
to z.
Proof of Corollary 3.2: The first statement in part (i) follows from (3.18), F (wt ) = 0, and A(wt )
being decreasing in α when γ > 1 and independent of α when γ = 1. Since for γ < K and small wt ,
A(wt ) ≈

K
wt ,

the second statement in part (i) follows from (3.18) and F (wt ) = 0 if

in α. Differentiating

α
K

α
K

is decreasing

with respect to α, we find

α
∂K
K − α ∂K
∂α
=
=
∂α
K2

K −α

2K
αz

1+ z1






rK
+ z(ρ−r)

rK
+1
ρ−r

K2



rK
+1
ρ−r

!


K 1 − 1z
h


=
rK
K 2 1 + 1z ρ−r
+1 +

rK
z(ρ−r)

i,

where the second step follows by differentiating implicitly K with respect to α using (3.23). Therefore,

α
K

is decreasing in α if z < 1. The third statement in part (i) follows from (3.19), F (wt ) = 0,

and A(wt ) being increasing in α when γ < 1 and independent of α when γ = 1. The first statement in part (ii) follows from (3.18), F (wt ) = 0 and A(wt ) being decreasing in u⊤ Σu when γ > 1.
The second statement in part (ii) follows from the former two properties and A(wt ) being increasing in u⊤ Σu when γ < 1. The third statement in part (ii) follows from (3.19), F (wt ) = 0 and
A(wt ) being increasing in α when γ < 1. The result for long-lived hedgers follows from (3.18),
limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = 0, and because the asymptotic behavior of A(wt ) for wt close to zero is the
same as for short-lived hedgers.
Proof of Proposition 3.5: Substituting (3.17), (3.18) and (A.14) into (A.4) and (A.5), we can
write the dynamics of arbitrageur wealth wt as
⊤
dwt = µwtdt + σwt
dBt ,

(A.78)

where


1
µwt = r − q(wt )− γ wt +
σwt =

α2 A(wt )
u⊤ Σu,
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2

α
σu.
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(A.79)
(A.80)

76

If the stationary distribution has density d(wt ), then d(wt ) satisfies the ODE
1 ⊤
−[µwt d(wt )]′ + [σwt
σwt d(wt )]′′ = 0
2

(A.81)

over (0, ∞), with the boundary condition
lim

wt →∞




1 ⊤
′
−µwt d(wt ) + [σwt σwt d(wt )] = 0
2

(A.82)

(see Bogachev, Krylov, Röckner, and Shaposhnikov (2015)). Integrating (A.81) using (A.82) yields
the ODE
1 ⊤
−µwt d(wt ) + [σwt
σwt d(wt )]′ = 0.
2

(A.83)

⊤ σ d(w ), we can write (A.83) as
Setting D(wt ) ≡ σwt
wt
t

D ′ (wt )
2µwt
.
= ⊤
D(wt )
σwt σwt

(A.84)

Integrating between one and wt , we find
exp
d(wt ) = D(1)

hR

wt 2µwt
dŵt
⊤ σ
1 σwt
wt
⊤σ
σwt
wt

i

(A.85)

.

We can determine the multiplicative constant D(1) by the requirement that d(wt ) must integrate
to one, i.e.,

Z

∞

d(wt )dwt = D(1)
0

Z

∞
0

exp

hR

wt 2µwt
dŵt
⊤ σ
1 σwt
wt
⊤σ
σwt
wt

i

dwt = 1.

(A.86)

Eq. (A.86) determines a positive D(1), and hence a positive d(wt ), if the integral multiplying D(1)
is finite. If the integral is infinite, then (A.86) implies that D(1) = 0, and the stationary distribution
does not have a density but is concentrated at zero. The integral multiplying D(1) is infinite when
the integrand converges to infinity at a fast enough rate when wt goes to zero, or does not converge
to zero at a fast enough rate when wt goes to infinity.

77

Substituting (µwt , σwt ) from (A.79) and (A.80) into (A.85), we can write (A.85) as





1
−γ
α2 A(ŵt )
⊤ Σu
2
r−q(
ŵ
)
ŵ
+
u
t
t
Rw
[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2
exp  1 t
dŵt 
α2
⊤
[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2

d(wt ) = D(1)

α2
u⊤ Σu
[α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt )]2



= D(1)

u Σu

R w
exp  1 t
exp

= D(1)

hR

wt
1

"

ρ−r
2 − A(
1+
ŵ )
t

z A′ (ŵt )+A(ŵt )2

(

)

[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2

!

+

α2 A(ŵt )
u⊤ Σu
[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2

α2
u⊤ Σu
[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2

α2
u⊤ Σu
[α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt )]2

 ′
− AA((ŵŵtt)) + A(ŵt ) −

[α+A(ŵt )−F ′ (ŵt )]2
zA(ŵt )

α2
⊤
[α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt )]2 u Σu

D(1)A(1) [α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
= 2 ⊤
exp
α u Σu
A(wt )

Z

1

wt





dŵt

#




dŵt 

i

[α + A(ŵt ) − F ′ (ŵt )]2
A(ŵt ) −
zA(ŵt )





dŵt ,
(A.87)

where the second step follows from (3.21), the third from (3.20), and the fourth by noting that
exp

Z

wt
1



A′ (ŵt )
−
A(ŵt )





dŵt = exp {− log[A(wt )] + log[A(1)]} =

A(1)
.
A(wt )

Substituting (A.87) into (A.86) to solve for D(1), and substituting back into (A.87), we find (3.24).
Since limwt →0 A(wt )wt = max{γ, K} and limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = 0, for wt close to zero the numerator of (3.24) is bounded above and below by functions of the form
max{γ, K}
exp
wt

Z

1

wt

Ψ0


z − 1 max{γ, K}
max{γ, K} Ψ0 max{γ,K} z−1
z
dŵt =
wt
,
z
ŵt
wt

where Ψ0 is a positive constant. These functions are integrable at zero if z > 1, and not integrable at
zero if z < 1. Hence, the numerator of (3.24) has the same properties. Since limwt →∞ A(wt )wt = γ
and limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt = 0, for wt close to infinity the numerator of (3.24) is bounded above by a
function of the form
α2 wt
exp
γ

Z

wt
1




α2 ŵt
α2 wt
α2 (wt2 − 1)
−Ψ∞
dŵt =
exp −Ψ∞
,
γz
γ
2γz

where Ψ∞ is a positive constant. This function is integrable at infinity, and hence the numerator of
(3.24) has the same property. Therefore, the integral in the denominator of (3.24) is finite if z > 1
and infinite if z < 1.
78

Proof of Proposition 3.6: For F (wt ) = 0 and A(wt ) =
− z1

d(wt ) = R
∞
0

(αwt + 1)2 wt

− 1z

(αwt + 1)2 wt

1
wt ,

(3.24) becomes


1
α2 wt2 + 4αwt
exp − 2z
.

1
α2 wt2 + 4αwt dwt
exp − 2z

(A.88)

The derivative d′ (wt ) has the same sign as the derivative of the numerator. The latter derivative is



1
1
− 1z −1
2 2
α wt + 4αwt [2αzwt − (αwt + 1) − (αwt + 1)αwt (αwt + 2)]
(αwt + 1)wt
exp −
z
2z
and has the same sign as


− (αwt )3 + 3(αwt )2 + (3 − 2z)αwt + 1 .

The function

Φ(x) ≡ x3 + 3x2 + (3 − 2z)x + 1
is equal to 1 for x = 0, and its derivative with respect to x is
Φ′ (x) = 3x2 + 6x + (3 − 2z).
If z < 23 , then Φ′ (x) > 0 for all x > 0, and hence Φ(x) > 0 for all x > 0. If z > 32 , then Φ′ (x) has
the positive root
x′1 ≡ −1 +

r

2z
,
3

and is negative for 0 < x < x′1 and positive for x > x′1 . Therefore, if Φ(x′1 ) > 0 then Φ(x) > 0 for
all x > 0, and if Φ(x′1 ) < 0 then Φ(x) has two positive roots x1 < x′1 < x2 and is positive outside
the roots and negative inside. Since

Φ(x′1 ) =

−1 +

r

2z
3

!3

+ 3 −1 +

r

2z
3

!2

+ (3 − 2z) −1 +

Φ(x′1 ) is positive if
r

3−2

2z
27
>0⇔z<
,
3
8
79

r

2z
3

!

2z
+1 =
3

r

3−2

2z
3

!

,

27
8 .

and is negative if z >

Therefore, if z <

27
8

then the derivative of d(wt ) is negative, and if z >

27
8

then the derivative of d(wt ) is negative for wt ∈ (0, m1 ) ∪ (m2 , ∞) and positive for wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ),
where mi ≡

xi
α

for i = 1, 2. This proves Parts (i) and (ii).

The density d(wt ) shifts to the right in the monotone likelihood ratio sense when a parameter
θ increases if
∂ 2 log [d(wt , θ)]
> 0.
∂θ∂wt

(A.89)

Using (A.88), we find

∂ log[d(wt )]
2α
1 2
1
=
−
α wt + 2α .
−
∂wt
αwt + 1 zwt z

(A.90)

An increase in α (which also affects z from (3.20)) raises the right-hand side of (A.90). Therefore,
d(wt ) satisfies (A.89) with respect to α. An increase in z also raises the right-hand side of (A.90).
Therefore, d(wt ) satisfies (A.89) with respect to u⊤ Σu. This proves Part (iii).

B

Proofs of the Results in Section 4

Proof of Lemma 4.1: Using (2.1) and (4.1), we can write (4.4) and (4.5) as


dvt = (rvt − c̄t )dt + Xt⊤ (µSt + D̄ − rSt )dt + u⊤ D̄dt + Xt⊤ (σSt + σ)⊤ + u⊤ σ ⊤ dBt ,

(B.1)

dwt = (rwt − ct )dt + Yt⊤ (µSt + D̄ − rSt )dt + Yt⊤ (σSt + σ)⊤ dBt ,

(B.2)

respectively. If St , Xt , and Yt satisfy (4.7), (4.8), and (4.9), then (B.1) is identical to (3.3), and
(B.2) to (3.8). Therefore, if xt and yt maximize the objective of hedgers and of arbitrageurs,
respectively, given πt , then the same is true for Xt and Yt , given St . Moreover, if xt and yt
satisfy the market-clearing equation (3.15), then Xt and Yt satisfy the market-clearing equation
(4.6) because of (4.8) and (4.9). Since (B.1) is identical to (3.3), and (B.2) to (3.8), the dynamics
of arbitrageur wealth and the exposures of hedgers and arbitrageurs to the Brownian shocks are
the same in the equilibrium (St , Xt , Yt ) as in (πt , xt , yt ). The market prices ηt of the Brownian
−1
risks in the two equilibria are (σ ⊤ )−1 (D̄ − πt ) and (σSt + σ)⊤
(µSt + D̄ − rSt ), and are the
⊤ (D̄−π

y
same because of (4.7). The arbitrageurs’ Sharpe ratios in the two equilibria are √t

t)

yt⊤ σ⊤ σyt

√

Yt⊤ (µSt +D̄−rSt )
⊤
Yt (σSt +σ)⊤ (σSt +σ)Yt

, and are the same because of (4.7) and (4.9).
80

and

Proof of Proposition 4.1: Setting St = S(wt ) and combining Ito’s lemma with (4.1), we find
1 ⊤
µSt = µwtS ′ (wt ) + σwt
σwt S ′′ (wt )
2




α2 u⊤ Σu
1 ′′
− γ1
′
′
S (wt )wt +
= r − q(wt )
A(wt )S (wt ) + S (wt ) ,
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
2

(B.3)

where the second step follows from (A.79) and (A.80), and
σSt = σwt S ′ (wt )⊤
=

α
σuS ′ (wt )⊤ ,
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(B.4)

where the second step follows from (A.80). Multiplying (4.7) from the left by (σSt + σ)⊤ , and using
(3.17), we find
µSt + D̄ − rSt =

αA(wt )
(σSt + σ)⊤ σu.
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(B.5)

Substituting (µSt , σSt ) from (B.3) and (B.4) into (B.5), we find the ODE


− γ1

r − q(wt )



S ′ (wt )wt +

α2 u⊤ Σu
αA(wt )
S ′′ (wt )+ D̄ −rS(wt ) =
Σu.
2[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
(B.6)

Setting S(wt ) ≡

D̄
r

+ Ŝ(wt ), we find that the resulting ODE equates linear terms in Ŝ(wt ), Ŝ ′ (wt )

and Ŝ ′′ (wt ) to a scalar times Σu. Hence, Ŝ(wt ) must be collinear to Σu, which means that S(wt )
must have the form in (4.10). Substituting (4.10) into (B.6), we find that g(wt ) solves the ODE
(4.11).
Substituting µSt from (B.3) into (4.2), and using (4.10) and (4.11), we can write expected
excess returns as (4.12). Substituting σSt from (B.4) into (4.3), and using (4.10), we can write the
covariance matrix of returns as (4.13).

Proof of Theorem 4.1: We start with the case where hedgers are short-lived. Since q(wt ) and
A(wt ) are continuous and positive in (0, ∞), the functions multiplying g(wt ), g ′ (wt ) and g ′′ (wt ) in
(4.11) are continuous. Since, in addition, (4.11) is a linear ODE, it has a unique solution over any
interval [ǫ, M ] ⊂ (0, ∞) with initial conditions g(ǫ) and g ′ (ǫ) (Murray and Miller (2013)). That
solution can be extended over (0, ∞). We next derive properties of solutions to (4.11), as well as
the existence result, through a number of lemmas that parallel those in the proof of Theorem 3.1.
81

Lemma B.1 (Limits at zero and infinity) Consider a solution g(wt ) to (4.11), defined over
the interval (0, ∞). If the limits of g(wt ) at zero and infinity are finite, then they are equal to − αr
and zero, respectively.
Proof: We first derive the limit at zero. Suppose that limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt exists, in which case it is
zero (as shown in the proof of Theorem 3.1 in the case of R(wt )). Since limwt →0 g(wt ) is assumed
to exist, (4.11) implies that limwt →0

g ′′ (wt )
[α+A(wt )]2

exists. Since limwt →0 A(wt )wt = max{γ, K},

g ′′ (wt )
limwt →0 g ′′ (wt )wt2
,
=
wt →0 [α + A(wt )]2
(max{γ, K})2
lim

and hence limwt →0 g ′′ (wt )wt2 exists. As shown in the proof of Theorem 3.1 (in the case of F (wt )),
if limwt →0 g ′′ (wt )wt2 exists, it is zero. Taking the limit of both sides of (4.11) when wt goes to
zero and using limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt = limwt →0 g ′′ (wt )wt2 = 0, limwt →0 A(wt )wt = max{γ, K} and
1

limwt →0 q(wt )− γ ∈ (0, ∞), we find limwt →0 g(wt ) = − αr .
To complete the proof for the limit at zero, we need to show that limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt exists. We
proceed by contradiction and assume that limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt does not exist, and hence lim supwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt >
lim inf wt →0 g ′ (wt )wt . Since g ′ (wt )wt oscillates between values close to lim supwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt and values close to lim inf wt →0 g ′ (wt )wt , there exists ξ ∈ (lim inf wt →0 g ′ (wt )wt , lim supwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt ) and
a sequence {wtn }n∈N converging to zero such that g ′ (wtn )wtn = ξ and [g ′ (wt )wt ]′

wt =wtn

alternates

between being non-positive and non-negative. Since


g ′ (wt )wt

′

wt =wtn

= g ′′ (wtn )wtn + g ′ (wtn ) =

2 +ξ
g ′′ (wtn )wtn
,
wtn

where the second step follows from g ′ (wtn )wtn = ξ,
2
g ′′ (wtn )wtn
+ξ

must also alternate between being non-positive and non-negative. Taking the limit of (4.11) along
the sequence {wtn }n∈N , however, we find


α2 u⊤ Σu
− γ1
′′
2
lim g (wtn )wtn + r − lim q(wt )
ξ − r lim g(wt ) = α.
wt →0
wt →0
2 (max{γ, K})2 wt →0
2 converges to a finite limit, which means that ξ can be chosen so that g ′′ (w )w 2 +
Hence, g ′′ (wtn )wtn
tn
tn

ξ can be non-zero and with a sign that does not change, a contradiction.
82

We next derive the limit at infinity. Suppose that limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt exists, in which case it
is zero. The same argument as for the limit at zero implies that limwt →∞ g ′′ (wt ) exists. That
limit has to be zero since limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt = 0. Taking the limit of both sides of (4.11) when
wt goes to zero and using limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt = limwt →∞ g ′′ (wt ) = 0, limwt →∞ A(wt ) = 0 and
− γ1

limwt →∞ q(wt )

∈ (0, ∞), we find limwt →∞ g(wt ) = 0. The existence of limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt follows

by adapting the contradiction argument used for the limit at zero.

Lemma B.2 (Single crossing of solutions) Consider two solutions g1 (wt ) and g2 (wt ) to (4.11)
with initial conditions g1 (ǫ) = g2 (ǫ) and g1′ (ǫ) > g2′ (ǫ) for ǫ > 0. The solutions compare as follows:
• g1 (wt ) > g2 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞), and g1 (wt ) < g2 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (0, ǫ).
• g1′ (wt ) > g2′ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (0, ∞).
Proof: We first show the inequalities for wt > ǫ. Since g1 (ǫ) = g2 (ǫ) and g1′ (ǫ) > g2′ (ǫ), g1 (wt ) >
g2 (wt ) for wt close to and larger than ǫ. Proceeding by contradiction, suppose that there exists
wt > ǫ such that g1 (wt ) ≤ g2 (wt ) or g1′ (wt ) ≤ g2′ (wt ). The infimum m within that set is strictly

larger than ǫ since g1 (wt ) > g2 (wt ) and g1′ (wt ) > g2′ (wt ) for wt close to and larger than ǫ. Since
g1 (ǫ) = g2 (ǫ) and g1′ (wt ) > g2′ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m), g1 (m) > g2 (m). Hence, g1′ (m) must be
equal to g2′ (m). Since g1′ (wt ) > g2′ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m), g1′′ (m) ≤ g2′′ (m). Eq. (4.11) then implies

g1 (m) ≤ g2 (m), a contradiction. Therefore, g1 (wt ) > g2 (wt ) and g1′ (wt ) > g2′ (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞).

The inequalities for wt < ǫ follow from a similar argument (developed in the case of Q(wt ) and
R(wt ) in Lemma A.2).

Lemma B.3 (Boundary conditions over finite interval) For any ǫ > 0 and M > ǫ, there
exists a unique solution to (4.11) defined over the interval (0, ∞) that satisfies g(ǫ) = − αr and
g(M ) = 0.

Proof: We will consider solutions to (4.11) with g(ǫ) = − αr , and show that there exists a unique
g ′ (ǫ) such that g(M ) = 0. For any ℓ ∈ (−∞, ∞), the linear ODE (4.11) has a unique solution

over [ǫ, M ] with initial conditions g(ǫ) = − αr and g ′ (ǫ) = ℓ, and that solution can be extended over
(0, ∞). We denote the solution derived for g ′ (ǫ) = ℓ by gℓ (wt ).
83

Consider the solutions g0 (wt ) and g1 (wt ). Since the ODE (4.11) is linear, the function h(wt ) ≡

g0 (wt ) + ℓ [g1 (wt ) − g0 (wt )] is also a solution. Since, in addition, h(ǫ) = − αr and h′ (ǫ) = ℓ, h(wt )
coincides with the solution gℓ (wt ).
Since g0 (ǫ) = g1 (ǫ) = − αr and g1′ (ǫ) > g0′ (ǫ), Lemma B.2 implies g1 (wt ) − g0 (wt ) > 0 for all
wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞). Therefore, the function ℓ −→ g0 (M ) + ℓ [g1 (M ) − g0 (M )] = gℓ (M ) is invertible, and
so there exists a unique ℓ such that gℓ (M ) = 0. The function gℓ (wt ) corresponding to that ℓ is the
required solution.

Lemma B.4 (Negative and increasing g(wt )) For any ǫ > 0 and M > ǫ, the solution to (4.11)
constructed in Lemma B.3 is negative for all wt in [ǫ, M ) and increasing.

Proof: We first show that the ℓ determined in Lemma B.3 is positive. Since gℓ (M ) = 0, g1 (M ) −
g0 (M ) > 0 and gℓ (M ) = g0 (M ) + ℓ [g1 (M ) − g0 (M )], we need to show that g0 (M ) < 0. We will

show the stronger result that g0 (M ) < − αr . Setting wt = ǫ, g0 (ǫ) = − αr and g0′ (ǫ) = 0 in (4.11), we

find g0′′ (ǫ) < 0. Hence, g0′ (wt ) < 0 and g0 (wt ) < − αr for wt close to and larger than ǫ. Proceeding
by contradiction, suppose that there exists wt > ǫ such that g0 (wt ) ≥ − αr or g0′ (wt ) ≥ 0. The
infimum m within that set is strictly larger than ǫ since g0 (wt ) < − αr and g0′ (wt ) < 0 for wt close
to and larger than ǫ. Since g0 (ǫ) = − αr and g0′ (wt ) < 0 for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m), g0 (m) < − αr . Hence,
g0′ (m) must be equal to zero. Since g0′ (wt ) < 0 for all wt ∈ (ǫ, m), g0′′ (m) ≥ 0. Since, however,

g0 (m) < − αr and g ′ (m) = 0, (4.11) implies g0′′ (m) < 0, a contradiction. Therefore, g0 (wt ) < − αr
and g0′ (wt ) < 0 for all wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞). This in turn implies g0 (M ) < 0 and ℓ > 0.

We next show that gℓ (wt ) < gℓ (ŵt ) for all wt < ŵt in [ǫ, M ]. Suppose, by contradiction, that
there exist m2 > m1 in [ǫ, M ] such that gℓ (m1 ) ≥ gℓ (m2 ). If gℓ (m1 ) > gℓ (m2 ), then there exists
m3 ∈ (m1 , m2 ) such that gℓ (m3 ) =

gℓ (m1 )+gℓ (m2 )
.
2

Since gℓ′ (ǫ) = ℓ > 0 and gℓ (m1 ) > gℓ (m3 ), gℓ (wt )

reaches its maximum value over [ǫ, m3 ] at an interior point m. Setting gℓ′ (m) = 0 in (4.11), we find
that gℓ′′ (m) has the same sign as

A(m)
α+A(m)

+ rgℓ (m). Since gℓ′′ (m) ≤ 0 at a maximum,

A(m)
A(m)
+ rgℓ (m) ≤ 0 ⇒ gℓ (m) ≤ −
< 0.
α + A(m)
r[α + A(m)]

(B.7)

Since gℓ (m3 ) < gℓ (m) < 0 = gℓ (M ) and gℓ (m3 ) > gℓ (m2 ), gℓ (wt ) reaches its minimum value in
[m3 , M ] at an interior point m̂ > m3 . Setting gℓ′ (m̂) = 0 in (4.11), we find that gℓ′′ (m̂) has the same
84

sign as

A(m̂)
α+A(m̂)

+ rgℓ (m̂). Since gℓ′′ (m̂) ≥ 0 at a minimum,

A(m̂)
A(m̂)
+ rgℓ (m̂) ≥ 0 ⇒ gℓ (m̂) ≥ −
.
α + A(m̂)
r[α + A(m̂)]

(B.8)

Since A(wt ) is decreasing, (B.7) and (B.8) imply gℓ (m) < gℓ (m̂). Since, however, m is the maximizer
of gℓ (wt ) over [ǫ, m3 ] and m̂ is the minimizer of gℓ (wt ) over [m3 , M ], gℓ (m) > gℓ (m̂), a contradiction.
If gℓ (m1 ) = gℓ (m2 ), a contradiction can be derived through the same argument, by distinguishing
the case where there exists wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ) such that gℓ (wt ) 6= gℓ (m1 ) = gℓ (m2 ) and replacing m1 or
m2 by wt , and the case where gℓ (wt ) = gℓ (m1 ) = gℓ (m2 ) for all wt ∈ (m1 , m2 ) and taking

m1 +m2
2

for m3 . Therefore, gℓ (wt ) < gℓ (ŵt ) for all wt < ŵt in [ǫ, M ]. Since gℓ (M ) = 0, gℓ (wt ) < 0 for all
wt ∈ [ǫ, M ).
Lemma B.5 (Boundary conditions over [0, ∞]) A solution to (4.11), defined over the interval
(0, ∞), and with finite limits at zero and infinity, exists. That solution is negative and increasing.
Proof: We will construct the solution as the simple limit of solutions with boundary conditions
at ǫ and M . Denote the solution constructed in Lemma B.3 by gǫ,M (wt ). Since for M2 > M1 ,
′
′
gǫ,M2 (M1 ) < 0 = gǫ,M1 (M1 ) (as implied by Lemma B.4), Lemma B.2 implies gǫ,M
(ǫ) > gǫ,M
(ǫ),
1
2

and hence gǫ,M1 (wt ) > gǫ,M2 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞). This means that the function M → gǫ,M (wt ),
defined for given wt > ǫ and for M > wt , is decreasing. Since that function is bounded below by
− αr (as implied by Lemma B.4), it converges to a finite limit, denoted by gǫ (wt ), when M goes to
infinity. That limit satisfies 0 ≥ gǫ (wt ) ≥ − αr for all wt ∈ (ǫ, ∞) and gǫ (wt ) ≤ gǫ (ŵt ) for all wt < ŵt
in (ǫ, ∞) because these inequalities hold (strictly) for gǫ,M (wt ) over (ǫ, M ) (Lemma B.4).
We next take the limit of gǫ (wt ) when ǫ goes to zero. Since for ǫ2 < ǫ1 and for all M > ǫ1 ,
gǫ2 ,M (ǫ1 ) > − αr = gǫ1 ,M (ǫ1 ) (as implied by Lemma B.4), Lemma B.2 (applied with M rather
than ǫ as starting value) implies gǫ′ 2 ,M (M ) < gǫ′ 1 ,M (M ), and hence gǫ2 ,M (wt ) > gǫ1 ,M (wt ) for all
wt ∈ (0, M ). Taking limits when M goes to infinity, we find gǫ2 (wt ) ≥ gǫ1 (wt ) for all wt ∈ (ǫ1 , ∞).
Hence, the function ǫ → gǫ (wt ), defined for given wt > ǫ, is increasing. Since that function is
bounded above by zero, it converges to a finite limit, denoted by g(wt ), when ǫ goes to zero. That
limit satisfies 0 ≥ g(wt ) ≥ − αr for all wt ∈ (0, ∞) and g(wt ) ≤ g(ŵt ) for all wt < ŵt in (0, ∞)
because these inequalities hold for gǫ (wt ) over (ǫ, ∞).
85

Following a similar argument as in Lemma A.5, we can show that g(wt ), viewed as a function
of wt , solves the ODE (4.11). Since 0 ≥ g(wt ) ≥ − αr for all wt ∈ (0, ∞) and g(wt ) ≤ g(ŵt ) for
all wt < ŵt in (0, ∞), g(wt ) has finite limits at zero and infinity. To show that g(wt ) is negative

and increasing, we need to show that the inequalities 0 ≥ g(wt ) ≥ − αr for all wt ∈ (0, ∞) and

g(wt ) ≤ g(ŵt ) for all wt < ŵt in (0, ∞) are strict. This can be done following a similar argument
as in Lemma B.4.
When hedgers are long-lived, the analysis in Lemma B.1 carries through, by observing additionally that limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt = 0.

Proof of Proposition 4.2: Showing that the effects of wt on variance, covariance and correlation
converge to zero when wt goes to zero and to infinity amounts to showing that limwt →0 f (wt ) =
limwt →∞ f (wt ) = 0. To show that limwt →0 f (wt ) = 0, we multiply the numerator and denominator
of f (wt ) by wt :
lim f (wt ) =

wt →0

α limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt
.
α limwt →0 wt + limwt →0 A(wt )wt − limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt

(B.9)

Since limwt →0 A(wt )wt = max{γ, K}, limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = 0 and limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt = 0, (B.9) implies limwt →0 f (wt ) = 0. To show that limwt →∞ f (wt ) = 0, we follow the same procedure and note
that limwt →∞ A(wt )wt = γ, limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt = 0 and limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt = 0.
We next show that when hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic preferences,
f (wt ) is hump-shaped. Since limwt →0 f (wt ) = limwt →∞ f (wt ) = 0, f (wt ) ≥ 0 for all wt ∈ (0, ∞)
and f (wt ) > 0 for at least some wt ∈ (0, ∞), there exists wt ∈ (0, ∞) at which f (wt ) is maximized.
ˆ i)
If f (wt ) is not hump-shaped, then we can proceed as in Lemma A.7 and choose ξ > 0 and (m̂i , m̂
ˆ 1 ≤ m̂2 < m̂
ˆ 2 ≤ m̂3 < m̂
ˆ 3 , f (m̂i ) = f (m̂
ˆ i ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, 3,
for i = 1, 2, 3, such that m̂1 < m̂
ˆ i ) < 0 for i = 1, 3, f ′ (m̂2 ) < 0 and f ′ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) > 0, f (wt ) > ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂i , m̂
ˆ i)
f ′ (m̂i ) > 0 and f ′ (m̂
ˆ 2 ).
for i = 1, 3, and f (wt ) < ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
For any γ, the derivative of f (wt ) has the same sign as
g ′′ (wt )[α + A(wt )] − g ′ (wt )A′ (wt )




[α + A(wt )]3
αA(wt )
− γ1
′
=
+ rg(wt ) + q(wt ) − r g (wt )wt − g ′ (wt )A′ (wt ),
α2 u⊤ Σu
α + A(wt )
86

(B.10)

where the second step follows by substituting g ′′ (wt ) from (4.11). Since for γ = 1, A(wt ) =

1
wt

and

q(wt ) = ρ1 , we can write (B.10) as


(αwt + 1)3
α
g ′ (wt )
′
+
rg(w
)
+
(ρ
−
r)g
(w
)w
+
.
t
t
t
3
α2 u⊤ Σuwt αwt + 1
wt2

(B.11)

ˆ i ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, 3, we find fˆξ (m̂i ) > 0 and fˆξ (m̂
ˆ i ) < 0 for i = 1, 3,
Using (B.11) and f (m̂i ) = f (m̂
ˆ 2 ) > 0, where the function fˆξ (wt ) is defined by
and fˆξ (m̂2 ) < 0 and fˆξ (m̂
fˆξ (wt ) ≡


α
(ρ − r)(αwt + 1)ξ
ξ
+ rg(wt ) +
+
.
⊤
αu Σu αwt + 1
α
(αwt + 1)2
1



(B.12)

Consider next the function
¯
fˆξ (wt ) ≡ fˆξ (wt ) −

r



g(wt ) −

ξ
[αwt + log(wt )]
α



αu⊤ Σu


1
α
rξ
(ρ − r)(αwt + 1)ξ
ξ
=
+
[αwt + log(wt )] +
+
. (B.13)
⊤
αu Σu αwt + 1
α
α
(αwt + 1)2

Since f (wt ) > ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂1 , m̂1 ),
ξ
g (wt ) >
α
′



h
i
1
ˆ 1 ) − ξ αm̂
ˆ 1 + log(m̂
ˆ 1 ) > g(m̂1 ) − ξ [αm̂1 + log(m̂1 )] . (B.14)
α+
⇒ g(m̂
wt
α
α

ˆ 1 ) < 0, we find f¯ˆξ (m̂1 ) > f¯ˆξ (m̂
ˆ 1 ). We
Combining (B.14) with (B.13), fˆξ (m̂1 ) > 0 and fˆξ (m̂
¯
¯ ˆ
¯
¯ˆ ˆ
¯ˆ
ˆ
likewise find fˆξ (m̂2 ) < fˆξ (m̂
2 ) and fξ (m̂3 ) > fξ (m̂3 ). Hence, fξ (wt ) is decreasing, increasing, and
¯
then decreasing. Since fˆξ (wt ) converges to minus infinity when wt goes to zero, it starts being
increasing, and since it converges to infinity when wt goes to infinity, it ends being increasing.
Hence, its first derivative changes sign at least four times, from positive, to negative, to positive,
to negative, to positive. Moreover, its second derivative changes sign at least three times, from
¯
negative, to positive, to negative, to positive. The first and second derivatives of fˆξ (wt ) are



α2
1
2αξ
−
+ rξ 1 +
,
+ (ρ − r)ξ −
⊤
2
αu Σu
(αwt + 1)
αwt
(αwt + 1)3


1
2α2
rξ
6α2 ξ
¯ˆ′′
−
,
fξ (wt ) =
+
αu⊤ Σu (αwt + 1)3 αwt2
(αwt + 1)4
¯
fˆξ′ (wt ) =

1



87

(B.15)

(B.16)

respectively. The second derivative has the same sign as the function P (wt ) −
P (wt ) ≡

rξ
α,

where

6α3 u⊤ Σuξwt2
2α2 wt2
+
.
(αwt + 1)3
(αwt + 1)4

The derivative of P (wt ) has the same sign as the expression
(2 − αwt )(1 + αwt ) + 6αu⊤ Σuξ(1 − 2αwt ),
which is quadratic in wt , positive for wt = 0, and has a unique positive root. Hence, P (wt ) is
¯
hump-shaped, which means that fˆξ′′ (wt ) can change sign at most twice, from negative, to positive,
to negative. This yields a contradiction, and hence f (wt ) is hump-shaped.
Parts (i) and (ii) of the proposition follow from (4.13) and f (wt ) being hump-shaped. To show
Part (iii), we use (4.13) to write the correlation as


f (wt ) u⊤ Σuf (wt ) + 2 (Σu)n (Σu)n′ + Σnn′
Corrt (dRnt , dRn′ t ) = q
.

2
⊤
2
⊤
′
′
{f (wt ) [u Σuf (wt ) + 2] (Σu)n + Σnn } f (wt ) [u Σuf (wt ) + 2] (Σu)n′ + Σn n
(B.17)

Differentiating (B.17) with respect to f (wt ), we find that Corrt (dRnt , dRn′ t ) is increasing in f (wt )
if (4.15) holds and is decreasing in f (wt ) if (4.15) holds in the opposite direction. Part (iii) then
follows from f (wt ) being hump-shaped.
Proof of Proposition 4.3: We start by proving a lemma on the limit of g ′ (wt ) when wt goes to
zero.
Lemma B.6 (Limit of g ′ (wt ) at zero) For the solution to (4.11) constructed in Lemma B.5, the
limit of g ′ (wt ) when wt goes to zero is infinite if γ < K and equal to

2γ
α
h
 i
r
(ρ−r)z γ+ γz ρ−r
+1 −1

if γ > K.

Proof: We start with the case where hedgers are short-lived. We use the equation


g(wt ) +
α2 u⊤ Σu
− γ1
′′
g
(w
)
+
r
−
q(w
)
g ′ (wt ) − r
t
t
2
2[α + A(wt )] wt
wt

α
r

=−

α2
,
[α + A(wt )]wt

(B.18)

which can be derived from (4.11) by subtracting α from both sides and dividing by wt . Consider
first the case γ > K, and suppose that g ′ (wt ) converges to a finite limit when wt goes to zero.
88

Since limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) is finite and limwt →0 g(wt ) = − αr , limwt →0
limwt →0 A(wt )wt = γ, limwt →0

α2
[α+A(wt )]wt

=

α2
γ .

g(wt )+ α
r
wt

= limwt →0 g ′ (wt ). Since,
− γ1

Since, in addition, q(wt )

converges to a finite

limit when wt goes to zero, (B.18) implies that g ′′ (wt )wt must converge to a finite limit, which has
to be zero because limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) is finite. Taking the limit of both sides of (B.18) when wt goes
to zero thus yields
1

lim q(wt )− γ lim g ′ (wt ) =

wt →0

wt →0

α2
.
γ

(B.19)

1

Substituting limwt →0 q(wt )− γ = limwt →0 Q(wt ) from (A.28) into (B.19), we find that limwt →0 g ′ (wt )
is as in the lemma.
To complete the proof of the lemma for γ > K, we need to show that g ′ (wt ) converges to
a finite limit when wt goes to zero, and does not have no limit or converge to infinity. Suppose, by contradiction, that limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) does not exist, and hence lim supwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt >
lim inf wt →0 g ′ (wt )wt . Since g ′ (wt ) oscillates between values close to lim supwt →0 g ′ (wt ) and values close to lim inf wt →0 g ′ (wt ), there exist ξ > ξ̂ in (lim inf wt →0 g ′ (wt ), lim supwt →0 g ′ (wt )) and
sequences {wtn }n∈N and {ŵtn }n∈N converging to zero with the following properties. For the for-

mer sequence, g ′ (wtn ) = ξ, g ′′ (ŵtn ) alternates between being non-positive and non-negative, and
g ′ (wt ) ≥ ξ for each interval in which g ′′ (ŵtn ) is non-negative at the lower end and non-positive at
ˆ g ′′ (wtn ) alternates between being non-positive
the upper end. For the latter sequence, g ′ (ŵtn ) = ξ,
and non-negative, and g ′ (wt ) ≤ ξ̂ for each interval in which g ′′ (wtn ) is non-positive at the lower end
and non-negative at the upper end. Denote by wtn the element of the sequence corresponding to
the upper end of the interval, in which case the element corresponding to the lower end is wt,n+1 .
Using (4.11) and g ′ (wtn ) = g ′ (wt,n+1 ) = ξ, we find ĝξ (wtn ) ≤ 0 and ĝξ (wt,n+1 ) ≥ 0, where the
function ĝξ (wt ) is defined by
ĝξ (wt ) ≡



1
αA(wt )
+ rg(wt ) + q(wt )− γ − r ξwt .
α + A(wt )

(B.20)

Consider next the function
1
αA(wt )
ĝ¯ξ (wt ) ≡ ĝξ (wt ) − r[g(wt ) − ξwt ] =
+ ξq(wt )− γ wt .
α + A(wt )

(B.21)

Since g ′ (wt ) ≥ ξ over the interval [wt,n+1 , wtn ],
g(wtn ) − g(wt,n+1 ) ≥ ξ (wtn − wt,n+1 ) ⇒ g(wt,n+1 ) − ξwt,n+1 ≤ g(wtn ) − ξwtn .
89

(B.22)

Combining (B.21) with (B.22), ĝξ (wtn ) ≤ 0 and ĝξ (wt,n+1 ) ≥ 0, we find ĝ¯ξ (wtn ) ≤ ĝ¯ξ (wt,n+1 ), which
we can write as
h
i
αA(wt,n+1 )
αA(wtn )
−1
−1
−
+ ξ q(wt,n+1 ) γ wt,n+1 − q(wtn ) γ wtn ≥ 0
α + A(wt,n+1 ) α + A(wtn )
−1

−1

q(wt,n+1 ) γ − q(wtn ) γ
α2 [A(wt,n+1 ) − A(wtn )]
−1
+ ξq(wt,n+1 ) γ + ξ
wtn ≤ 0,
⇔
[a + A(wtn )][α + A(wt,n+1 )](wt,n+1 − wtn )
wt,n+1 − wtn
(B.23)
where the second step follows by dividing by wt,n+1 − wtn < 0. The limits of the three terms in the
left-hand side of (B.23) when n goes to infinity are
α2 [A(wt,n+1 ) − A(wtn )]
A′ (wt )wt2
= α2 lim
n→∞ [a + A(wtn )][α + A(wt,n+1 )](wt,n+1 − wtn )
wt →0
γ2
lim

R′ (wt )wt − A(wt )wt
α2
=
−
,
wt →0
γ2
γ

= α2 lim

− γ1

lim ξq(wt,n+1 )

n→∞

− γ1

= ξ lim q(wt )
wt →0

1

,

1

q(wt,n+1 )− γ − q(wtn )− γ
R(wt ) − γ
lim ξ
wtn = ξ lim Q′ (wt )wt = ξ lim Q(wt )
= 0,
n→∞
w
→0
w
→0
wt,n+1 − wtn
γ
t
t
where the first limit follows by differentiating R(wt ) = A(wt )wt and using limwt →0 R′ (wt )wt = 0
(shown in Lemma A.1) and limwt →0 A(wt )wt = γ, and the third limit follows from (A.25) and
limwt →0 R(wt ) = γ. Hence, taking the limit in (B.23) when n goes to infinity, we find
1

ξ lim q(wt )− γ ≤
wt →0

α2
.
γ

Proceeding similarly for the sequence {ŵtn }n∈N , we find
1
α2
,
ξˆ lim q(wt )− γ ≥
wt →0
γ

which yields a contradiction since ξ̂ > ξ.13 Suppose next, by contradiction, that limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) =
∞, in which case g ′′ (wt ) < 0 for small wt . The mean-value theorem implies that there exists
ŵt ∈ (0, wt ) such that
rg′ (wt ) − r

g(wt ) +
wt

α
r

= rwt g ′′ (ŵt ).

(B.24)

13

The argument establishing that g ′ (wt ) converges to a finite limit when wt goes to zero can be suitably adapted
in the proof of Lemma A.8 to show that the asymptotic behavior of R(wt ) for wt close to zero in the case γ < K has
the conjectured form.

90

1

Substituting into (B.18), and using limwt →0 q(wt )− γ ∈ (0, ∞) and g ′′ (wt ) < 0 for small wt , we find
that the left-hand side converges to minus infinity when wt goes to zero. This yields a contradiction
because the right-hand side converges to a finite limit. This completes the proof of the lemma for
γ > K.
− γ1

Consider next the case γ < K. Since limwt →0 q(wt )

= limwt →0 Q(wt ) = 0, (B.19) rules out

that g ′ (wt ) converges to a finite limit. Moreover, the same argument as in the case γ > K rules
out that g ′ (wt ) has no limit. Therefore, g ′ (wt ) ≥ 0 converges to infinity.
Eqs. (4.12) and (4.14) imply that the derivative of the absolute value of expected excess returns
has the same sign as
[g ′′ (wt )A(wt ) + g ′ (wt )A′ (wt )][α + A(wt )] − 2g ′ (wt )A(wt )A′ (wt )
αA′ (wt )
+
[α + A(wt )]3
[α + A(wt )]2
 ′′

αA′ (wt )
g (wt )A(wt ) g ′ (wt )A′ (wt )[α − A(wt )]
⊤
+
+
.
(B.25)
αu Σu
[α + A(wt )]2
[α + A(wt )]3
[α + A(wt )]2
αu⊤ Σu

For γ > K, Lemma B.6 shows that limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) =

h

α2γ

(ρ−r)z γ+ γz



r
+1
ρ−r

i
−1

and limwt →0 g ′′ (wt )wt =

0. Combining with limwt →0 A(wt )wt = γ and limwt →0 A′ (wt )wt2 = −γ, we find that the limit of
(B.25) when wt goes to zero is
αu⊤ Σu
α2 γ
h

γ
(ρ − r)z γ + γ
z

r
ρ−r

α

i− ,
γ
+1 −1

which is positive under the condition in the proposition. For γ < K, Lemma B.6 shows that
limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) = ∞, in which case g ′′ (wt ) < 0 for small wt . Eqs. (B.24) and g ′′ (wt ) < 0 imply that the left-hand side of (B.18) is the sum of the three negative terms
− γ1 ′
g (w

−q(wt )

t ),

and rg′ (wt ) − r

g(wt )+ α
r
wt

α2 u⊤ Σu
g ′′ (wt ),
2[α+A(wt )]2 wt

. Since the right-hand side is bounded for wt close to

zero, each of the three negative terms is bounded. Since limwt →0 A(wt )wt = γ, the boundedness of the first term means that g′′ (wt )wt is bounded. Combining with limwt →∞ g ′ (wt ) = ∞,
limwt →0 A(wt )wt = γ and limwt →0 A′ (wt )wt2 = −γ, we find that the limit of (B.25) when wt goes
to zero is infinity.

91

C

Proofs of the Results in Sections 5 and 6

Proof of Proposition 5.1: We first compute the position Yt of arbitrageurs. Using (4.10) and
(B.4), we can write (4.9) as


σyt = σ I + f (wt )uu⊤ Σ Yt



⇔ yt = I + f (wt )uu⊤ Σ Yt

⇔ Yt + f (wt )u⊤ ΣYt u =

α
u,
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(C.1)

where I is the N × N identity matrix, and the third step follows from (3.18). Eq. (C.1) implies
that Yt is collinear with u. Setting Yt = νu in (C.1), we find
α
α
= ν + f (wt )νu⊤ Σu ⇒ ν =
,
′
′
α + A(wt ) − F (wt )
[α + A(wt ) − F (wt )][1 + u⊤ Σuf (wt )]
and so
Yt =

α
α
u=
u. (C.2)
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )][1 + u⊤ Σuf (wt )]
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) + αu⊤ Σug ′ (wt )

Eqs. (4.6) and (C.2) imply
∂Xnt
∂Ynt
α
=−
=−
.
∂un
∂un
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) + αu⊤ Σug ′ (wt )

(C.3)

Eq. (4.10) implies
∂Snt
= g(wt )Σnn .
∂un

(C.4)

Substituting (C.3) and (C.4) into (5.1), we find (5.2).

Since limwt →0 A(wt )wt = max{γ, K},

limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt = 0 and limwt →0 g(wt ) = − αr , (5.2) implies limwt →0 λnt = ∞.
Since limwt →∞ A(wt )wt = γ, limwt →∞ F ′ (wt )wt = limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt = 0 and limwt →∞ g(wt ) = 0,
(5.2) implies limwt →∞ λnt = 0.
Suppose next that hedgers are short-lived. Since −g(wt ) > 0, A(wt ) > 0 and g ′ (wt ) ≥ 0,
λnt > 0. To show that λnt is decreasing in wt if γ = 1, we prove the following lemma.
Lemma C.1 (g ′ (wt ) decreasing if γ = 1) For the solution to (4.11) constructed in Lemma B.5,
g ′ (wt ) is decreasing if γ = 1.
92

Proof: If g ′ (wt ) is not decreasing, then there exist m1 < m2 such that g ′ (m1 ) ≤ g ′ (m2 ). Consider

first the case where g ′ (m1 ) ≥ limwt →0 g ′ (wt ), and recall from Lemma B.6 that limwt →0 g ′ (wt )
is positive for γ > K and infinity for γ < K. Recall also from the proof of Lemma B.1 that
limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt = 0, and hence limwt →∞ g ′ (wt ) = 0. If g ′ (m1 ) < g ′ (m2 ), then we can choose

ˆ 2 ) such that m̂2 < m2 < m̂
ˆ 2 , g ′ (m̂2 ) = g ′ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) = ξ, g ′′ (m̂2 ) > 0 and
ξ > g ′ (m1 ) and (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ) < 0, and g ′ (wt ) > ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ). If g ′ (m1 ) = g ′ (m2 ), then we can choose
g ′′ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) such that m̂2 < m2 < m̂
ˆ 2 and the remaining inequalities are weak.
ξ ≥ g ′ (m1 ) and (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ) ≤ ĝ¯ξ (m̂2 ). The derivative of ĝ¯ξ (wt ) is
Proceeding as in the proof of Lemma B.6, we find ĝ¯ξ (m̂


1
α2 A′ (wt )
− γ1 −1 ′
− γ1
′
¯
ĝξ (wt ) = ξ − q(wt )
.
q (wt )wt + q(wt )
+
γ
[α + A(wt )]2
Since for γ = 1, A(wt ) =
ĝ¯ξ′ (wt ) = ξρ −

1
wt

(C.5)

and q(wt ) = 1ρ , we can write (C.5) as

α2
.
(αwt + 1)2

(C.6)

Lemma B.6 implies that for γ = 1, limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) =

α2
ρ .

Since ξ ≥ g ′ (m1 ) ≥ limwt →0 g ′ (wt ) =

α2
ρ ,

ˆ 2 ) ≤ ĝ¯ξ (m̂2 ).
(C.6) implies ĝ¯ξ′ (wt ) > 0 for all wt ∈ (0, ∞). This contradicts ĝ¯ξ (m̂
Consider next the case where g ′ (m1 ) < limwt →0 g ′ (wt ). If g ′ (m1 ) < g ′ (m2 ), then we can
ˆ i ) for i = 1, 2 such that m̂1 < m1 < m̂
ˆ 1 ≤ m̂2 < m2 < m̂
ˆ 2,
choose ξ > g ′ (m1 ) and (m̂i , m̂
ˆ i ) = ξ for i = 1, 2, g′′ (m̂1 ) < 0 and g ′′ (m̂
ˆ 1 ) > 0, g ′′ (m̂2 ) > 0 and g ′′ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) < 0,
g ′ (m̂i ) = g ′ (m̂
ˆ 1 ), and g ′ (wt ) > ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂2 , m̂
ˆ 2 ). If g ′ (m1 ) = g ′ (m2 ), then
g ′ (wt ) < ξ for all wt ∈ (m̂1 , m̂
ˆ i ) for i = 1, 2 such that m̂1 < m1 < m̂
ˆ 1 ≤ m̂2 < m2 < m̂
ˆ 2 and
we can choose ξ > 0 and (m̂i , m̂
the remaining inequalities are weak. Proceeding as in the case g ′ (m1 ) ≥ limwt →0 g ′ (wt ), we find

ˆ 1 ) ≥ ĝ¯ξ (m̂1 ) and ĝ¯ξ (m̂
ˆ 2 ) ≤ ĝ¯ξ (m̂2 ). For γ = 1, (C.6) implies that for any ξ > 0, ĝ¯′ (wt ) is
ĝ¯ξ (m̂
ξ
increasing and becomes positive for large wt . Hence, ĝ¯ξ′ (wt ) is either increasing, or decreasing and
ˆ 2 ). Hence,
ˆ 2 ) ≤ ĝ¯ξ (m̂2 ), ĝ¯′ (wt ) is decreasing in at least part of (m̂2 , m̂
then increasing. Since, ĝ¯ξ (m̂
ξ
ˆ 1 ), which contradicts ĝ¯ξ (m̂
ˆ 1 ) ≥ ĝ¯ξ (m̂1 ).
it is decreasing in all of (m̂1 , m̂
t)
⊤
′
Since −g(wt ) and 1+ A(w
α +u Σug (wt ) are positive, and −g(wt ) is decreasing, λnt is decreasing

if A(wt ) + αu⊤ Σug ′ (wt ) is decreasing. The latter function is decreasing for γ = 1 because A(wt ) is
decreasing for all γ and Lemma C.1 shows that g ′ (wt ) is decreasing for γ = 1.
93

Proof of Corollary 5.1: We set


A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
λnt = −g(wt ) 1 +
+ g ′ (wt )u⊤ Σu Σnn ≡ L(wt )Σnn .
α
Using (C.7) and Ito’s lemma, we find
PN
Σ n′ n′
′
′
Covt (dwt , dRt ),
Covt (dΛt , dRt ) = L (wt ) n =1
N
P
2 Σnn N
′
n′ =1 Σn′ n′
Covt (dΛt , dλnt ) = L (wt )
Vart (dwt ),
N
Covt (d(u⊤ dRt ), dλnt ) = L′ (wt )Σnn u⊤ Covt (dwt , dRt ).

(C.7)

(C.8)
(C.9)
(C.10)

The diffusion matrix of the return vector dRt is

⊤
α
⊤
′
⊤
(σSt + σ) =
σuS (wt ) + σ
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
=



αg ′ (wt )
σuu⊤ Σ + σ
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

⊤

,

(C.11)

where the first step follows from (B.4) and the second from (4.10). The covariance between wealth
and the return vector dRt is
Covt (dwt , dRt ) = (σSt + σ)⊤ σwt
⊤
αg ′ (wt )
α
⊤
=
σuu Σ + σ
σu
′
α + A(wt ) − F (wt )
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
h
i
α
⊤
=
u
Σuf
(w
)
+
1
Σu,
t
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )


(C.12)

where the second step follows from (A.80) and (C.11). Part (i) of the corollary follows by substituting (C.12) into (C.8). The proportionality coefficient is
P
h
i
α N
⊤
n′ =1 Σn′ n′
C (wt ) = L (wt )
u
Σuf
(w
)
+
1
,
t
N [α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]
Λ

′

(C.13)

and is negative when hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic preferences because
L(wt ) is decreasing in wt (Proposition 5.1). Part (ii) of the corollary follows from (C.9). The
proportionality coefficient is positive regardless of the shape of L(wt ). Part (iii) of the corollary
follows by substituting (C.12) into (C.10). The proportionality coefficient is negative when hedgers
are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic preferences because L(wt ) is decreasing in wt .
94

Proof of Corollary 5.2: The proportionality result follows from (4.12), (C.8), and (C.12). These
equations imply that the proportionality coefficient is
A(wt )

ΠΛ (wt ) =
L′ (w

t)

PN

n′ =1

Σn′ n′

(C.14)

.

N

This coefficient is negative when hedgers are short-lived and arbitrageurs have logarithmic preferences because L(wt ) is decreasing in wt .

Proof of Proposition 5.2: Using (C.7) to compute L′ (wt ), we can write (C.13) as
h


 ′
i
′ (w )
′′
t
′ (w )u⊤ Σu − g(w ) A (wt )−F (wt ) + g ′′ (w )u⊤ Σu
−g ′ (wt ) 1 + A(wt )−F
+
g
t
t
t
α
α
C Λ (wt ) =
′
α + A(wt ) − F (wt )
×

α

PN

n′ =1 Σn′ n′

N

h

i
u⊤ Σuf (wt ) + 1 ,

(C.15)

and ΠΛ (wt ) as
ΠΛ (wt ) = h


−g ′ (wt ) 1 +

×

PN

n′ =1 Σn′ n′

N

A(wt )−F ′ (wt )
α

A(wt )

 ′
i
′′ (w )
t
′′ (w )u⊤ Σu
+ g ′ (wt )u⊤ Σu − g(wt ) A (wt )−F
+
g
t
α
(C.16)

.

We denote the numerator and denominator of the fraction in the first line of (C.15) by NC (wt ) and
DC (wt ), respectively. We denote the numerator and denominator of the fraction in the first line of
(C.16) by NΠ (wt ) and DΠ (wt ), respectively, noting that NC (wt ) = DΠ (wt ).
Since limwt →0 A(wt )wt = max{γ, K} and limwt →0 F ′ (wt )wt = 0, limwt →0 DC (wt )wt = max{γ, K}.
Since, in addition, limwt →0 g(wt ) = − αr , limwt →0 g ′ (wt )wt = limwt →0 g ′′ (wt )wt2 = limwt →0 F ′′ (wt )wt2 =
0 and limwt →0 A′ (wt )wt2 = − max{γ, K}, limwt →0 NC (wt )wt2 = − max{γ,K}
. Hence limwt →0 NC (wt )wt =
r
−∞. Since, in addition, limwt →0 f (wt ) = 0, (C.15) implies that limwt →0 C Λ (wt ) = −∞.
Since limwt →0 A(wt )wt = max{γ, K}, limwt →0 NΠ (wt )wt = max{γ, K}. Since, in addition,
DΠ (wt ) = NC (wt ), limwt →0 DΠ (wt )wt = −∞. Therefore, (C.16) implies that limwt →0 ΠΛ (wt ) = 0.
Since limwt →∞ A(wt ) = limwt →∞ F ′ (wt ) = 0 (because the limits of these functions multiplied
by wt are γ and zero, respectively), limwt →∞ DC (wt ) = α. Since, in addition, limwt →∞ g(wt ) =
95

limwt →∞ g ′′ (wt ) = 0 and limwt →∞ A′ (wt ) = limwt →∞ F ′′ (wt ) = limwt →∞ g ′ (wt ) = 0 (because the
limits of the first two functions multiplied by wt2 are −γ and zero, respectively, and the limit of the
third function multiplied by wt is zero), limwt →∞ NC (wt ) = 0. Since, in addition, limwt →∞ f (wt ) =
0, (C.15) implies that limwt →∞ C Λ (wt ) = 0.
We finally determine limwt →∞ ΠΛ (wt ) when hedgers are short-lived. Since limwt →∞ A(wt )wt =
γ, limwt →∞ NΠ (wt )wt = γ. We next derive limwt →∞ DΠ (wt )wt assuming that g ′′ (wt )wt2 has a (finite or infinite) limit when wt goes to infinity. Since limwt →∞ g(wt ) is finite, limwt →∞ g ′′ (wt )wt2 = 0.
Since limwt →∞ A(wt ) = limwt →∞ A′ (wt )wt = limwt →∞ g(wt ) = limwt →∞ g ′ (wt )wt = limwt →∞ g ′ (wt ) =
limwt →∞ g ′′ (wt )wt = 0, limwt →∞ DΠ (wt )wt = 0. Therefore, (C.16) implies that limwt →∞ ΠΛ (wt )
is plus or minus infinity. To show that the limit is −∞, we note that the largest-order term


t)
′ (w )u⊤ Σu is −g ′ (w ), which is non-positive because g(w ) is increasing,
in −g ′ (wt ) 1 + A(w
+
g
t
t
t
α
 ′

′
t)
′′ (w )u⊤ Σu is −g(w ) A (wt ) , which is negative
and that the largest-order term in −g(wt ) A (w
+
g
t
t
α
α
because g(wt ) < 0 and A′ (wt ) < 0.

Proof of Proposition 6.1: We first derive the positions of hedgers and arbitrageurs, as well
as asset prices, in an equilibrium with positive supply. We next derive the Bellman equations of
hedgers and arbitrageurs. We finally show the equivalence with a zero-supply equilibrium.
Positive supply does not change the asset demands (3.6) and (3.13) of hedgers and arbitrageurs.
We write these demands in terms of the long-maturity assets, using the mapping derived in Lemma
4.1. (That is, we use (4.7) to replace D̄ − πt by µSt + D̄ − rSt, and (4.8) and (4.9) to replace (xt , yt )
by (Xt , Yt ).) Eqs. (3.7) and (3.13) become

−1
(σSt + σ)⊤ (σSt + σ)
(µSt + D̄ − rSt)
F ′ (wt )Yt
Xt =
− (σSt + σ)−1 σu −
,
α
α

−1
(σSt + σ)⊤ (σSt + σ)
(µSt + D̄ − rSt)
Yt =
,
A(wt )

(C.17)

(C.18)

respectively. Using the market-clearing equation
Xt + Yt = s,

(C.19)

we can write (C.17) as
−1
(σSt + σ)⊤ (σSt + σ)
(µSt + D̄ − rSt) − α(σSt + σ)−1 σu − F ′ (wt )s
Xt =
.
α − F ′ (wt )


96

(C.20)

Substituting Xt and Yt from (C.20) and (C.18), respectively, into (C.19), we find that expected
excess returns are
µSt + D̄ − rSt =

αA(wt )
(σSt + σ)⊤ bt ,
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(C.21)

where
bt ≡ (σSt + σ)s + σu.

(C.22)

Substituting µSt + D̄ − rSt from (C.21) into (C.18), we find that the position of arbitrageurs is
Yt =

α
(σSt + σ)−1 bt .
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(C.23)

Substituting ct from (A.14), µSt + D̄ − rSt from (C.21), and Yt from (C.23) into (B.2), we find that
the dynamics of arbitrageur wealth are given by (A.78) with


α2 A(wt )
−1
b⊤ bt ,
µwt = r − q(wt ) γ wt +
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2 t
σwt =

(C.24)

α
bt .
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(C.25)

Using (C.24) and (C.25), we find the following counterparts of (B.3) and (B.4):




1 ′′
α2
−1
⊤
′
b
b
A(w
)S
(w
)
+
S
(w
)
,
µSt = r − q(wt ) γ S ′ (wt )wt +
t
t
t
t
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2 t
2
(C.26)
σSt =

α
bt S ′ (wt )⊤ .
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )

(C.27)

Substituting σSt from (C.27) into (C.22) and solving for bt , we find
bt =

σ(s + u)

1−

(C.28)

.
α
′
⊤
α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt ) S (wt ) s

Substituting (µSt , σSt ) from (C.26) and (C.27) into (C.21), we find


1
α2
r − q(wt )− γ S ′ (wt )wt +
b⊤ bt S ′′ (wt ) + D̄ − rS(wt )
2[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]2 t
=

αA(wt )
σ ⊤ bt
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )



−1
⇔ r − q(wt ) γ S ′ (wt )wt +
=

α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)

2S

2 [α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αS ′ (wt )⊤ s]

αA(wt )
Σ(s + u),
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αS ′ (wt )⊤ s
97

′′

(wt ) + D̄ − rS(wt )
(C.29)

where the second step follows from (C.28). The same argument as in the proof of Proposition 4.1
implies that S(wt ) must have the form in (4.10). Substituting (4.10) into (C.29), we find that g(wt )
solves the ODE
α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)



− γ1
′′
g ′ (wt )wt − rg(wt )
g
(w
)
+
r
−
q(w
)
t
t
2
2 [α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs]
=

αA(wt )
.
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs

(C.30)

Substituting St from (4.10) into (C.28), we can write bt as
bt =

σ(s + u)
1−

α
′
α+A(wt )−F ′ (wt ) g (wt )(s

+ u)⊤ Σs

(C.31)

.

Substituting bt from (C.31) into (C.21) and (C.23), we can write µSt + D̄ − rSt and Yt as
µSt + D̄ − rSt =
Yt =

α + A(wt ) −

αA(wt )
(σSt + σ)⊤ σ(s + u),
′
⊤
t ) − αg (wt )(s + u) Σs

F ′ (w

α
(σSt + σ)−1 σ(s + u),
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs

(C.32)
(C.33)

respectively. This completes the derivation of positions and prices: the position Yt of arbitrageurs
is given by (C.33), the position Xt of hedgers is given by s − Yt , and asset prices are given by (4.10),
where g(wt ) solves the ODE (C.30).
We next derive the Bellman equation of arbitrageurs. To do that, we write (A.12) in terms of
the long-maturity assets, using (4.7) to replace D̄ − πt by µSt + D̄ − rSt , and (4.8) and (4.9) to
replace (xt , yt ) by (Xt , Yt ). We also note that the maximum in (A.12) is achieved for ĉt given by
ŵt
, and we substitute ct from (A.14), µSt + D̄ − rSt from (C.32), and Yt from
(3.11) and for ŷt = yt w
t

(C.33). This yields the following counterpart of (A.16):
1

ρq(wt ) = q(wt )1− γ



(1 − γ)q(wt )
α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)A(wt )
− γ1
+ q (wt ) +
rwt − q(wt ) wt +
wt
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs]2


1
γ(1 − γ)q(wt ) 2(1 − γ)q ′ (wt )
α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)
′′
+
q (wt ) −
+
.
2
wt
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs]2
wt2
(C.34)


′

Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition 3.4, we find the following counterpart of (3.21):

−1
zs A′ (wt ) + A(wt )2
q(wt ) γ − r
1=
A(wt )wt −
,
ρ−r
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs]2
98

(C.35)

where
zs ≡

α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)
.
2(ρ − r)

(C.36)

We next derive the Bellman equation of hedgers. Using (4.7) to replace D̄ −πt by µSt + D̄ −rSt ,
and (4.8) and (4.9) to replace (xt , yt ) by (Xt , Yt ), we find the following counterpart of (A.21):
i
1 h
ρ̄ = r + rF (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ − α2 Xt⊤ (σSt + σ)⊤ − u⊤ σ ⊤ [(σSt + σ)Xt + uσ]
2
h
i
− F ′ (wt ) rwt − ct + Yt⊤ (µSt + D̄ − rSt )


1  ′′
F (wt ) − F ′ (wt )2 Yt⊤ (σSt + σ)⊤ (σSt + σ)Yt + αF ′ (wt )u⊤ σ ⊤ (σSt + σ)Yt
2
i
1 h
⇔ ρ̄ = r + rF (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ − α2 bt − (σSt + σ)Yt − 2u⊤ σ ⊤ [bt − (σSt + σ)Yt ]
2
h
i
− F ′ (wt ) rwt − ct + Yt⊤ (µSt + D̄ − rSt )

−

−


1  ′′
F (wt ) − F ′ (wt )2 Yt⊤ (σSt + σ)⊤ (σSt + σ)Yt + αF ′ (wt )u⊤ σ ⊤ (σSt + σ)Yt ,
2

(C.37)

where the second step follows from (C.19) and (C.22). Using (C.23), we find
bt − (σSt + σ)Yt =

A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
[A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )]σ(s + u)
b
=
, (C.38)
t
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt )
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs

where the second step follows from (C.31). Substituting ct from (A.14), µSt + D̄ − rSt from (C.32),
Yt from (C.33), and bt − (σSt + σ)Yt from (C.38), we can write (C.37) as


−1
ρ̄ =r + rF (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ − r − q(wt ) γ F ′ (wt )wt


α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u) F ′′ (wt ) + A(wt )2
α2 u⊤ Σ(s + u)A(wt )
−
+
.
[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs]2 α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs
(C.39)

The equilibrium is characterized by the ODEs (3.14), (C.30), (C.35) and (C.39). To show the
equivalence with a zero-supply equilibrium, we define the function
F̂ (wt ) ≡ F (wt ) − αg(wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs.

(C.40)

99

Using (C.40), we can write (C.30) and (C.35) as


α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)
αA(wt )
− γ1
′′
g
(w
)
+
r
−
q(w
)
g ′ (wt )wt − rg(wt ) =
,
h
i2
t
t
′ (w )
α
+
A(w
)
−
F̂
′
t
t
2 α + A(wt ) − F̂ (wt )

(C.41)


−1
zs A′ (wt ) + A(wt )2
q(wt ) γ − r
1=
A(wt )wt −
,
ρ−r
[α + A(wt ) − F̂ ′ (wt )]2

(C.42)

respectively. We next multiply (C.30) by α(s + u)⊤ Σs and add it to (C.39). Using (C.40), we can
write the resulting equation as


1
ρ̄ = r + r F̂ (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ − r − q(wt )− γ F̂ ′ (wt )wt
−

n
o
α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u) F̂ ′′ (wt ) + A(wt )2

[α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs]2

+

α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)A(wt )
α + A(wt ) − F ′ (wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs
1

r F̂ (wt ) − r log(r) − αu⊤ D̄ + ρ − ρ̄ q(wt )− γ − r ′
⇔1=
+
F̂ (wt )wt
ρ−r
ρ−r
n
h
io
zs F̂ ′′ (wt ) − A(wt ) 2α + A(wt ) − 2F̂ ′ (wt )
−
.
h
i2
α + A(wt ) − F̂ ′ (wt )

(C.43)

Eqs. (C.41), (C.42) and (C.43) are identical to (4.11), (3.21) and (3.22), respectively, except that
F (wt ) is replaced by F̂ (wt ) and u is replaced by s+u. Hence, a solution (q(wt ), A(wt ), F̂ (wt ), g(wt ))
to the system of (3.14), (C.41), (C.42) and (C.43), coincides with a solution (q(wt ), A(wt ), F (wt ), g(wt ))
to the system of (3.14), (3.21), (3.22) and (4.11) provided that we replace u by s + u in the latter
system. Since the function g(wt ) is identical in the two cases, the price is the same in the positivesupply equilibrium and in a zero-supply equilibrium in which u is replaced by s + u. The position
Yt of arbitrageurs is also the same across the two equilibria because of (C.33) and F̂ (wt ) = F (wt ).
Since Yt is the same, the market-clearing equation (3.15) implies that the position Xt of hedgers in
the zero-supply equilibrium is equal to that in the positive-supply equilibrium minus s. Since positions and prices are the same across the two equilibria, the exposures of hedgers and arbitrageurs
to the Brownian shocks are also the same.

Proof of Proposition 6.2: The arguments in the proof of Proposition 6.1 that concern prices,
positions and the arbitrageurs’ Bellman equation remain valid for short-lived hedgers, provided

100

that we set F (wt ) = 0. Hence, S(wt ) has the form in (4.10) and g(wt ) solves the ODE
α2 (s + u)⊤ Σ(s + u)



− γ1
′′
g
(w
)
+
r
−
q(w
)
g ′ (wt )wt − rg(wt )
t
t
2
′
⊤
2 [α + A(wt ) − αg (wt )(s + u) Σs]
=

αA(wt )
,
α + A(wt ) − αg ′ (wt )(s + u)⊤ Σs

(C.44)

which is obtained from (C.30) by setting F (wt ) = 0. Substituting µSt from (C.26) into (4.2), and
using (4.10), (C.30), (C.31) and F (wt ) = 0, we can write expected excess returns as (4.12).

101

