                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE LABOR MARKET EFFECTS OF REDUCING THE NUMBER OF ILLEGAL
                             IMMIGRANTS

                                         Andri Chassamboulli
                                            Giovanni Peri

                                         Working Paper 19932
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19932


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




Previously circulated as "The Labor Market Effects of Reducing Undocumented Immigrants." We
are grateful to three anonymous referees for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Andri Chassamboulli and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market Effects of Reducing the Number of Illegal Immigrants
Andri Chassamboulli and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 19932
February 2014, Revised March 2015
JEL No. E24,J15,J64

                                            ABSTRACT

A controversial issue in the US is how to reduce the number of illegal immigrants and what effect
this would have on the US economy. To answer this question we set up a two-country model with
search in labor markets and featuring legal and illegal immigrants among the low skilled. We calibrate
it to the US and Mexican economies during the period 2000-2010. As immigrants, especially illegal
ones, have a worse outside option than natives their wages are lower. Hence their presence reduces
the labor cost of employers who, as a consequence, create more jobs per unemployed when there are
more immigrants. Because of such effect our model shows that increasing deportation rates and tightening
border control weakens the low-skilled labor markets, increasing unemployment of native low skilled.
Legalization, instead decreases the unemployment rate of low-skilled natives and it increases income
per native.


Andri Chassamboulli
University of Cyprus
CY-1678, Nicosia
Cyprus
andricha@ucy.ac.cy

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1         Introduction
Most of the existing papers on the labor market effects of immigration consider the num-
ber and the skill composition of immigrants as an exogenous variable and analyze the
consequences of changing those on native labor market outcomes. The number and type
of immigrants entering a country, however, are not policy variables of choice, but the
outcomes of economic, social and policy forces in the sending and receiving countries. In
the economic literature on the effect of immigration, very little attention has been paid
to the specific policies used and to the difference between the labor market effects of legal
and illegal immigrants.1
        Large part of the policy debate in the US, however, has been about different ways
to reduce the number of illegal immigrants. The presence of a large number of illegal
immigrants is an anomaly, but there is disagreement on how to address it. A question often
asked to economists is whether reducing illegal immigrants would be costly or beneficial
for the US economy. In particular, what policy, among border enforcement, deportation,
self-deportation or legalization, would be most harmful to US firms and workers? The
existing economic analysis uses naive frameworks to answer this question. Based on
an oversimplified canonical model of labor demand and supply, economists rarely focus
explicitly on illegal immigrants and they overlook the different implications across policies.
The goal of this paper is to fill this gap by using a more insightful model to analyze
the effects of different policies aimed at reducing the number of illegal immigrants. Do
fewer illegal immigrants free jobs for Americans or do they reduce firm’s profit and job
creation? Will legalization increase migration pressures? Will deportation and border
control decrease legal immigration?
        To address these important questions we propose a new model representing two con-
nected labor markets, parameterized to match US and Mexico, and two groups of workers,
high-skilled and low-skilled, that are complementary in production. Firms create jobs
that are skill-specific and search frictions in the market exist. Legal and illegal migration
opportunities from Mexico to the US arise and people take them if they increase their
expected labor income net of costs. To focus on the issue of illegal immigrants we consider
migration of low-skilled workers only from Mexico, while US workers can be low-skilled
    1
     Throughout the paper we will use the adjectives “legal” and “illegal” immigrants to characterize
immigrants who are endowed or not of proper documentation to reside and work in the US. Some scholars
refer to those groups as “regular” and “irregular” or as “documented” and “undocumented” immigrants.



                                                 1
(competing with immigrants) or high-skilled (complementing them in production). This
model incorporates aspects of labor markets and migration, which would not be captured
by a classical demand-supply framework and turn out to be crucial. First, we charac-
terize legal and illegal immigrants and native workers in the receiving country (US) as
potentially different in their outside options and in their probability of breaking up a
job-match. These differences affect the wage that each type of worker can bargain with
firms, for given productivity of the worker-firm match. In particular, illegal immigrants
usually have the worse outside option, followed by legal immigrants and then natives.
Hence the first group will accept lower wages, relative to legal immigrants and natives,
which imply that US firms can cut labor costs by hiring them. Second, as a consequence
of these labor cost savings, firms are willing to post more job openings and if those are
specific to skills, but not to immigrant workers, a positive job-creation effect will benefit
native employment opportunities too.
   Given the large productivity difference between Mexico and the US, illegal immigration
opportunities, albeit associated to worse conditions than legal ones, can be attractive to
Mexican unskilled workers. At the same time US firms benefit from illegal immigrants by
paying lower labor cost. These features capture the economic incentives that have lead to
illegal immigration in the US. However, there is also another crucial implication of this
framework: besides rich country skilled workers, also unskilled workers, can benefit from
illegal immigrants. More illegal workers push firms to create more jobs per unemployed
worker in the unskilled labor markets because their presence reduces the average firm’s
cost. As long as labor markets are not fully segmented between immigrants and natives,
natives will increase their employment too. Hence policies reducing the number of illegal
immigrants may cost employment and income to natives. With our model we can quantify
these costs and analyze how policies differ from each other.
   The four policies that we analyze are the following: (i) increasing border enforcement
to reduce illegal immigration opportunities (ii) increasing the costs that illegal immigrants
face in looking for a job (no access to benefits), (iii) increasing the frequency of depor-
tations and (iv) increasing the probability of legalization. In analyzing these policies we
take a status-quo driven approach. Rather than asking whether there is a theoretically
optimal number of illegal immigrants from the perspective of native income per person,
we consider the status quo, and we ask for each policy what would be the cost, in terms
of native income per person, wage and employment of reducing the number of illegal


                                             2
immigrants by a certain percentage.
   The policies described can be separated into two categories. Three of them (increased
deportation, increased border control, and increased cost of looking for a job) not only
decrease the number of illegal immigrants, but they also reduce the total number of
immigrants (legal plus illegal). We will call these three “restrictive policies”. To the
contrary legalization, the fourth policy, decreases the number of illegal immigrants, but it
increases the number of total immigrants. By turning illegal immigrants into legal, this
policy leaves the total immigrant stock unchanged and it also provides stronger incentives
for potential immigrants, as more of them can become legal in the US.
   The three restrictive policies, by reducing unskilled immigrants (illegal and total)
have a depressing effect on wage and employment of skilled workers (complementary to
unskilled), and on firms’ profits (that benefit from the cost-reducing effects of illegal
immigrants). In the canonical model, however, they would increase employment and
wages of native unskilled, by reducing competition from unskilled immigrants. To the
contrary, because of the unskilled-job creation effect of immigrants described above, the
restrictive policies worsen labor market conditions for unskilled natives when analyzed
within our model. Legalization, instead, as it increases the total number of unskilled
immigrants enhancing their job-creation effect, produces a positive effect on wages and
employment of skilled natives and a positive effect also on unskilled native employment.
While the wage effect of legalization on unskilled natives is negative, the overall effect on
income per native in the receiving country is positive, contrarily to the restrictive policies
that reduce income per native in the receiving economy.
   Quantitatively our simulations shows the following effects. Increasing the deportation
rate of illegal immigrants or reducing illegal immigration opportunities at the border, to
achieve a 50% reduction in the number of illegal immigrants (a very aggressive program)
would produce an increase in the unemployment rate of unskilled natives by about 1.13%
of its initial value. The unemployment rate of native skilled workers also increases by
0.57%. The first effect is due to a decrease in unskilled job creation by firms and the
second to the negative productivity effect on skilled workers due to complementarity. A
similar result obtained through increasing the cost of unemployment for illegal immigrants,
would generate qualitatively similar but somewhat smaller results on unskilled native
unemployment (+0.95%). This is because that policy would also reduce the wage of
illegal immigrants and hence partly offset the negative incentives in creating unskilled


                                              3
jobs. The same reduction in illegal immigrants achieved with a legalization program
would produce very different effects. The unemployment rate of unskilled natives would
decrease by about 1.31% of its initial value and that of skilled native would decrease by
1.20% of its initial value. The increase in legal immigrants generated by the legalization
program turns the negative labor market effect into a positive one. At the same time
legalization is the only policy that increases income per native in the scenario presented
above (+0.45%), while the losses of high skilled native workers, of firm profit and the
employment loss of low-skilled natives result in a net decrease in income per native when
adopting the other three policies (−0.25/ − 0.28%).
   Several checks on parameter values and on different scenarios about immigrants’ pro-
ductivity confirm that the above results are quite stable and they apply, qualitatively, to
most plausible scenarios. In summary, while the effects on income and unemployment
are quite small, the difference between the restrictive policies (that deliver similar effects
within each other) and the legalization is very clear: legalization is the only policy that
produces an increase in income per native and a decrease in native skilled and unskilled
unemployment. As the administrative costs to implement legalization are also likely much
smaller than those of increasing border security and certainly of those of deporting immi-
grants our analysis suggests that in terms of consequences on income of natives legalization
seems the best option.
   This paper is related to a large empirical literature on the effect of immigration on
US labor market outcomes (see the meta-analysis by Longhi, Nyikamp and Poot (2005),
(2008) and Lewis and Peri (forthcoming) for reviews of several important recent findings).
Most of that literature adopts a canonical neoclassical labor demand-supply approach to
derive a reduced form equation (e.g. Borjas 2003) or a slightly more structural approach
to estimate the elasticity of relative demand (Ottaviano and Peri 2012, Manacorda et al
2012). Very few studies analyze immigration within the context of search-matching models
of the labor market. Even fewer differentiate between legal and illegal immigration when
looking at labor market implications.
   The paper most closely related to ours is Chassamboulli and Palivos (2014). In that
paper, however, immigration is exogenous, only the receiving country is analyzed, only
legal immigrants exists and no policy is explicitly considered. Chassamboulli and Palivos
(2014) is the first paper, to our knowledge, that introduces the important job-creation
effect of immigrants stemming from the fact that the profit for the firm generated by


                                              4
immigrants is larger than that generated by natives. This is an important building block
of our model too. We add to that framework the very important difference between
legal and illegal immigrants, the modelling of migration decision from Mexico, and the
representation and analysis of specific policies. With those tools we are the first to analyze
the income and employment impact of different policies reducing the number of illegal
immigrants.
   Palivos (2009) is one of the very few papers analyzing the welfare effects of illegal
immigrants on natives. Liu (2010) is the only other model we are aware of, that analyzes
the effects of illegal immigration on the receiving country using a search and matching
model. In his model Liu (2010) only includes illegal immigrants and assumes that they
are identical to natives in their search and labor supply behavior, but may be complemen-
tary to native workers in production. We consider, instead that immigrants, particularly
illegal ones, are disadvantaged relative to natives in terms of job search conditions and
search costs (they receive lower or no benefits when unemployed) and we also include the
possibility that illegal immigrants are subject to the risk of deportation. In our model
what is commonly referred to as “exploitation” of illegal immigrants, namely them be-
ing paid lower salaries, is due to their worse bargaining position vis-a-vis their employer
relative to natives.
   Finally, somewhat related to this paper, although mainly empirical, is the literature
on immigration and labor market institutions. It has been recognized for some time that
the specific labor market institutions (level of unemployment benefits, costs of hiring,
centralization of wage bargaining) can affect significantly the impact of immigration on
employment and wages of natives. For instance Angrist and Kugler (2003) show that
more protective labor markets result in larger impact of immigration on unemployment.
D’Amuri and Peri (2014) also show that labor reallocation and the complementarity effects
of immigrants can be larger in markets with lower rigidities.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and provides
intuition for its main results and the working of different mechanisms. We then describe
in Section 3 the policy experiments that we will be considering and two special cases
that allow us to illustrate the functioning of two important mechanisms in the model.
Section 4 describes the parameterization of the model calibrated to match the main labor
market statistics of the US and Mexico for the period between 2000 and 2010. Section 5
shows the main effects obtained by simulating four different policies that would achieve a


                                              5
reduction of the number of illegal immigrants in the rich country. In Section 6 we present
some checks that the results are robust to reasonable variations of the parameter values.
Section 7 concludes the paper.


2     The Model
We describe here the main features of the model. Details of the equilibrium conditions
and derivation of intermediate results are described in the Appendix (A). We consider
two countries indexed by i = [1, 2]. Each country is endowed with a continuum of workers.
All agents are risk neutral and discount the future at a common rate r > 0, equal to the
real interest rate, time is continuous. Country 1 has higher wages and higher employment
rate than country 2. Hence workers have economic incentives to migrate from country 2
to country 1. No worker has incentives to migrate from country 1 to country 2. Migration
can be legal or illegal. We denote with I and L, respectively, the number of illegal and
legal migrant workers in country 1. The difference between the two is that opportunities
to migrate illegally are more frequent than those to migrate legally. However illegal
immigrants have higher search costs in the labor market and they face risk of deportation.
The size of the labor force native of country 1 (indicated as N ) is normalized to 1 and it is
divided into two types of workers: skilled in measure of S and unskilled in measure of 1−S.
Individuals born in country 2 are, instead, of measure F (foreign) and we assume that they
are all unskilled. The reason for this simplification is that we are focussing on the Mexico-
US migration which mainly involves unskilled workers (without tertiary education). The
total labor force of country 1 consists of natives, legal and illegal immigrants and its size
is 1 + I + L. The size of total labor force in country 2 is F − I − L. Individuals from
either country enter the labor force at rate τ and they exit at rate τ , so that the overall
size of the labor force (native of country 1 and 2) remains constant. The new individuals
enter the labor force as unemployed.
    At any point in time, opportunities to migrate arise as “random events” occurring
at rate µx , if the worker is unemployed in country 2, and at rate µex , if the worker is
employed. The subscript x = [I, L] indicates the type of the immigration opportunity.
Specifically, the worker may find an opportunity to migrate to country 1 legally (L) or
illegally (I). Once in country 1, illegal immigrants face some risk of deportation but they
may obtain legal status with probability n. This reflects the possibility that through
some special circumstances (e.g. marriage) some illegal immigrants may become legal.

                                              6
This probability is however very small in absence of a legalization program. We assume
that µx > µex and without loss of generality we choose µex = 0, x = [L, I]. Migration
opportunities, that is, arise only for the unemployed, who are actively looking for them.
This captures the idea that, in order to migrate, workers often need to move closer to
the border and actively look for migration opportunities. A worker will act upon an
opportunity to migrate to country 1 if the benefit exceeds the cost. The migration cost,
z is heterogeneous across individuals and it is distributed according to the CDF Φ(z)
with support [z, z̄]. Only the fraction of workers with costs lower than expected benefits
will migrate. Once in country 1, migrants search for a job. Hence, the benefit from
immigrating to country 1 is the difference between the value of searching for a job as an
immigrant in country 1 and the value of searching for a job as a native in country 2.

2.1       Workers and Firms
Firms in country 1 operate in one of two intermediate sectors or in the final sector.2
The two intermediate sectors produce intermediate goods Y1u and Y1s using “unskilled”
and “skilled” labor, respectively. Each of these two sectors operates a linear technology,
which, through normalization of units, yields output equal to the number of the respective
workers employed. These intermediate inputs are non-storable. Once produced, they are
sold in competitive markets and are assembled for the production of country’s 1 final good
(Y1 ) which is also the numeraire. The production technology for the final good of country
1 is as follows:


                          Y1 = [α(Y1s )ρ + (1 − α)(Y1u )ρ ]1/ρ ,   ρ ≤ 1,               (1)

where α is a positive parameter that governs income shares and ρ determines the elasticity
of substitution between the unskilled and skilled inputs. Since the two intermediate inputs
are sold in competitive markets, their prices, ps1 and pu1 will be equal to their marginal
products, that is:                                 1−ρ
                                                 Y1
                                         ps1
                                           =α            ,                              (2)
                                                Y1s
                                                   1−ρ
                                      u             Y1
                                     p1 = (1 − α)          ,                            (3)
                                                    Y1u
  2
      Our production side borrows from Acemoglu (2001).




                                                  7
The production technology in (1) implies diminishing marginal products and Edgeworth
complementarity between the two inputs Y1s and Y1u .3 The migrants from country 2 in
country 1 supply labor to the unskilled intermediate sector. The natives, on the other
hand, can be either skilled (s) or unskilled (u). Hence the skilled labor market in Country 1
hires only skilled native workers whose marginal productivity is ps1 and the unskilled labor
market hires unskilled native workers and immigrants with marginal productivity pu1 . The
production technology in (1) implies that immigrants are complements for skilled native
workers and perfect substitutes for unskilled native workers. Without loss of generality,
we keep the economy of country 2 simple by assuming that all workers in country 2 are
identically unskilled. There is therefore only one labor market in country 2 in which
all matches produce a constant output p2 and total output in that country is equal to
Y2 = (F − I − L − U2 )p2 , where U2 denotes the unemployed labor force of country 2 and
is defined below.

2.2       Search and Matching
In each labor market of country i unemployed workers and unfilled vacancies are brought
together via a stochastic matching technology Mi (Uit , Vit ), where t = [u, s] denotes the
skill-type. Uit and Vit denote, respectively, the number of unemployed workers and vacan-
cies of skill t in country i.4 We assume that the function Mi (Uit , Vit ), i = [1, 2] exhibits
standard properties: it is at least twice continuously differentiable, increasing in its argu-
ments, it exhibits constant returns to scale and satisfies the Inada conditions. Using the
property of constant returns to scale, we can write the flow rate of match per unemployed
worker of skill type t in country 1 as Mi (Uit , Vit )/Uit = mi (θit ). The flow rate of match
per vacancy is Mi (Uit , Vit )/Vit = qi (θit ), where θit = Vit /Uit = mi (θit )/qi (θit ) represents the
measure of tightness in market t of country i and mi (θit ) is increasing in θit while qi (θit ) is
decreasing in θit .
       Each firm posts at most one vacancy. The number of vacancies in each market is
determined endogenously by free entry. While vacancies in country 1 are skill-specific,
they cannot be specifically “targeted” to natives or to immigrants. They are open to
both native and immigrant workers with those skills. A vacant firm bears a recruitment
cost cti specific to the country and skill type, related to the expenses of keeping a vacancy
   3          ∂pt          ∂px
     That is: ∂Y1t < 0 and ∂Y1t > 0 for x 6= t.
                1             1
   4
     Since there is only one labor market in country 2 the superscript t is not relevant in the case i = 2.
In what follows we therefore drop the superscript t whenever i = 2.

                                                    8
open and looking for a worker. An unemployed worker of type t in country i receives a
flow of income bti , which can be considered as the opportunity cost of employment. In
addition, unemployed workers pay a search cost πijt per unit of time where the subscript
j = [N, I, L] denotes the worker’s origin and status: native (N ), illegal immigrant (I) and
legal immigrant (L). Such subscript applies only to the unskilled market of country 1. We
account for the fact that a legal immigrant worker faces a higher search cost compared to
a native workers and an illegal immigrant faces even higher costs. The reason is that legal
immigrants, whether on temporary visas or permanent resident have access to significantly
fewer benefits than US citizens. Since the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996 many federal government benefits (Food stamps,
TANF, AFDC and others) were restricted to US citizens only. Hence non-naturalized legal
immigrants (the majority of unskilled foreign-born) had a significant larger cost of being
without a job. In the 2000’s some but not all, states re-instated some of them. Moreover
all legal immigrants on temporary visas (such as H2B and other working visas) are not
eligible for any welfare assistance, including unemployment insurance. Hence their access
to income when not employed is significantly smaller than for natives. Undocumented
immigrants cannot access any welfare program/unemployment insurance at all and hence
their cost of searching is even larger. We standardize the search cost of a native worker
                 s     u              u          u
to 0 and we set π1N = π1N = π2N = 0, π1I = πI , π1L = πL and we presume πI > πL > 0
which will be confirmed by the calibration.
   Legal immigrants face zero deportation risk. They have a positive probability of
returning home, however, reflecting the possibility of return for personal or other reasons.
Illegal immigrants face the additional risk of being repatriated by deportation. Hence the
return probability of illegal immigrants is higher than that of legal immigrants. Let dL
and dI denote the instant return rate of legal and illegal immigrants, respectively. We set
dI ≥ dL > 0 where their difference is the deportation rate. Upon return to country 2 the
worker joins the pool of unemployed and starts searching for a job.
   When a vacancy and a worker are matched, they bargain over the division of the
produced surplus. The status of the worker as well as the output that results from a
                                                    t
match are known to both parties. Wages, denoted as wij , differ by country (i), skill type
(t) and migration status (j). They are determined by Nash bargaining of the produced
surplus between the firm and the worker. After an agreement has been reached, production
commences immediately. Matches in country i dissolve at the rate σit , specific to skill


                                              9
type t and country i. Following a job destruction, the worker and the vacancy enter the
corresponding market and search for new match.

2.3       Optimality Conditions and Free entry
At each point in time a worker is either employed (E) or unemployed (U ), while a vacancy
may be either filled (F ) or empty (V ). We use the notation Jijκ,t to denote the present
discounted value associated with each state κ = [V, F, U, E], where i = [1, 2] denotes the
country, j = [N, I, L] the worker’s immigration status and t = [u, s] indicates the worker’s
skill type.
       Eighteen Bellman equations describe the optimal behavior of workers and firms. Since
all workers and firms in country 2 are identical, four Bellman equations (one for each state
κ = [V, F, U, E]) describe the values of workers and firms in country 2. The remaining
fourteen Bellman equations describe the values of workers and firms in country 1, where
workers differ in terms of skills and immigration status. Specifically, for each of the three
states [F, U, E] there are four Bellman equations: one for legal immigrants, one for illegal
immigrants one for unskilled natives and one for skilled natives. The value of an unskilled
vacancy searching for a worker (V ), instead, is the same for legal immigrants, illegal
immigrants and unskilled natives because the vacancy is open to any of them and hence
it is described by the same Bellman equation. Another Bellman equation describes the
value of a skilled vacancy.5 The full set of Bellman equations is in the Appendix A.
       A second set of equilibrium conditions is that of free-entry (vacancy posting) on the
firm side in each of the two labor markets in country 1 (skilled and unskilled) and in
country 2. Firms open vacancies up to the point that an additional one has zero expected
value. In equilibrium this implies the following three conditions:


                           JiV,t = 0,    i = [1, 2] and t = [s, u] if i = 1,                          (4)

       Wages are then determined by Nash bargain between the matched firm and the worker.
The outside options of the firm and the worker are the value of a vacancy and the value
of being unemployed, respectively. Let Sijt ≡ JijF,t + JijE,t − (JijU,t + JiV,t ) denote the surplus
of a match between a vacancy of skill type t in country i and a worker of immigration
   5
    The superscript t and the subscript j are not relevant for country 2, we therefore drop them whenever
i = 2. We also drop the superscript t in the cases j = [L, I], since all immigrants provide only unskilled
labor and can only be employed in unskilled jobs, and the subscript j in the case κ = V and i = 1, since
unskilled vacancies in country 1 are common to immigrants and natives.


                                                   10
                                         t
status j. With Nash-bargaining the wage wij is set to a level such that the worker gets a
share β of the surplus, where β represents the relative bargaining power of workers, and
the share (1 − β) goes to the firm. This implies five equilibrium conditions (for matches
with legal immigrants, illegal immigrants, unskilled natives and skilled natives in country
1 and for matches with native workers in country 2) of the following form:

                  βSijt = JijE,t − JijU,t      (1 − β)Sijt = JijF,t − JiV,t              (5)
                  for i = [1, 2]; j = [N, I, L] if i = 1; and t = [s, u] if j = N

2.4    The Immigration Decision
An (unemployed) worker located in country 2 will choose to immigrate to country 1,
when an immigration opportunity arises, if its benefit exceeds its cost. The benefit from
migration is the difference between the value of searching for an unskilled job in country
1 and the value of searching in country 2. Workers are heterogeneous in their migration
costs. A worker whose migration cost is z, will chose to take advantage of an opportunity
                                       U
to enter legally in country 1 only if J1L − J2U ≥ z while he/she will enter illegally if
 U
J1I − J2U ≥ z. The threshold costs, denoted as zI∗ and zL∗ , and representing the highest
cost a worker is willing to pay in order to obtain illegal or legal entry into country 1, are
defined by the following conditions:

                                            zI∗ = J1I
                                                   U
                                                      − J2U                              (6)
                                            zL∗ = J1L
                                                   U
                                                      − J2U                              (7)

Notice that in equilibrium zL∗ > zI∗ because the value of searching for a job in country
                                                                           U     U
1 is higher when the immigrant is legal than when he/she is illegal (i.e. J1L > J1I ).
This proceeds from the assumptions that illegal immigrants have higher search costs
(πI > πL > 0) and face the risk of deportation (dI > dL > 0) both of which reduce the
value they can generate while searching for a job and the value of a job for them. This
implies that for a given distribution of the migration cost z, there will always be a larger
share of the country 2 population willing to take a legal immigration opportunity than
an illegal one.

2.5    The Steady-State conditions
The last set of equilibrium conditions are the steady-state conditions. Five of them
determine the constant number of unemployed workers of each type in each country by

                                                   11
equating the flows into and out of unemployment status for each type of worker: U2 are
               s                                     u
in country 2, U1N are skilled natives in country 1, U1N are unskilled natives in country 1,
U1L are legal immigrants in country 1 and U1I are illegal immigrants in country 1. Two
more conditions guarantee the stationarity of the number of legal and illegal immigrants,
L and I by equating the flows into and out of the group. The seven formal conditions
defining these steady state variables are given by (38-44) in the Appendix A.2. Let us
                               u     u
also define the variables φ ≡ U1N /(U1N + U1I + U1L ) to be the share of native workers in
the pool of unemployed unskilled workers of country 1 and λ ≡ U1L /(U1L + U1I ) to be the
share of legal immigrants among unemployed immigrants in country 1. In equilibrium φ
and λ are also constant. Writing the steady state conditions for unemployed and migrants
as a function of parameters, labor market tightness in the respective markets (θ1s , θ1u , θ2 )
and threshold costs zI∗ and zL∗ we obtain the following expressions:
                                          s
                                         U1N      σs + τ
                                us1N =       = s 1                                         (8)
                                          S   σ1 + τ + m(θ1s )
                                         u
                                        U1N      σu + τ
                               uu1N =       = u 1                                          (9)
                                        1−S  σ1 + τ + m(θ1u )
                                    U1I      σ u + τ + dI + n
                           u1I =        = u 1                                             (10)
                                     I   σ1 + τ + dI + n + m(θ1u )
                                 U1L   σ1u + τ + dL − n LI (1 − u1I )
                         u1L   =     =                                                    (11)
                                  L        σ1u + τ + dL + m(θ1u )
                                       U2         σ2 + τ
                             u2 =           =                                             (12)
                                    F −I −L   σ2 + τ + m(θ2 )

                                        µL Φ(zL∗ )u2 (F − I) + nI
                                L=                                                        (13)
                                         dL + τ + µL Φ(zL∗ )u2
                                           µI Φ(zI∗ )u2 (F − L)
                                 I=                                                       (14)
                                        dI + n + τ + µI Φ(zI∗ )u2
   Expressions (8)-(14) reveal some important mechanisms at work in our model. First,
(13) and (14) show that the equilibrium number of migrants I and L depend negatively
on the return probabilities (dI and dL ), positively on the rates of migration opportunities
(µI , µL ), and positively on the threshold migration costs zI∗ and zL∗ . The latter implies
that any economic and policy factor that increases the value of searching for a job in
country 1 relative to country 2, encourages immigration and translates in larger stocks of
legal L and illegal I immigrants in country 1. Second, the legalization rate (n) increases
the steady state number of legal immigrants L and decreases the steady state number of

                                                 12
illegal immigrants I. Third, as customary in these models, unemployment rates increase
with the relative separation probability σit and decrease with the matching probability
m(θit ) in the corresponding market.6 The impact of immigration policies on θit , and in
turn, on the matching probability m(θit ), is the main channel through which they can
influence the unemployment rate of the native workers that participate in that market.
                                                                         s     u
       Let us notice that once the constant equilibrium values of L, I, U1N , U1N , U1L , U1I are
determined then, a linear technology determines production of intermediates for country
                                  u
1 so that: Y1u = 1 − S + L + I − U1N                            s
                                     − U1L − U1I and Y1s = S − U1N .

2.6       Equilibrium
The eighteen Bellman equations (20-37), five Nash-Bargaining conditions (5), three free
entry conditions (4), seven steady-state conditions (8-14) and two immigration-threshold
conditions (6-7) plus 2 marginal productivity conditions (2, 3), the two linear production
functions of intermediates and the aggregate production function of country 1 (1) and
country 2 constitute the fourty-one equilibrium conditions determining the fourty-one
endogenous variables of the model. These endogenous variables are the eighteen values
of Jijκ,t across countries, skills and immigration status, five wages (w1N
                                                                        s     u
                                                                           , w1N , w1L , w1I , w2 ),
three labor market tightness values (θ1u , θ1s , θ2 ) the number of unemployed and migrants
                     s
of each type (I, L, U1N    u
                        , U1N , U1L , U1I , U2 ) the immigration cost thresholds (zI∗ , zL∗ ) the
marginal productivity of skilled and unskilled workers (pu1 , ps1 ), the output of skilled and
unskilled firms (Y1u , Y1s ) and the final output of country 1 and 2 (Y1 , Y2 ). In the appendix
A.3 we show how to derive some intermediate results and provide a description for how
to solve the model in blocks. Given the fact, however, that some of the expressions are
cumbersome and not very intuitive we omit those from the text. We will explain, instead,
before calibrating and simulating the full model, the intuition behind two key mechanisms
with the help of two special cases described in Section 3 below.

2.7       Three key conditions
Before moving to the special cases, it is useful, to show three equilibrium relations that
provide some intuition for the role of legal and illegal immigrants on unskilled job creation
(vacancy posting) by firms in country 1.
   6
     The unemployment rates of illegal and legal immigrants, u1I and u1L , increase also with the proba-
bility of return dI and dL (respectively) and with the exit/entry rate τ. All those parameters, in steady
state, act as separation rates.


                                                   13
   Manipulating the Bellman equations of the value (to the firm) of a filled unskilled
          F,u    F       F
vacancy, J1N  , J1L and J1I we can write the difference in value between a native-filled
vacancy and a legal immigrant-filled one and between one filled by a legal and an illegal
immigrant as follows:


                                                 u         F,u
                         F,u    F      [w1L − w1N  ] + dL J1N
                        J1N  − J1L =                                                      (15)
                                          r + τ + σ1u + dL
                                                                  F
                          F     F      [w1I − w1L ] + [dI − dL ] J1L
                         J1L − J1I   =                                                    (16)
                                           r + τ + σ1u + dI + n

Expression (15) reveals that if w1L < w1N , which would be the case when legal immigrants
                                                                  F,u    F
have higher search cost than natives (worse outside option) then J1N  < J1L as long as
dL is small. So the value of a legal immigrant is higher than that of a native to the firm
as long as, given their equal productivity, the wage paid to the immigrant is low enough
relative to the native wage, to compensate for the larger probability that the immigrants
ends the match because of return to the country of origin. Likewise condition (16) reveals
that if w1I < w1L , because illegal immigrants have worse outside options than legal ones,
      F     F
then J1L < J1I as long as the difference between the return probabilities (dI − dL ) which
represent the deportation rate, is sufficiently small. Hence, low deportation rates and high
search cost for illegal immigrants make them particularly valuable to the firm. And low
return rates and high search cost for legal immigrants make them valuable to the firm.
A negative value of expressions (15), (16) implies that legal and illegal immigrants may
stimulate job creation. This vacancy creation effect can be seen by manipulating the free
entry condition for unskilled vacancies in country one to get:

                         cu1         F,u
                                                    F               F
                                                                       
                                = φJ 1N  + (1 − φ)  λJ 1L + (1 − λ)J1I                    (17)
                        q(θ1u )
   In this expression a larger share of immigrants among the unemployed (smaller value of
φ) and a larger share of illegal ones among them (smaller value of λ) increase the value of
                                                                                   F
the right-hand side, as long as (15) and (16) are negative, by shifting weight on J1I relative
    F,u
to J1N  . This would imply more vacancy posting (free entry) and an increase in market
tightness θ1u to increase the left-hand side and reduce the right-hand side and maintain the
equality (recall that q(θ1u ) is decreasing in θ1u ). This implies that a policy that decreases
the share of both illegal and total immigrants in the labor force certainly depresses the
labor market tightness through this channel. However a policy that decreases the share of


                                              14
illegal immigrants but increases the share of total immigrants may offset the first negative
impact with a positive impact on θ1u .
    Finally let us notice that the impact of immigrants on θ1u is also the channel through
which they affect skilled native workers. For as long as skilled and unskilled workers
are complementary in production, larger supply of the unskilled labor input Y1u , implies
larger price for the skilled labor input ps1 and thus larger profits for skilled firms. Hence
immigration policies that stimulate the creation of unskilled jobs and raise θ1u will also
stimulate the creation of skilled jobs (i.e. raise θ1s ), with a positive impact on skilled native
employment and wages.


3      Policy Effects in Special Cases
The rich structure of the model presented above allows us to analyze different policies. We
consider four of them: (i) reduced opportunities of illegal entry (increased border control)
captured by a decline in µI ; (ii) increased search cost for illegal immigrants, captured by
an increase in πI ; (iii) increased probability of deportation, captured by an increase of dI
for given dL (iv) increased probability of legalization, captured by an increase in n. All
these measures reduce the number of illegal immigrants. They have, however, different
implications on native labor markets as well as different incentive effects on immigration.
    There are the two main channels through which the presence of illegal (and legal)
immigrants affects labor market outcomes of natives in our model. The first channel,
that we call “price channel”, operates through the price of the intermediate input, pu1 .
As evidenced in equation (3) a decrease in I which is translated by the linear production
technology into a decrease in Y1u increases the marginal productivity of the unskilled labor
input thereby causing its price to rise. This “price effect” is the standard one, also present
in the canonical model: immigrants are substitute for native unskilled and reducing their
supply the marginal productivity of those increases putting upward pressure on their
wages and downward pressure on their unemployment rate. The second channel, that we
call “labor-cost channel” works instead through the expected labor cost to an unskilled-
sector firm from a filled job and follows the logic described in 2.7. A decrease in I which
corresponds to an increase in the share of legal immigrants λ would increase the expected
labor cost and reduce the value of a vacancy to an unskilled-sector firm. Hence firms post
fewer vacancies, the tightness of the labor market decreases putting downward pressure
on wages and upward pressure on unemployment of native unskilled.

                                               15
   For both effects it is important to know whether the policy reducing I also reduces
total immigrants (and their share in the labor force 1 − φ). A policy that decreases total
immigrants (I + L) together with I may exacerbate both effects, while a policy that
decreases I but increases (I + L) may attenuate and even reverse each effect. Before
considering the general case it is useful to consider two special cases in which the price
and the labor-cost effects work one at a time, while the other effect is muted.

3.1     Identical Options for Natives and Immigrants: the Price
        Channel only
The first case considered is one in which unskilled natives, legal and illegal immigrants
are identical in their search cost and in their probability of breaking up a match. The
parameter restrictions generating this case are: dI = dL = 0 (no probability of random
return for immigrants) and πI = πL = 0 (no search costs for immigrants). In this case a
decrease in I can be achieved through either border control or legalization (as the other
two channels have been muted) and it will essentially represent a decrease in the supply of
unskilled workers who are identical to native ones. While framed in a search-model with
two labor markets (skilled and unskilled) the working of this model is very similar to that
of a canonical model in which changing the number of illegal immigrants is like changing
the supply of unskilled workers. The effects on wages and employment are very similar
to what a classical model of labor demand and supply for two complementary types of
labor, would deliver.
   A consequence of the assumptions above is that legal immigrants, illegal immigrants
                                                  u     u     u
and native unskilled will be paid the same wage: w1N = w1L = w1I = w1t . Therefore,
the expected value of filling an unskilled vacancy with natives, legal or illegal immigrants
              F,u    F     F
is the same (J1N  = J1L = J1I ) and changing the share of legal, illegal immigrants and
natives in the labor force has no effect on the incentive to post vacancies (the right-hand
side of 17 does not depend on λ and φ in this case). This means that the labor-cost
channel is not operating and the only effects work through the price channel.

3.1.1   Identical Natives and Immigrants: Effects of Border Controls

A decrease in the number of illegal immigrants I achieved through increased border
control (lower µI ) reduces the total number of unskilled workers, (1 − S + L + I) in
country 1 and through the linear technology of the unskilled-sector it lowers Y1u =


                                            16
    m(θ1u )
σ1 +τ +m(θ1u )
 u               [1 − S + I + L] in equilibrium. Since skilled and unskilled labor inputs are
complements in the production of the final good (ρ < 1), the decrease in Y1u raises the
marginal productivity of unskilled labor pu1 and lowers that of skilled labor ps1 (from 2
and 3). Since higher prices lead to higher surplus of a match, this induces the posting
of unskilled jobs and raises the tightness and matching probability in the unskilled sec-
tor m(θ1u ). The increase in the matching probability of unskilled native workers, in turn,
drives their unemployment rate down and drives their wages up by improving their outside
option. The opposite holds for the skilled workers. Their unemployment rate increases
and their wage decreases.

3.1.2     Identical Natives and Immigrants: Effects of Legalization:

A decrease in the number of illegal immigrants I achieved through legalization (increase
in the rate n) leaves the total number of immigrants unchanged by simply increasing the
number of legal immigrants L by the same amount that it decreases illegal ones I. In
this case “legal”and “illegal” are simply labels given to identical type of workers and they
are also identical to unskilled natives. Hence legalization does not change any feature
of the labor market nor the incentives of people in country 2 to immigrate since there
is no benefit from obtaining legal status. Hence in this case the production and the
price of the unskilled intermediate input (Y1u and pu1 , respectively) remain unchanged. In
this case, the legalization of illegal immigrants has no impact on job creation and labor
market outcomes of native. Relative to the restrictive policy of increasing border controls,
legalization fully eliminates the positive effects on wage and employment of unskilled
natives and the negative effects on wage and employment of skilled native workers.

3.2      Perfect Substitution Skilled-Unskilled: the Labor-Cost chan-
         nel only
The second special case represents, in some respects, the opposite scenario. In this case
we consider perfect substitutability in production between skilled and unskilled workers
(which corresponds to the assumption ρ = 1 in the production function 1) but we maintain
differences between unskilled natives, legal immigrants and illegal immigrants so that
dI > dL > 0 and πI > πL > 0. Illegal immigrants can be deported and they have the
highest search costs. Legal immigrants have a certain probability of returning and also
intermediate search costs.


                                                17
      In this case, the price effect is muted because the prices (marginal productivity) of
the intermediate goods are constant, as the aggregate production function is linear in
the intermediates. In particular ps1 = α and pu1 = 1 − α and they will be unaffected
by the relative supply of skilled and unskilled. This implies that the skilled sector is
unaffected by the employment and labor market conditions in the unskilled sector, and as
a consequence, the wage and unemployment rate of skilled native workers are independent
of I. For unskilled workers, instead, the labor market effects of reducing illegal immigrants
works only through their effects on the expected labor cost. We can see from expression
(17) that an increase in the proportion of natives in total unemployment of country 1 (φ)
and an increase in the proportion of legal immigrants in the total number of unemployed
immigrants (λ) decreases the expected value of a vacancy and reduces job creation7 .
Moreover, policies that increase the search cost for illegal immigrants (πI ) or increase
their deportation probability (dI ) also influence directly the value of filling a vacancy
                           F
with an illegal immigrant J1I and in turn affect the right-hand side of (17). Policies
aimed at reducing illegal immigrants, therefore, can affect the expected labor cost to an
unskilled firm in country 1 and in turn their job creation.

3.2.1      Perfect Skill Substitution: Border controls, Search Cost and Deporta-
           tion Rates

Border controls, search cost and deportation rates reduce the total proportion of immi-
grants in the unemployment pool of country 1 hence increasing φ. This effect decreases
                      F            F                                          F
the weight on term [λJ1L + (1 − λ)J1I ] and increases the weight on the term J1N in the
                             F     F     F
right-hand side of (17). If J1I > J1L > J1N (which is the empirically relevant case) then
the decline in the proportion of immigrants will increase the expected labor cost to an
unskilled firm and decrease job creation and market tightness θ1u to maintain the equality
in (17).
      Also, immigration policies aimed at reducing illegal immigrants would, increase λ, the
fraction of legal workers among unemployed immigrants. Such a change shifts weight
      F      F                       F            F                            F     F
from J1I to J1L in the expression [λJ1L + (1 − λ)J1I ] of (17) and as long as J1I > J1L it
reduces market tightness θ1u to maintain equality. Both effects of the restrictive policies
conjure to a decrease in θ1u and hence they have an unambiguously positive impact on
unemployment and negative impact on wages of unskilled native workers.
  7
      As long as expressions (15) and (16) are negative.



                                                    18
   Besides this effect, increasing the search cost for illegal immigrants (πI ) or increasing
their deportation probability (dI ) affect directly the cost of employing an illegal immigrant
                                  F
and hence his value to the firm, J1I . Those two policies have opposite effects on the cost
of employing an illegal immigrant. An increase in πI worsens the outside option of illegal
                                        u
immigrants and hence lowers their wage w1I for given productivity thereby lowering labor
costs to the firm. The increased deportation policy, instead, by increasing the probability
of breaking a match, increases the cost of employing an illegal immigrant and hence it
reduces incentives for job posting. Hence, the same reduction in the number of illegal
immigrants achieved through an increase in πI , has a smaller negative impact on job
                                                                               F
creation in the unskilled sector than an increase in dI , as it will increase J1I , while an
                            F
increase in dI will reduce J1I and have a further negative impact on unskilled labor market
tightness (via reducing the value of the right-hand side of 17).

3.2.2   Perfect Skill Substitution: Legalization

Following the three policies described above, both 1 − λ (the share of illegal immigrants
among unemployed immigrants) and 1 − φ (the immigrant share in unemployment) de-
crease and this produces a depressing effect on job creation. Legalization, instead, is the
only policy that may decrease the share of illegal immigrants without reducing the total
share of immigrants in country 1. By turning illegal into legal immigrants and increasing
the incentives to migrate, it actually increases the overall number of immigrants. The
positive effect on job creation implied by an increase in total immigrants will mitigate the
negative effect on job creation due to the reduction of illegal immigrants.
   The impact of legalization on the share of immigrants in the labor force (and in the
unemployment pool) is in general ambiguous. There are however reasonable parameter
configurations such that an increase in n raises total immigrants as share of the labor
force. This situation is more likely when the opportunities for legal entry µL are small.
To the limit when µL = 0 so that all new immigrants are illegal and can become legal
with probability n, an increase in the legalization probability raises the total number of
immigrants (legal and illegal together) for two reasons. First, because a higher legalization
probability means that the rate by which immigrants return home is on average lower
(fewer deportations). Second, because higher chances of legalization raise the expected
value of being illegal and this attracts a larger share of country 2 workers by increasing zI∗ .
In the general case, where µL > 0, a higher n will have the additional effect of deterring


                                              19
the entry of legal immigrants through its negative impact on zL∗ .8 In our simulations for
the relevant parameter range an increase in n (legalization) lowers φ and raises λ. These
compositional changes involve two opposite effects on the creation of unskilled jobs in
country 1: the decrease in φ raises it, while the increase in λ lowers it. The relative size of
these two opposite effects depends on how large µL is relative to n among other factors.
Hence, while we cannot be sure that the effect of legalization through the labor-cost
channel is positive on the labor market tightness of unskilled, the described mechanisms
suggests that it will be larger (either reducing a negative effect or turning it into a positive
one) than the effect of the other policies considered.

3.3     Both Channels
In the basic model in which both channels are at work their relative effect will determine
the effect of reducing illegal immigrants on native unemployment and wages. The three
“restrictive” policies, reducing border crossing, increasing search costs and increasing
deportation have a positive price effect on employment and wages of native unskilled
workers, but they may also have a negative labor-cost effect on those variables. If the
second effect prevails they may be harmful to employment and wage of native unskilled.
They will certainly hurt the wage of skilled workers through the price channel. On the
other hand legalization, the only policy that may reduce the number of illegal immigrants
while increasing total immigration, attenuates the positive price effect on employment and
wages of unskilled but may have a positive impact through reduction of labor costs. In the
presence of a significant labor-cost effect, the effect of legalization on employment of native
unskilled may be beneficial, while it also benefits native skilled, if there is complementarity
across skills. Relative to the canonical model the search model introduces the important
labor-cost effects that may reverse or attenuate the canonical predictions on native labor
market outcomes. We will now simulate the effects obtained in a model matched to the
US-Mexican economy.
   8
    A higher legalization probability improves the outside option of potential immigrants in country 2
and increases, in turn, their wage w2 . The value of searching for a job in country 2 (J2U ) therefore
                                       ∗
increases, with a negative impact on zL  .




                                                 20
4         Baseline parameterization of the Model
We parameterize the model as to represent the average performance and conditions of
the US and the Mexican economy between 2000 and 2010 a period in which the presence
of illegal immigrants in the US peaked to about 11.5 million individuals. To do so we
combine three types of parameters. Some are taken from the literature. Others are taken
directly from the US and Mexican data. Finally a third group is chosen to match some
moments of the data. The parameter choice is summarized in Table 1. We describe here
in detail the sources and the methods used to calculate these parameters. For some key
parameters we perform robustness checks in Section 6 so as to test the sensitivity of our
main results to a range of plausible values.
        We use a Cobb-Douglas matching function, Mit = ξi (Uit )ε (Vit )1−ε , i = [1, 2], t = [u, s]
with constant return to scale to Uit and Vit . Following common practice in these models,
we set the unemployment elasticity of the matching function to ε = 0.5, which is within
the range of estimates reported in Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001). We postulate the
worker’s bargaining power to be β = 0.5, so that the Hosios condition (β = ε) is met
(see Hosios, 1990). We use the monthly interest rate r = 0.4% which implies a yearly
real rate of about 5%.9 This is calculated as the 30-year treasury constant maturity bond
rate minus the average GDP deflator over the period 1980-2010 for the US.10 We define
as skilled a worker who has at least some college education and unskilled workers are
those with no college education. Based on estimates from Ottaviano and Peri (2012)
the elasticity of substitution between workers with at least some college education and
workers with no college education is around 2. We therefore set ρ = 0.5. We assume
that the distribution of migration costs is uniform over the interval [0, z̄] where we have
standardized the lower bound to 0.
        We consider only immigrants from Mexico to the US whose vast majority is unskilled
(no college degree). Our measure of I + L therefore includes only unskilled Mexican
immigrants.11 The rest of the labor force of country 1 (which we normalize to 1) includes
unskilled and skilled US natives. The share of skilled workers in the US is set to S = 0.54.
This is the average (over years 2000 and 2010) share of US-born workers with some
    9
     We match all the flow rates in the model to monthly rates.
  10
     If one uses the short-term rate, namely the 3-months treasury rate during the 1980-2010 period, one
gets a smaller value of r = 0.2%. We use this in a robustness check. We consider the longer interval
1980-2010 as interest rates were unusually low in the 2000-2010 period.
  11
     We omit the skilled Mexicans from our analysis with no consequences as they constitute a very small
percentage of the total.

                                                  21
college or more in the native working age (25-65) population. Data for this measure come
from IPUMS USA. Using the same data we find the monthly inflow of new individuals
in the US native labor force is 0.061% and hence we set τ = 0.00061. Using matched
data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) we estimated the average skilled and
unskilled monthly job-separation rates in the US (σ1s and σ1u , respectively) to be 0.024
and 0.032, respectively.12 As we are not aware of comparable estimates for Mexico, we set
the separation rate of Mexican jobs equal to that of unskilled US jobs, σ2 = σ1u = 0.032.
The Mexican population in working age (residing in Mexico and the US), F , is set to
0.33 of the US native population in working age which is standardized to 1. This number
equals the average value obtained from census data 2000 and 2010 by dividing the Mexican
unskilled population (in Mexico and US) and the total US native population in the US.
       From Masferrer and Roberts (2009), the total number of returnees to Mexico each
year (excluding deportation and averaged over the available period 2001-2005) was about
245,000 per year. These are the most precisely estimated returns to Mexico measured
during the 2000-2010 decade. As of 2001, the total Mexican-born unskilled population
in the US was about 9.1 millions.13 The basic yearly return migration rate for Mexican
migrants can be obtained as the ratio of returnees to US residents which equals 0.027 per
year. We consider this to be the “basic” rate of return for Mexican immigrants and we
apply it to legal Mexican immigrants for the decade 2000-2010. In order to compute the
yearly return rate of illegal Mexican immigrants we add to the basic rate the deportation
rate of non-criminal Mexicans. More specifically, applying the same basic return rate
of 0.027 to the illegal Mexican population in the US, which was estimated at about 5.2
million in 2001 (Passel and Capps, 2004), gives an estimate of 0.14 million of illegal
Mexicans returning to Mexico each year. We then add the deportation of non-criminal
Mexicans to that number by using Masferrer and Roberts (2009). They report, on average
(for the period 2001-2005), about 100,000 non-criminal Mexicans deported per year14 so
that the total number of previously illegal Mexicans going home (either returning or
deported) was about 0.24 million per year. The ratio of total returnees (0.24 million)
to the total number of illegal Mexicans (5.2 million) gives the return+deportation rate
of the illegal Mexicans equal to 0.0453 yearly. Based on these values and recalling that
  12
     These measures include employment to unemployment and employment to inactivity transitions.
  13
     This number comes from the US Census, 1990.
  14
     As in our model people are deported while working or looking for a job we assume that they are not
criminal.



                                                  22
our model uses monthly rates we set the monthly return rates by converting the yearly
ones: (1 − dL )12 = (1 − 0.027) and (1 − dI )12 = (1 − 0.0453). This gives dL = 0.0023
and dI = 0.0039 corresponding to a return probability of 0.23% and 0.39% per month
respectively. Given the limited evidence on these parameters we also conduct robustness
checks allowing values for the return rate twice as large (see section 6.1). Both rates are
low relative to the average separation rate of less-skilled jobs which was about 3% per
month.
       The legalization rate of illegal immigrants is available for the period 2009-2010 and
it is calculated as follows. During this period there were about 100,000 naturalizations
of Mexicans per year (see Lee, 2012) and of those naturalizations according to table A.1
of Hill et al. (2010) about half were of individuals who had been at some point illegal
immigrants. Hence about 50,000 illegal Mexican immigrants per year were naturalized
(via marriage, family unification and other specific circumstances). The estimate of il-
legal Mexicans in 2010 was around 6.8 millions (out of a total of 12 million Mexicans
immigrants in the US in that year 15 ) so that the “naturalization rate” per year for illegal
Mexicans immigrants was (50,000/6,800,000)=0.007.(0.7% per year). We consider this
form of naturalization as the way of becoming legal from illegal in absence of an amnesty.
Hence converting this yearly rate into monthly rate (approximately dividing by 12) gives
a value of n = 0.0006. This is the monthly probability of legalization equal to 0.06% per
month.
       We jointly calibrate the remaining 14 parameters of the model (cs1 , cu1 c2 , bs1 , bu1 , b2 ,
µL µI
 z̄
    , z̄ ,   ξ1 , ξ2 , πL , πI , p2 and α) to match the targets described here.16 We target the
ratio of employment/population in working age for workers with some college education or
more (skilled workers) and for high-school graduates or less (unskilled workers) in the US
using IPUMS USA data averaging 2000 and 2010 and we obtain values equal to 87% and
73%, respectively.17 We also target the employment/population ratio in Mexico, which
using IPUMS International data, 2000 and 2010 equals 59%.18 Our next target is the
  15
     see Hoefer, Rythina and Baker (2012)
  16
     Under the assumption that the distribution of migration costs is uniform over the interval [0, z̄], the
individual values of µL , µI and z̄ do not matter. What matters, instead, is our choice of values for µz̄L
and µz̄I and we therefore match those.
  17
     As there are very large flows between employment and non-employment for individuals in working
age we match the value of U in both countries to non-employment rather than to unemployment.
  18
     To measure the employment to population ratios in the US and Mexico we use ages 25-65 and average
over years 2000 and 2010. Since our focus is on unskilled Mexican immigrants and their consequences
for US native workers, our measure of total population in country 1 (1 + I + L) includes only US-
and Mexican-born workers; all other (immigrant) workers are excluded. Moreover, our measure of total


                                                    23
wage premium for workers in the US who have at least some college education. Using
IPUMS USA data 2000-2010 we find it to be on average equal to 68%.19 We use the
Conference Board’s Help-Wanted Index (HWI) to calculate the vacancy to unemployment
ratio which is equal to 0.62 in the US and we assume that the vacancy to unemployment
ratio in Mexico takes the same value. As baseline value we then set the wage gap between
legal immigrants and natives in the US in 2000-2010 at 20% of the native wage which is
consistent with the immigrant-native wage gap estimated in Borjas and Friedberg (2009)
for year 2000, after controlling for observed abilities such as education and age.20 We
target the wage ratio between US and Mexico to be equal to 4 which is close to the average
ratio of income per person between the two countries in the years 2000-2010, according to
Penn World Table, version 7.121 . We use Hall and Milgrom’s (2008) estimate for the ratio
of unemployment to employment income of 0.71 to pin down values for the unemployment
incomes; we set bs1 = 0.71w1N
                           s
                              , b2 = 0.71w2 and bu1 = 0.71w1u , where w1u is the average wage
of unskilled workers in the US. We set the ratio of Mexican immigrants to the US native
labor force to (L + I) = 0.038 (averaging 2000 and 2010) and the proportion of legal
immigrants in the total number of Mexican immigrants to 56% (from Hoefer et al. 2012)
so that I = 0.017 and L = 0.021. Finally, based on studies of the wage increase produced
by legalization following Rivera-Batiz (1999) and Kossoudji and Cobb-Clark (2002) we
set the wage gap between illegal and legal immigrants to a baseline value of 7.5% (as
estimated from the NLSY data at page 621 of Kossoudji and Cobb-Clark 2002). More
recent studies of the legal-illegal immigrant wage gap (Barcellos 2010) have identified
somewhat smaller values estimated to be in the order of 5%. We will use that value in a
robustness check in section 6.1.
    The values of the parameters matching the above targets are as follows: α = 0.643,
cs1 = 0.068, cu1 = 0.146 , c2 = 0.028, bs1 = 0.419, bu1 = 0.249, b2 = 0.086, πI = 0.381,
                                                       µI                    µL
πL = 0.301, ξ1 = 0.113, ξ2 = 0.060, p2 = 0.135,        z̄
                                                            = 0.0166% and     z̄
                                                                                   = 0.0039% and they
are shown in Table 1. The last two coefficients, determining the flow-rate of migration
opportunities seem very low. However, they imply an illegal immigration rate equal to
population in country 2 includes only unskilled Mexican workers, i.e. workers with no college education.
  19
     To measure the wage premium we use hourly wages of workers of ages 25-65 and average over 2000-
2010.
  20
     Several other papers (e.g. LaLonde and Topel 1991, Kerr and Kerr 2011) show that immigrants
are paid less than natives even after controlling for other observable productivity determinants such as
education and language. A negative immigrant premium of 20% as the one used here is within the range
found in the survey by Kerr and Kerr (2011).
  21
     Available at: http://pwt.sas.upenn.edu/php site/pwt index.php.


                                                  24
Φ(zI∗ )µI = 0.000706, which is equal to a 0.07% per month and a legal immigration rate of
Φ(zL∗ )µL = 0.000429 equal to 0.04% per month. In yearly rate, combining the two types
of migration, this gives an immigration rate of about 1% per year from Mexico to the US.
This is exactly the average rate observed in the 2000’s.
                                        F     F           F     F
    As discussed above, the conditions J1N − J1L < 0 and J1L − J1I < 0 are crucial in
determining whether the reduction in the number of illegal (and total) immigrants has a
positive impact on the creation of unskilled jobs in country 1. With the targeted legal
immigrant-native wage gap equal to 20% and with the illegal-legal immigrant wage gap
equal to 7.5%, and using the choice of the remaining parameters as described above, the
                                    F         F       F         F
calibration discussed above yields J1I = 3.56J1N and J1L = 3.08J1N . This implies that
the value of jobs that are filled by immigrants (legal and illegal) is significantly higher
than that of jobs filled by natives, while the value of jobs filled by illegal immigrants is
only somewhat larger than that of jobs filled by legal ones. This also implies that a higher
share of immigrants may generate a significant increase in the expected surplus to the
firm and, in turn, a job-creating effect on the economy of country 1.


5     Simulated Effects of Policies on Native Labor Mar-
      ket Outcomes
We simulate the effects of the four different policies aimed at reducing the number of illegal
immigrants, described above, one at a time. We focus on the effects of those policies on
the labor market outcomes of natives, skilled and unskilled, and on the total income of
natives, Ỹ1 , which is given by the following expression:


         Ỹ1 = Y1 + bu1 U1N
                         u
                            + bs1 U1N
                                   s
                                      − cu1 v1u − cs1 v1s − w1I (I − U1I ) − w1L (L − U1L )   (18)

    Expression (18) assumes that employers are natives and it shows that total income to
natives includes total wage income to natives plus firm profits plus unemployment income
to native workers minus the cost of keeping vacancies open. An alternative definition can
be obtained omitting the natives’ unemployment income (which is reasonable if one thinks
that such income is generated by transfers rather than by additional home-production)
obtaining what we can call “income from market activities” as follows:


                                  Ỹ1a = Ye1 − bu1 U1N
                                                    u
                                                       − bs1 U1N
                                                              s
                                                                                              (19)


                                                25
   Notice that as the policies do not change the number of natives, the percentage impact
on total native income captures also the percentage impact on income per native. The
simulations that we perform consist in using each of the four policy instruments to reduce
illegal immigrants by a certain percentage (we simulate reductions between 10% and 100%,
where 100% implies that no illegal immigrants is left in the US). In Table 2 we report the
effects on the relevant outcomes for natives for each of the four policies implemented so
as to reduce illegal immigrants by 10 or 50% of their initial value (the first being a rather
limited policy while the second being a drastic one). In Figures 1 to 3, we consider the
impact of the policies on one endogenous variable at a time plotted against the percentage
reduction in illegal immigrants obtained with each policy.
   Figure 1 is made of six panels. Those on the left show the impact of the four policies
on unskilled natives’ labor market outcomes while those on the right show the effects on
skilled natives. The variables shown are labor market tightness (top row), unemployment
rate (median row) and wages (bottom row). The solid trajectory captures in each panel the
effect of increasing the job search costs for illegal immigrants (πI ), the dashed trajectory
shows the effect of increasing the deportation rate (dI ) the dash and dots trajectory shows
the effects of increasing border security (reducing µI ) and the dotted line represents the
effect of increasing the legalization rate (n). The horizontal axis shows the decrease in
illegal immigrants (I) as percentage of their initial number. The vertical axis shows the
effect on the outcome variable as percentage of its initial value. The percentage changes
in the policy parameters needed to obtain the same change in illegal immigrants may be
different from policy to policy. The figures allow us to compare easily the effects on the
labor market outcomes of natives, skilled and unskilled, of different policies that deliver
a certain percentage reduction of illegal immigrants. The entries in Table 2 represent the
percentage effect on native unskilled outcomes (top three rows), native skilled outcomes
(next 3 rows) and native income (last 2 rows) from reducing illegal immigrants by 10
and 50% with each type of policy. Columns 1 and 2 show the impact of reducing illegal
immigrants by 10 and 50% using increased border controls (lower µI ). Columns 3 and
4 show the impact of the same reduction obtained by making it more costly for illegal
immigrants to search for a job (higher πI ). Columns 5 and 6 show the effects of increasing
deportation probabilities (higher dI ). Columns 7 and 8 show the effects of increasing
the legalization probability n. Finally columns 9 and 10 show the effects of a policy
combination that we discuss in Section 5.1 below.


                                             26
       The effects on labor market tightness, shown in the top panels of Figure 1 (and in the
top row and fourth row of Table 2), are key to understanding the other effects. In those
figures we see that increases in search costs, deportation probability and border controls
all decrease the labor market tightness for skilled and unskilled native workers. This is
because these restrictive measures decrease the share of immigrants overall, implying an
increase in expected labor costs for firms that more than offsets the positive price effects on
unskilled workers. Hence the unskilled job creation will decrease and so will labor market
tightness for unskilled. For skilled workers, instead, the only effect would be through
relative prices (marginal productivity) which declines so that their labor market tightness
will decrease (see panels on the right). Notice that, although marginally, an increase in
search cost is the policy, among the three restrictive ones with the least negative effect on
market tightness. This is because, while it decreases the total number of immigrants it
also increases the firm surplus per illegal immigrants (by worsening their outside option).
The second effect reduces the first. The top row of Figure 1 shows that this positive effect
reduces only minimally the negative impact on market tightness.
       The only policy with a significantly different effect on labor market tightness is the
increase in the legalization rate. This policy increases the market tightness of unskilled
because it increases legal (and total) immigration. Hence, through this channel and
because immigrants reduce the labor costs of the firm, legalization generates higher job
creation and higher market tightness among unskilled.
       The two panels in the intermediate row of Figure 1, then, show how labor market
tightness translates into effects on the unemployment rates.22 These effects mimic (with
the opposite sign) those on market tightness: fewer vacancies per unemployed result in
higher unemployment rates in equilibrium. To gauge the size of the effects, we see in Table
2 that for a 50% reduction in illegal immigrants, achieved through tighter border control
or increased deportation rates, the native unemployment rate of unskilled is 1.13 − 1.14%
higher than before and 0.57 − 0.58% higher for high skilled natives.23 The same reduc-
tion achieved via increased search costs for illegal immigrants increases native low-skilled
unemployment only by 0.95%. Skilled unemployment rate increases by 0.55%. However
if the same reduction is achieved via increased legalization rate, the unemployment rate
  22
    The variable “unemployment” in our model captures all non-employed in working age.
  23
    Using the base-value of 27 percentage points as non-employment rate of unskilled and 12 as non-
employment rate of high skilled in the US (see Section 4) this implies an increase of non-employment rate
by 0.3 percentage points for unskilled and 0.06 percentage points for skilled.



                                                   27
of natives unskilled would actually be reduced by 1.31% (or 0.35 percentage points, us-
ing the base-value of 27 percentage points as non-employment rate of unskilled) and the
unemployment rate of skilled would also be reduced by 1.20% (0.14 percentage points,
using the base-value of 12 percentage points for skilled). While these effects are small
the benchmark simulation suggests that the US labor market for unskilled and skilled
workers is made tighter by a policy that legalizes immigrants. In layman language, legal-
ization encourages firms to create jobs in the perspective of hiring legal immigrants and
this expansion benefits native workers as well. To the contrary when using the restrictive
policies the benchmark simulations of our model show negative effects on tightness and
positive on unemployment rates. Firms reduce job creation as they have lower chances of
hiring immigrants.
   The bottom panels of Figure 1 (and the third and sixth row of Table 2) show the effects
on native skilled and unskilled wages. In this case the price effect prevails and the policies
restricting the total supply of immigrants increase the wage of native unskilled workers and
reduce the wage of skilled ones, vice-versa legalization has the opposite effect and reduces
unskilled wage while raising skilled one. While a tighter labor market, as generated by
legalization, increases the bargaining power of workers and allows them to bargain for
higher wages, for given productivity, the reduction of their marginal productivity, due
to the price effect, prevails on wages. Specifically achieving a 50% reduction in illegal
immigrants with either of the “restrictive” policies increases native unskilled wages by
0.55 − 0.56% and reduces native skilled wages by 0.34 − 0.35%. Achieving the same goal
with legalization, instead, reduces the wage of unskilled natives by 1.23% and increases
the wage of skilled natives by 0.75%. The interesting finding of this first set of simulations
is that, in this model, it is not possible to predict the impact of reducing illegal immigrants
on wages and unemployment rates of native unskilled (and skilled) workers unless we know
what policy is used. Moreover the impact of a policy on wages and employment is not
necessarily consistent with the simple canonical model in which a change in the supply of
immigrants affects wages and employment of natives in the same direction.
   Inspection of Figure 1A (and Table A1) in the appendix shows that effects similar to
those for unskilled natives emerge for the unemployment and wages of legal immigrants
(lower panels in Figure 1A). Hence the increased job creation by firms, from a legaliza-
tion program, benefits employment of unskilled natives and legal immigrants, however
reduces their wages. To the contrary increased job search costs, border enforcement and


                                              28
deportation hurts job creation and employment of legal immigrants, but increases their
wages.
       The policies have very different effects on the wage of illegal immigrants (top panels
of Figure 1A). In particular, all policies, but border control, reduce the wage of illegal
immigrants. A policy that reduces illegal immigrants by 50% by increasing their job-search
costs, thus worsening their outside option, would also reduce their wages by 3.31%. The
same drastic reduction in illegal immigrants achieved through deportation also reduces the
wage of illegal immigrants (by 0.73%). Notice also that despite its positive job creation
effect, a legalization program produces a large increase in the unemployment rate of illegal
immigrants (+19.28%) and a relatively large decrease in their wage (−2.17% as opposed
to −1.29% for legal immigrants and −1.23% for unskilled natives). This is because with
the legalization of incumbent illegal immigrants a higher portion of those that remain
illegal are new (unemployed) entrants, i.e. workers who have recently crossed the border
in order to search for better jobs.24 Hence, following a legalization program, a higher
portion of those that remain illegal are workers who are unemployed.
   Figure 2 shows the impact of policies that reduce the number of illegal immigrants
on the income per native. In the upper panel we show the impact on Ye1 (expression
18), while in the lower panel we exclude unemployment income (expression 19) and we
show the impact on Ye1a . We comment the results on Ye1a . The effects on Ye1 are similar,
but somewhat smaller, as unemployment income attenuates the negative income effect
of reducing employment. The restrictive immigration policies (deportation, border con-
trols and higher job-search costs) hurt unskilled-firm profits and reduce job creation, as
described above. While their effect on overall wages, aggregating skilled and unskilled,
is very small (positive for the first and negative for the second group), the negative job-
creation effect and the negative effect on firm profits produce an overall negative impact
on native per capita income. Hence restrictive policies produce an effect on income per
native between 0 and −0.6%. A policy delivering a reduction of illegal immigrants by
50% produces a 0.25 − 0.28% decline in income per native. To the contrary, legalization
combines a positive employment effect, a small aggregate wage effect and a positive profit
effect and hence it delivers an increase in income per native between 0 and 0.80%. An
  24
    Notice from equation (10) that an increase in n raises u1I . In steady state, a larger flow of immigrants
out of illegal status, due to legalization, must be balanced by a larger flow into it through illegal entry. The
legalization of existing immigrants therefore shifts the pool of illegal immigrants towards new entrants
who are more likely to be unemployed.



                                                      29
increase of the legalization rate that reduces the illegal immigrant population by 50%,
would increase income per native by 0.45%. Overall native average income is hurt by
restrictive policies, both because of reduced profits and reduced employment rates while
it is helped by legalization.
   Finally, Figure 3 shows the percentage change in the number of total and legal immi-
grants produced by the different policies. As the native population is kept fixed at 1, these
changes can be interpreted as percentage changes in the immigrant population relative to
natives. At the initial equilibrium the Mexican immigrant population in the US equals
3.8% of the US working-age population (the average value in 2000-2010). Of those, 1.7%
are illegal immigrants and 2.1% are legal immigrants. The top panel of Figure 3 shows that
any of the three restrictive policies pushed to the point of eliminating illegal immigrants
(-100%) would also imply a reduction of total immigrants: the Mexican population in the
US would decrease by about 50%, to only 1.9 percentage points of the native population.
If the goal is not only to reduce illegal immigrants but also to discourage legal immigrants
and reduce overall immigrants then those polices deliver a strong result reached at the
expenses of a weaker native labor market for unskilled and skilled workers, lower profits
for firms and lower income per native. To the contrary, the same upper panel of Figure 3
shows that a legalization policy (dotted line) that eliminates illegal immigrants (-100%),
substantially increases the legal immigrant population so that total Mexican immigrants
in the US increase by about 40% (to 7.6% of US native population). This is because those
once illegal are now legalized and a larger flow of legal immigrants is driven to the US
because of better labor market and legalization opportunities. Additionally this policy
delivers tighter labor markets for native workers, more job creation, lower unemployment
and higher income per native. However, wages for native unskilled workers are some-
what reduced. If the goal of policy reform is to encourage legal immigration, promote
job creation and reduce the number of illegal immigrants, legalization has a much better
performance.

5.1    Effects of Policy Combination
Let us consider here an interesting case of policy combination. In the recent debate about
immigration and in the recent immigration reform proposals (e.g. S766 passed by the
U.S. Senate in June 2013) the principle that a legalization program may happen when
the border is under control, is prominently stated. In our context this may be captured


                                             30
by a combination of increased legalization rate n and decreased opportunities for illegal
immigration µI so that the total number of immigrants (as percentage of natives) is
constant. Such combination would eliminate the beneficial effects of more legal immigrants
on the labor market. However the negative effects of this mixed policy on labor market
tightness are attenuated relative to purely restrictive measures. The simulation results
in this case, reported in the last two columns of Table 2, show that for a reduction of
illegal immigrants by 50% and no increase in total immigrants this policy delivers an
increase of unskilled natives’ unemployment of 0.35% of its initial value and an increase
of skilled natives’ unemployment by 0.03% of its initial value (as opposed to increases by
0.95 − 1.14% and 0.55 − 0.58%, respectively, when the restrictive-only policies are used).
Similarly the income loss for natives would be very small (−0.05% using this combined
policy as opposed to −0.28%). This combination essentially delivers a replacement of
illegal immigrants with legal immigrants in the population with much smaller adverse
effects on native labor market outcomes than purely restrictive measures.
   Finally it is worth commenting briefly on how the policies used to reduce illegal Mex-
icans immigrants in the US affect the labor market outcomes of the workers that remain
in Mexico. As shown in the last 3 rows of Table A1 in the Appendix, all restrictive immi-
gration measures (border control, increases search cost and deportations) lead to higher
job creation (i.e. a tighter labor market) in Mexico and lower unemployment rates for
Mexicans, but at the cost of lower wages. In fact, the restrictive immigration measures
help increase job creation in Mexico, through their negative impact on the wage of Mex-
ican workers. More specifically, by lowering the value of migration opportunity to the
US (and thereby discouraging migration), restrictive policies worsen the outside option of
Mexican workers and as a result their bargaining power and wage. In turn, this benefits
Mexican firms who can now appropriate of larger profits per job created, leading to more
vacancy posting in the Mexican labor market. Legalization, by contrast, has exactly the
opposite effects: it improves the outside option and wage of Mexican workers, thereby
reducing firm profits, job creation and employment in Mexico.




                                           31
6      Robustness Checks and Extensions
6.1     Robustness to Key Parameters
The parameterization of the baseline specification is based on the best data available.
However, in some cases there is a range of reasonable uncertainty about some of the
statistics and the parameters that we are matching. For some important parameters we
show the simulated effects of policies in a range indicated by the literature as plausible.
These checks are performed in tables 3-6 that reproduce the simulations reported in Table
2, with each table devoted to one specific policy. Table 3 shows the effects of tighter border
controls, Table 4 of higher search costs, Table 5 considers increase in deportation rates
and Table 6 increase in legalization probability. The tables show robustness checks on
five parameters. For other parameters that are less relevant we perform robustness checks
in the Appendix (see table A2-A5, which mirror the structure of tables 3 to 6). A first
key moment is given by the legal immigrant-native wage gap. The significant job-creation
effect from immigrants, in fact, derives from their lower wage that corresponds, in part,
to a lower outside option for them. In order to check the robustness of our main results
we target a smaller immigrant-native wage gap, of -15% in specifications (3) and (4) of
tables 3-6.25 We then consider in specifications (5) and (46) an illegal-legal immigrant
wage gap of -5% (rather than -7.5%), which is in line with the more recent estimates
of Barcellos (2010).26 The return rate of immigrants is also an important determinant
of their value to a firm. Hence we check that our results are robust to a much higher
exogenous “natural” return rate of legal immigrants, and in specifications (7) and (8) we
double dL . As immigrants’ role in enhancing job creation is linked to their lower income
when unemployed, relative to natives, we consider a much lower level of unemployment
benefits for natives. In specifications (9) and (10) we reduce unemployment income to
50% of wage, rather than 71% in both countries. Finally, as in the optimal job creation
decision future events matter, we analyze the effect of changing the interest (discount)
rate to a lower value equal to 2% per year, which is closer to the short-run (3-months),
rather than long-run (30 years), real interest rate.
  25
     This is at the low end of the estimates for the US (Borjas and Friedberg 2009) and in line with
differentials between immigrants and natives as surveyed by Kerr and Kerr (32012) once we control for
their observable characteristics.
  26
     The values of πL and πI that match a smaller native-immigrant wage gap of -15% are 0.225 and
0.312, respectively. Those matching a smaller illegal-legal immigrant wage gap of -5% are 0.301 and
0.352, respectively.



                                                 32
   Tables 3-6 share with each other the same structure and we describe here the main
results. Let’s first consider Table 3 that examines the effect of tightening border controls.
That case, under the baseline configuration of parameters (specifications 1 and 2), is the
one that produces the most damaging effect on job opportunities of unskilled natives
(with deportation being a close second). To achieve 50% reduction in illegal immigrants
the labor market tightness for unskilled workers is reduced by 3.07% and for skilled by
1.31%, implying an increase of the unemployment rate by 1.14 and 0.57% respectively.
These results are not very sensitive to reducing the immigrant-native wage gap to 15%,
or the illegal-legal premium to 5%, or the interest rate to 2% nor to doubling the return
rate. In all cases unskilled unemployment increases between 0.84 and 1.19% in response to
that policy. Similarly the skilled unemployment increased between 0.53 and 0.58%. The
only change that somewhat reduces the adverse job-creation effect of border controls is if
we assume much lower unemployment benefits for natives. In this case a 50% reduction
in illegal immigrants increases unemployment rates of unskilled natives only by 0.69%.
As far as wage effects on natives are concerned, the changes in parameters have an even
smaller effect. Comparing across columns, the policy reducing illegal immigrants by 50%
has a small positive effect in the range of 0.51 − 0.56% on the wages of unskilled and a
small negative effect (−0.32%/ − 0.36%) on the wages of skilled natives in each scenario.
   The effects on native outcomes described in Table 3 are very similar to those obtained
with higher deportation rates and shown in Table 5. The negative and quantitatively
similar effect of this policy on labor market tightness of unskilled and skilled natives and
the fact that only the reduction of unemployment benefits for natives produces a non
negligible attenuation of that effect, suggests that these two policies produce very similar
effects on labor market outcomes of natives.
   Table 4 shows the baseline and robustness checks for the effect of increasing search
costs of illegal immigrants. Compared to the two policies discussed above this one has a
smaller negative effect on labor market tightness and smaller positive impact on native
unemployment. The reason is that, while reducing the number of immigrants overall,
it also increases the firm profit when hiring immigrants. This stimulates job creation.
Making immigrants more similar to natives in their outside option (by reducing the wage
gap) as in specifications (3) and (4), reduces even further the negative impact of this
policy on labor market tightness. With a 15% wage gap, a policy of increased search costs
that cuts illegal immigrants in half produces only a 0.46% increase in the native unskilled


                                             33
unemployment rate and a 0.51% increase in skilled unemployment rate.
       Finally Table 6 shows the robustness checks when considering legalization and its
effects on native labor market outcomes. This is the only “expansionary” policy for the
labor market, in that it increases in the baseline case the labor market tightness of skilled
and unskilled natives. A legalization rate that ensures a reduction of illegal immigrants
by 50% reduces unemployment of native unskilled workers by 1.31% and that of skilled
native workers by 1.20%. This result is robust to changing the legal-illegal gap, changing
the interest rate, and to changes in the unemployment benefits of natives. However it is
quite sensitive to increasing the return rate of immigrants. In particular, as the beneficial
job market effects of legalization depend on the higher value of a legal immigrant to the
firm (relative to a native), an increase in the probability of return for legal immigrants
(and termination of the match) can substantially reduce their value to the firm (as one
match has lower expected duration). Column (8) shows that with a return rate back
to Mexico for legal immigrants double the one estimated in our data, the positive job
market effect of legalization is essentially eliminated. Similarly a smaller wage differential
between immigrants and natives (Column 3 and 4) would reduce the job-creating effect of
having more immigrant and hence the positive impact on tightness. The effects on income
per native are also affected by the job-creation effect, so that while always positive in this
case, as opposed to being negative for all the scenarios that use restrictive policies, they
are larger when the tightness effect is larger, and close to 0 in the case of columns 7-8 in
which the tightness of native labor market is almost unchanged.
       So summarizing all the checks, the changes in the crucial parameters do not affect
the qualitative conclusions from the baseline simulations but they may attenuate the
quantitative effects.27 Changes that increase the cost of employing legal immigrants (as
a reduction of the wage-gap with natives or an increase in the probability of return to
Mexico) reduce the beneficial labor market effects of legalization.
  27
     Considering the other robustness checks performed in Tables A2 to A5 of the appendix we notice
that the only parameter change that produces a significant attenuation of the negative (positive) effect
of restrictive policies (legalization) on job-creation and market tightness is an decrease in the bargaining
power of firms (i.e. lower value for β). With higher bargaining power, firms can appropriate larger profits
per filled job. Since matches generate larger profits to firms, the disruptive effects of deportations and
voluntary returns of immigrants generate a much more significant loss to the firm. For this reason, the
job creating effect of more immigrants in the market becomes smaller.




                                                    34
6.2    The role of Immigrant-Native productivity differences
In the baseline specification of the model we have assumed that the productivities of
immigrants and natives of the same skill level are identical. As a consequence the wage
differences between those two type of workers is fully driven by their different outside
option and implies that immigrants generate larger profits to firms than natives. This
is a crucial condition to obtain the result that legalization tightens the labor market for
unskilled, while the other three policies, by reducing total immigrants, make it weaker. In
this section we test further such implication, by allowing part of the native-immigrant wage
gap to be driven by productivity differences. Since the impact on the high skilled-market
tightness would simply follow that on the low skilled-market tightness, we focus on the
simpler version of the model, in which ρ = 1 and the price effect is muted (section 3.2) and
we only consider the low skilled market. The question that we ask is how policies aiming at
reducing unskilled illegal immigrants affect market tightness for unskilled workers, when
part of the native-immigrant wage gap is due to immigrants being less productive than
natives.
   In this simpler model, we add the parameter Λ ≤ 1, which captures the productivity
of immigrants relative to unskilled natives and we standardize the productivity of un-
skilled natives to 1. For the given baseline parameter configuration if Λ = 0.76 the whole
immigrant-native wage gap is explained by productivity differences, while for Λ = 1 the
whole difference is explained by higher search costs for immigrants and implies πL = 0.69.
In Table 7 we compare the labor market outcomes of unskilled natives and the effects
on income per native, of using the four policies, pushed to the point of reducing illegal
immigrants by 50%, under different values of Λ and hence of search costs. In the columns
(1)-(4) we consider the extreme case in which the whole wage gap is explained by native-
immigrants productivity differences. In columns (9)-(12) we show the benchmark case in
which the whole difference is due to outside options. Columns (5)-(8) show the interme-
diate case in which about half of the difference is due to productivity and half to different
outside options. Confirming our intuition we see that the legalization policy is the only
one producing the positive labor market tightening effect and reducing unemployment of
unskilled natives, as long as the productivity differential between immigrants and natives
is not too large. The intermediate case (columns 5-8) shows that legalization has an unem-
ployment reducing effect of 0.32% on native unskilled and it increases income per native
by 0.20% while the other policies increase unemployment rate by 0.33 − 0.65%. However,

                                             35
when we move to the case in which the productivity of immigrants is much smaller than
that of natives (as small as possible given the wage gap) as in columns 1-4, the firm’s profit
from hiring an immigrant becomes smaller than that from hiring a native. In this case,
we see that legalization, by increasing the total number of immigrants and their share in
the unemployment pool, reduces the expected profits of firms, and as a result, the labor
market tightness, leading to an increase in the unemployment rate of unskilled natives
(by 0.63%). The restrictive measures, on the other hand, by decreasing total immigrants
and their share in the unemployment pool, increase the expected profits of firms and the
creation of unskilled jobs, causing a decrease in the unemployment of unskilled workers
between 0.07 and 0.60%. We think unlikely that more than half of the wage gap between
equally skilled native and immigrants is due to productivity differentials and hence we
think that this check strengthens the relevance of the positive labor-tightening effect of
legalization.


7     Conclusions
In this paper we have set up a model to analyze the labor markets of two countries in
which firms post job-openings, workers look for vacancies and matches take place over
time. Wages are then determined by splitting the surplus obtained from the worker-firm
match. Moreover, as one country has higher productivity and higher wages there is also
search for migration opportunities from the poor to the rich country. We have focussed
on the unskilled workers market in terms of legal and illegal immigrants and matched the
theoretical model to the case of Mexico-US labor markets.
    This model allows us to study quantitatively, the effects of different policies aimed at
reducing the number of illegal migrants on labor market outcomes of skilled and unskilled
native workers in the US. The novelty of the paper is that this is the first model to
consider different policies, and to model migration incentives while considering legal and
illegal immigrants and capturing their different features on the labor market.
    We find that for a reasonable range of parameters values, around the values cali-
brated for the US-Mexico economies circa 2000-2010, unskilled immigrants, because of
their worse outside options receive lower pay and generate higher surplus for the firm
than unskilled native workers. This in turn pushes firms to create more jobs per un-
employed when there are more immigrants, improving the labor market tightness and
reducing unemployment rate of natives. This key mechanism implies that policies aimed

                                             36
at reducing illegal immigration that are also restrictive and discourage total immigration
(such as forced repatriation, border controls, increased cost for job search by illegal im-
migrants) will reduce job-creation of firms and increase unemployment of unskilled native
workers. They will also reduce income per native. To the contrary, policies that decrease
the number of illegal immigrants but increase the total number of immigrants (such as le-
galization) will improve job creation, decrease native unemployment and increase income
per native.
   The innovative and appealing characteristic of this model is that it is much richer
than the existing 2-country labor market models and allows us to deal separately with
sophisticated immigration policies (border control, deportation, legalization). The model
can be easily adjusted also to analyze effects of other specific immigration policies, such
as increased workplace raids (that may detect and deport illegal working immigrants)
or policies increasing deportation of unemployed immigrants. While the quantitative
implications of the model are somewhat sensitive to the parameter choice the ranking of
the four policies considered, in terms of native unemployment and income per person is
extremely robust and invariant to specific parameter choice, in the range considered. The
most beneficial way of reducing illegal immigrants, in terms of unemployment for skilled
and unskilled native workers, is by increasing legalization rates.




                                            37
References
[1] Acemoglu D. (2001). “Good Jobs versus Bad Jobs,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol
   19, pages 121.

[2] Angrist Joshua D. and Adriana D. Kugler, (2003). “Protective or Counter-
   Productive? Labour Market Institutions and the Effect of Immigration on EU Na-
   tives,” Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, vol. 113(488), pages F302-F331,
   06.

[3] Barcellos Silvia H. (2010). “Legalization and the Economic Status of Immigrants”
   WR-754, RAND Labor and Popoulation Working Paper.

[4] Borjas, George J. (2003). “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reex-
   amining The Impact of Immigration On The Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, MIT Press, vol. 118(4), pages 1335-1374, November.

[5] Borjas, George J. and Rachel M. Friedberg, (2009). “Recent Trends in the Earnings
   of New Immigrants to the United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 1540, October
   2009, Cambridge Mass.

[6] Chassamboulli, Andri and Theodore Palivos, (2014) “A Search-Equilibrium Ap-
   proach to the Effects of Immigration on Labor Market Outcomes,” International
   Economic Review, vol. 55, pages 111-129.

[7] D’Amuri Francesco and Giovanni Peri, (2014). “Immigration, Jobs and Employment
   Protection: Evidence from Europe Before and During the Great Recession,” Journal
   of the European Economic Association, vol. 11(2), pages 432464, April.

[8] Hall Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom, (2008). “The Limited Influence of Unem-
   ployment on the Wage Bargain,” American Economic Review, American Economic
   Association, vol. 98(4), pages 1653-74, September.

[9] Hill, Laura, Magnus Lofstrom and Joseph Hayes, (2010). “Immigrant Legalization:
   Assessing the Labor Market Effects,” Public Policy Institute of California, Report,
   2010.




                                         38
[10] Hoefer, Michael, Nancy Rithina and Bryan Baker, (2012). “Estimates of the Unau-
    thorized Immigrant Population Residing in the United States: January 2011,” De-
    partment of Homeland Security, Washington D.C.

[11] Hosios, Arthur J. (1990). “On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of
    Search and Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, Wiley Blackwell, vol.
    57(2), pages 279-98, April.

[12] Kerr, Sari Pekkala and William R. Kerr, (2011) “Economic Impacts of Immigration:
    A Survey,” Finnish Economic Papers, Finnish Economic Association, vol. 24(1),
    pages 1-32, Spring.

[13] Kossoudji, Sherrie A. and Deborah A. Cobb-Clark, (2002). “Coming out of the Shad-
    ows: Learning about Legal Status and Wages from the Legalized Population,” Jour-
    nal of Labor Economics , vol. 20(3), pages 598-628, July 2002.

[14] LaLonde, R. J. and R. H. Topel (1991).“Immigrants in the American Labor Market:
    Quality, Assimilation, and Distributional Effects,”American Economic Review, vol.
    81(2), pages 297-302.

[15] Lee, James, (2012). “U.S. Naturalizations 2011,”Department of Homeland Security,
    available at: http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/publications/natz fr 2011.pdf.

[16] Lewis Ethan and Giovanni Peri (forthcoming) “Immigration and the Economy of
    Cities and Regions” in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5A,
    Duranton, Henderson, and Strange (eds.), Elsevier, Oxford, UK.

[17] Liu, Xiangbo, (2010). “On the Macroeconomic and Welfare Effects of Illegal Immi-
    gration,”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 34, pages 2547-2567.

[18] Longhi Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp and Jacques Poot, (2005). “A Meta-Analytic As-
    sessment of the Effect of Immigration on Wages,” Journal of Economic Surveys,
    Wiley Blackwell, vol. 19(3), pages 451-477, 07.

[19] Longhi Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp and Jacques Poot, (2008). “Meta-Analysis Of Em-
    pirical Evidence on The Labour Market Impacts of Immigration,” Region et Devel-
    oppement, LEAD, Universite du Sud - Toulon Var, vol. 27, pages 161-191.



                                          39
[20] Manacorda Marco, Alan Manning and Jonathan Wadsworth, (2012). “The Impact
    of Immigration on The Structure of Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain,”
    Journal of the European Economic Association, European Economic Association,
    vol. 10(1), pages 120-151, 02.

[21] Masferrer C. and B. Roberts, (2009). “Going Back Home? The Ambiguities of Con-
    temporary Mexican Return Migration,” Conference at UT Austin, 2009.

[22] Ottaviano Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri, (2012). “Rethinking The Effect of
    Immigration on Wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association, European
    Economic Association, vol. 10(1), pages 152-197, 02.

[23] Palivos, Theodore, (2009). “Welfare Effects of Illegal Immigration,” Journal of Pop-
    ulation Economics, vol. 22, pages 131-144.

[24] Passel,   Jeffrey and Randolph Capps,       (2004). “Undocumented Immigrants:
    Facts and Figures,” The Urban Institute Washington D.C., available at:
    http://www.urban.org/publications/1000587.html.

[25] Barbara Petrongolo and Pissarides Christopher, (2001). “Looking into the Black Box:
    A Survey of the Matching Function,” Journal of Economic Literature, American
    Economic Association, vol. 39(2), pages 390-431, June.

[26] Rivera-Batiz, Francisco L. (1999) “Undocumented Workers in the Labor Market:
    An Analysis of the Earnings of Legal and Illegal Mexican Immigrants in the United
    States,” Journal of Population Economics, vol. 12, pages 91-116, Spring.




                                           40
A      Appendix: Details of the Model
A.1     Bellman Equations
The bellman equations represent the dynamic optimality condition for each possible state
of workers and jobs. Those describing the value of unfilled unskilled and skilled vacancies
in country 1 and the value of vacancies in country 2 are as follows:


                                    h                                           i
           rJ1V,u   =  −cu1+      q(θ1u )F,u           F            F       V,u
                                      φJ1N + (1 − φ)(λJ1L + (1 − λ)J1I ) − J1          (20)
                                    h              i
           rJ1V,s                      F,s
                    = −cs1 + q(θ1s ) J1N   − J1V,s                                     (21)
            rJ2V    = −c2 + q(θ2 ) J2F − J2V
                                              
                                                                                       (22)

    The value of a filled unskilled job to a firm in country 1 is expressed by the following
three equations, depending on the origin and legal status of the worker filling the job
(native, legal immigrant and illegal immigrant):


                                                               h                  i
                F,u                                                 F,u
              rJ1N    =    pu1   −    u
                                     w1N    −    (σ1u−  + τ)       J1N    J1V,u        (23)
                                                    h            i
                F
              rJ1L    = pu1 − w1L − (σ1u + dL + τ ) J1L
                                                      F
                                                         − J1V,u                       (24)
                 F
                      = pu1 − w1I − (σ1u + dI + τ ) J1I
                                                    F
                                                        − J1V + n J1L
                                                                   F    F
                                                                             
               rJ1I                                                    − J1I           (25)

    The values of a filled skilled job in country 1 and of a job in country 2 are given,
respectively, by
                                                            h              i
                            F,s                                F,s     V,s
                          rJ1N       =    −ps1  −   s
                                                   w1N         (σ1s
                                                      + τ ) J1N − J1                   (26)
                           rJ2F      = p2 − w2 − (σ2 + τ ) J2F − J2V
                                                                    
                                                                                       (27)

    The value of being unemployed is described in the following five equations, relative to
each country and worker type:




                                                          41
                                   h              i
                U,s                  E,s      U,s
      (r + τ )J1N   = bs1 + m(θ1s ) J1N   − J1N                                              (28)
                                   h               i
                U,u                   E,u      U,u
      (r + τ )J1N   = bu1 + m(θ1u ) J1N    − J1N                                             (29)
                 U
                    = bu1 − πL + m(θ1u ) J1L
                                           E        U
                                                                U
                                                                   − J2U
                                                                        
       (r + τ )J1L                             − J1L     − dL J1L                            (30)
                 U
                    = bu1 − πI + m(θ1u ) J1I
                                          E        U
                                                               U
                                                                  − J2U + n J1L
                                                                            U      U
                                                                                         
       (r + τ )J1I                            − J1I     − dI J1I                   − J1I     (31)
                                                       Z z̄
                 U
                                    E      U
                                                                 U
                                                                     − J2U − z, 0 dΦ(z)
                                                                                
        (r + τ )J2 = b2 + m(θ2 ) J2 − J2 + µI                max J1I
                                                         0
                            Z z̄
                                 max J1L − J2U − z, 0 dΦ(z)
                                      U                   
                      +µL                                                                    (32)
                                 0

   Finally the value of being employed in steady state is given by the following five
conditions relative to each country and worker type:
                                         h              i
                     E,s        s           E,s     U,s
          (r +   τ )J1N    =   w1N −  σ1s  J1N − J1N                                         (33)
                                          h              i
                   E,u          u           E,u      U,u
          (r + τ )J1N  =       w1N − σ1u J1N    − J1N                                        (34)
                    E
                               w1L − σ1u J1L
                                          E      U
                                                             E
                                                                − J2U
                                                                     
           (r + τ )J1L =                      − J1L    − dL J1L                              (35)
                    E
                               w1I − σ1u J1I
                                          E     U
                                                            E
                                                               − J2U + n J1L
                                                                       E     E
                                                                                   
           (r + τ )J1I =                      − J1I   − dI J1I               − J1I           (36)
           (r + τ )J2E =       w2 − σ2 J2E − J2U
                                                
                                                                                             (37)

                           t
In expressions (20)-(37), w1N denotes the wage rate for the type-t native workers of country
1, w1L and w1I the wage for legal and illegal immigrants, respectively, and w2 the wage
rate in country 2.
   Expressions such as these have, by now, a relatively familiar interpretation. For in-
stance, consider equation (20). The term rJ1V,u is the flow-value of an unskilled vacancy in
country 1. It equals the flow cost of maintaining the vacancy cu1 , plus the flow probability
that the vacancy is matched with a worker (native or immigrant) multiplied by the ex-
pected value gain from such an event which is the expected value of filling a vacancy with
a native, legal immigrant and illegal immigrant worker, respectively, times the probability
of each of those events. The other equations follow similar interpretations.




                                               42
A.2        Steady-state Conditions
The condition for steady unemployment of each type are as follows:

                              σ1s (S − U1N
                                        s
                                           ) + τ S = (m(θ1s ) + τ )U1N
                                                                    s
                                                                                             (38)
                         σ1u (1 − S − U1N
                                       u
                                          ) + τ (1 − S) = (m(θ1u ) + τ )U1N
                                                                         u
                                                                                             (39)
         σ2 (F − I − L − U2 ) + τ F + dI I + dL L = (m(θ2 ) + µL Φ(zL∗ ) + µI Φ(zI∗ ) + τ )U2 (40)
                   σ1u (L − U1L ) + µL Φ(zL∗ )U2 + nU1I = [dL + m(θ1u ) + τ ] U1L            (41)
                      σ1u (I − U1I ) + µI Φ(zI∗ )U2 = [dI + n + m(θ1u ) + τ ] U1I            (42)

Equations (38) and (39) show that flows into the pools of unemployed skilled and unskilled
natives (of country 1) include those whose separate from their jobs (at the exogenous rate
σ1s and σ1u , respectively) and the new labor-force entrants (τ S and τ (1 − S), respectively),
while flows out of these pools consist of those who find jobs (at the job-finding rate m(θ1s )
and m(θ1u ), respectively) and those who exit the labor force. The rate at which workers
find skilled and unskilled jobs depend on the labor market tightness that prevails in the
skilled and unskilled labor market (θ1s and θ1u ), respectively. For the natives of country 2,
the flows into unemployment (represented by the left-hand-side of 40) include separations,
new entrants, as well as the exogenous return events (dI I + dL L) that move immigrants
back to country 2 as unemployed. On the other hand, the flow of native workers out of the
unemployment in country 2 (right-hand-side of 40) includes, both those who find jobs or
exit the labor force and those who migrate to country 1 legally or illegally (at rate µL Φ(zL∗ )
and µI Φ(zI∗ ), respectively). Since new immigrants arrive in country 1 without a job, the
flow into the pool of unemployed immigrants in country 1 (left-hand-sides of 41 and 42)
comes partly from the inflow of new immigrants and partly from the job separations of
incumbent immigrants. Flows into the pool of legal unemployed immigrants (left-hand-
side of 41) come also from incumbent unemployed immigrants who switch from illegal to
legal status (nU1I ). The flows of legal immigrants out of unemployment (right-hand-side
of 41) can be either due to job finding, exits or due to exogenous return to country 2.
Similarly, flows of illegal immigrants out of unemployment (right-hand-side of 42) come
from job finding, m(θ1u )U1I , from returns, dI U1I , from exits τ U1I , and from legalizations,
nU1I .
   By equating the inflow of new legal immigrants, which includes the inflow of new
immigrants and the legalization of incumbents, to the outflow of legal immigrants, which


                                                  43
includes exits of the labor force and returns to the home country, we obtain the steady-
state condition for L:
                                  (dL + τ )L = nI + U2 µL Φ(zL∗ )                              (43)

Likewise, the steady state condition for the number of illegal immigrants, I, implies that
the inflow of new illegal immigrants equals the flow of illegal immigrants that either return
home, obtain the legal status or exit the labor force:


                                   (dI + n + τ )I = U2 µI Φ(zI∗ )                              (44)

   Then equations (38) to (42) and equations (43) and (44) can be used to derive ex-
pressions for the steady-state values of the unemployment rates, unemployment levels
 s     u
U1N , U1N , U1I , U1L , U2 and numbers of legal and illegal immigrants, I, L (see equations 8
to 14 in the main text).

A.3     Solving the Model
A.3.1    Wages

Using the Bellman equations (20) to (37), the free-entry conditions (4) the Nash bargain-
ing conditions (5) and the immigration conditions in (6) and (7), we can solve for the
equilibrium wage rates. Those are specific to each type of worker in country 1 (native,
skilled or unskilled, and immigrant legal or illegal) and to workers of country 2. Their
expressions are as follows:
                                      h                             i
                   s                                  E,s     U,s
                  w1N = βps1 + (1 − β) bs1 + m(θ1s )(J1N  − J1N   )                            (45)
                                      h                              i
                   u                                   E,u     U,u
                  w1N = βpu1 + (1 − β) bu1 + m(θ1u )(J1N   − J1N   )                           (46)
                  w1L = βpu1 + (1 − β) bu1 − πL + m(θ1u )(J1L
                                                            E         U
                                                                          
                                                               − J1L     )                     (47)
                  w1I = βpu1 + (1 − β) bu1 − πI + m(θ1u )(J1I
                                                            E        U
                                                                        
                                                              − J1I    )                       (48)
                   w2 = βp2 + (1 − β) b2 + m(θ2 )(J2E − J2U ) + M
                                                                       
                                                                                               (49)
                   R zI∗                         R zL∗
The term M ≡ µI     z
                           (zI∗ − z)dΦ(z) + µL    z
                                                         (zL∗ − z)dΦ(z), in expression (49) measures
the expected gain of an immigration opportunity for a native of country 2. A worker’s
wage is a weighted average of the productivity of the match with a firm, pti , which depends
on the country and skill type of the worker, and the outside option available to her (the
term in the bracket). The parameter expressing the workers’ bargaining power (β) is
the weight put on productivity by the Nash-bargaining formula. The outside options of

                                                  44
the workers of country 1 depend on not only their skill type but also on their nativity
and immigration status and they are equal to their unemployment flow income plus the
expected gain from search. The outside option of native workers of country 2, instead,
includes also the expected gain from a migration opportunity (either legal or illegal) to
country 1 (M ). Anything that improves the worker’s outside option will also increase her
wage, as it will improve her “threat point” in the wage setting process. This explains
why wages rise with the unemployment income bti and the matching rate m(θit ), and in
addition, fall with the search costs πx .
    The wage equations above can be re-written as:


      s
     w1N = As1N ps1 + (1 − As1N )bs1                                                                      (50)
      u
     w1N = Au1N pu1 + (1 − Au1N )bu1                                                                      (51)
      w1L = A1L pu1 + (1 − A1L ) (bu1 − πL )                                                              (52)
      w1I = A1I pu1 + (1 − A1I ) (bu1 − πI ) + ΓI nJ1L
                                                    F
                                                                                                          (53)
                                        Z zI∗                    Z                   ∗
                                                                                     zL                 
                                                 ∗
       w2 = A2 p2 + (1 − A2 ) b2 + µI          (zI − z)dΦ(z) + µL                         (zL∗ − z)dΦ(z) (54)
                                                   z                             z

                  β(r+σ1s +τ +m(θ1s ))          β(r+σ u +τ +m(θu ))             β(r+σ u +τ +d +m(θu ))
where As1N ≡       r+σ1s +τ +βm(θ1s )
                                       Au1N ≡ r+σu 1+τ +βm(θ1u ) , A1L ≡ r+σu 1+τ +dLL+βm(θ1u ) ,        A1I ≡
                                                      1        1                    1             1
β(r+σ1u +τ +dI +n+m(θ1u ))         β(r+σ2 +τ +m(θ2 ))                      βm(θ1u )
 r+σ1u +τ +dI +n+βm(θ1u )
                           , A 2 ≡  r+σ2 +τ +βm(θ2 )
                                                      and  Γ I ≡  r+σ1u +τ +dI +n+βm(θ1u )
                                                                                            .

A.3.2     The immigration costs threshold

Using equations (30)-(32) and equations (47)-(49) we can write the equilibrium conditions
for zI∗ and zL∗ in equations (6) and (7) as a function of endogenous wages and productivity:

                                     [ηw1L + (1 − η)w1I − βpu1 ] − [w2 − βp2 ]
                     (1 − β)zI∗ =                                                                         (55)
                                             r + τ + ηdL + (1 − η)dI
                                     [w1L − βpu1 ] − [w2 − βp2 ]
                     (1 − β)zL∗    =                                                                      (56)
                                            r + τ + dL
where η ≡         n
             r+τ +n+dL
                       .    These two equations can be used to solve for zI∗ and zL∗ in terms of
market   tightness, θ1u ,   θ1s , θ2 and parameters.




                                                       45
A.3.3    Zero-expected-profit conditions and vacancy posting

Using (4), equations (20), (21) and (22) can be written as:
                       cu1          F,u
                                                  F             F
                                                                    
                           u
                              = φJ1N    + (1 − φ) λJ1L + (1 − λ)J1I                     (57)
                      q(θ1 )
                        cs1       F,s
                              = J1N                                                     (58)
                      q(θ1s )
                        c2
                              = J2F                                                     (59)
                      q(θ2 )
where φ and λ defined above are, respectively, the native share of total unskilled unem-
ployment and the share of legal immigrants among unemployed immigrants.
   The values accrued to jobs filled by workers of different types can be written as follows:

                             F,u       pu1 − w1Nu
                            J1N  =                                                      (60)
                                      r + τ + σ1u
                             F,s       ps1 − w1Ns
                            J1N  =                                                      (61)
                                      r + τ + σ1s
                              F            pu1 − w1L
                             J1L =                                                      (62)
                                      r + τ + σ1u + dL
                                                      F        
                              F       pu1 − w1I + n J1L      F
                                                          − J1I
                             J1I =                                                      (63)
                                            r + τ + σ1u + dI
                                        p2 − w2
                             J2F =                                                      (64)
                                      r + τ + σ2
   Substituting the equilibrium wages (given in equations (50) to (54)) into equations
(60) to (64) the values of filled vacancies can be written as:

               F,s           s            (1 − β)(ps1 − bs1 )
              J1N  = (1 − β)S1N =                                                       (65)
                                       r + τ + σ1s + βm(θ1s )
               F,u              u         (1 − β)(pu1 − bu1 )
              J1N  =    (1 − β)S1N =                                                    (66)
                                       r + τ + σ1u + βm(θ1u )
                F                        (1 − β)(pu1 − bu1 + πL )
               J1L =    (1 − β)S1L =                                                    (67)
                                       r + τ + σ1u + dL + βm(θ1u )
                                                                              
                F                     (1 − β) (pu1 − bu1 + πI ) + n J1L
                                                                     F     F
                                                                        − J1I
               J1I =    (1 − β)S1I =                                                    (68)
                                             r + τ + σ1u + dI + βm(θ1u )
                                     (1 − β)(p2 − b2 − M )
               J2F =    (1 − β)S2 =                                                     (69)
                                      r + τ + σ2 + βm(θ2 )

   With the above expressions substituted in, the zero-profit conditions in (57 to 59) can




                                             46
be written as:
                                                   h                                  i
                         cu1 Bu                Bu                     BL        n
                      q(θ1u )(1−β)
                                     − (1 − φ) BL
                                                     λπ L + (1 − λ)      π +
                                                                      BI I
                                                                                  π
                                                                                BI L
        pu1 = bu1 +                                  h                    i               (70)
                                                 Bu                  BL +n
                                     φ + (1 − φ) BL
                                                       λ + (1 − λ)    BI
                         cs1 Bs
        ps1 = bs1 +                                                                         (71)
                    q(θ1u )(1 − β)
                                        Z zI∗                    Z zL∗
                         c2 B2                  ∗
        p2   = b2 +                + µI       (zI − z)dΦ(z) + µL       (zL∗ − z)dΦ(z)       (72)
                    q(θ2 )(1 − β)        z                        z

where Bu = r +τ +σ1u +βm(θ1u ), BL = Bu +dL , BI = Bu +dI +n, Bs = r +τ +σ1s +βm(θ1s )
and B2 = r + τ + σ2 + βm(θ2 ). The left-hand side of each of the above equations, which is
the productivity of a match, represents the revenue and the right-hand side the expected
cost to an unfilled vacancy from being matched randomly with a worker.




                                                   47
Figures and tables

                                               Table 1: Parameterisation and Matched Moments

  Parameter                                                          From the literature:                  Matched moments:
   =0.5                       Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001).
    =0.5                      Satisfies the Hosios (1990) condition.
   =0.004                     Monthly interest rate. Average 1980-2010 for the US 30-year treasury bills
                              – GDP deflator
   =0.5                       Implies elasticity skilled-unskilled equal 2 (Ottaviano and Peri , 2012).
  z =0                        Normalization.
                                                   Measured from the data:
    =                         The average ratio of Mexican-born to US-born population for the 2000s.*
     =0.0023                  Our calculations from several sources (see text)

     =0.0039                  Our calculations from several sources (see text)

    =0.0006                   Our calculations from several sources (See text)

        = =0.032              The monthly unskilled separation rate in Mexico and the US. †

     =0.024                   The monthly skilled separation rate in the US. †

   =0.54                      The share of skilled labor force in the US. ††

   =0.00061                   The US native population growth rate. ††

                                  Jointly calibrated to match moments of the data:
    =0. 643                    The skill wage premium in the US.                                                     =0.68 ††
     =0.113                    The employment rate of unskilled workers in the US.                                  =0.73 ††
     =0.060                    The employment rate of unskilled workers in Mexico.                                  = 0.59 ₸
     =0.135                    The wage ratio between US and Mexico, equated to to the ratio of income     = 4‡
                               per person in the two countries.
     = 0.419                   The ratio of unemployment to employment income of
     =0.249                    71% for both countries and both skill types (Hall and Milgrom, 2008).
     =0.086
     =0.301                    The native-legal immigrant wage gap: -20% (Borjas and Friedberg, 2009).               =-0.20
     =0.381                    The legal-illegal immigrant wage gap: -7.5% (Rivera Batiz, 1999 and                  =-0.075
                               Kossoudji and Cobb-Clark, 2012).
     =0.146                    The ratio of Mexican immigrants to the US-native labor force.                               ⱡ
     =0.068                    The employment rate of skilled workers in the US: 0.87.                               =0.87 ††
     = 0.028                   The proportion of legal immigrants in the total number of Mexican            =0.56
                               immigrants: 56% (Hoefer et al, 2012).
    =0.0166%                   The vacancy to unemployment ratio in Mexico and the US.                                   =0.62 ¥
    =0.0039%
  * http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/statistics.
  ** http://www.migrationinformation.org/DataHub/charts/fb-mexicans.cfm.
  † Matched data from the Current Population Survey.
  †† IPUMS USA data, 2000-2010.
  ₸ IPUMS International data.
  ‡ Penn World Table, version 7.1, available at: https://pwt.sas.upenn.edu/php site/pwt index.php.
  ⱡ IPUMS in 2000.
  ¥ Conference Board's Help-Wanted Index.




                                                                                     48
                                Table 2: Baseline Case, Simulations of Policy Effects on Outcomes for Native Workers (percentage changes)

                                                                   Increased border control            Higher search cost           Increased rates of           Legalization             Policy
                                                                   (decrease in )                      (increase in )               deportation                  (increase in )           Combination
                                                                                                                                    (increase in )                                        (increase in ,
                                                                                                                                                                                          (decrease in )

                                                                               (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)       (10)
   : stock of illegal Immigrants                                              -10               -50            -10           -50            -10           -50          -10         -50         -10         -50
  Percentage Change in the Policy Parameter                               -10.40            -51.03            2.27        10.89            7.40        52.04      275.66       1985.3       65.64,     590.49,
                                                                                                                                                                                             -8.30      -39.19
                                                                    Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                                   -0.60         -3.07      -0.41       -2.55      -0.59                         -3.03        1.10         3.66        -0.19       -0.96
       : unemployment rate of natives                                       0.22               1.14           0.15          0.95           0.22         1.13        -0.40        -1.31        0.07         0.35
       : wage of natives                                                    0.11          0.56       0.11        0.55       0.11                        0.56        -0.34        -1.23        0.00         0.01
                                                                      Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                                    -0.26         -1.31      -0.24       -1.26      -0.26                        -1.32        0.77         2.81        -0.01       -0.06
       : unemployment rate                                                  0.11               0.57           0.11          0.55           0.11         0.58        -0.33        -1.20        0.01         0.03
         wage                                                              -0.07              -0.35          -0.07         -0.34          -0.07         -0.35        0.21         0.75        0.00        -0.02
                                                                            Native income per person, percentage change
    : income per native                                                    -0.03         -0.13      -0.02      -0.12                      -0.03         -0.13        0.06         0.23        0.00        -0.02
      : income per native net of unemployment                              -0.05              -0.28          -0.04         -0.25          -0.05         -0.28        0.13         0.45        -0.01       -0.05
  benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in the number of illegal immigrants and in the
policy parameters. The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show income
per native. The columns correspond to different policy changes. Columns (1) and (2) represent the effects of increases in border controls. Columns (3) and (4) show the impact of increased search costs for
illegal immigrants. Columns (5) and (6) show the effects of an increase in the probability of deportation. Columns (7) and (8) show the effects of an increase in the legalization rate. Columns (9) and (10) show
the effects of an increase in the legalization probability and an increase in border control that keeps total immigrants unchanged. The values of the parameters used in the simulation are those reported in
Table 1.




                                                                                                        49
                                              Figure 1: Effects of Policies on Native Labor Market Outcomes

                             Effects on market tightness in the unskilled market                                                     Effects on market tightness in the skilled market
                      10                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                        4
% change in u1




                                                                                                     % change in s1
                                                                                                                        2
                      0
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                        -2
                  -10                                                                                                   -4
                     0     -10   -20   -30   -40 -50 -60 -70 -80 -90 -100                                                 0    -10    -20     -30 -40 -50 -60 -70 -80 -90 -100
                                                % change in I                                                                                        % change in I
                            Effects on the unemployment rate of unskilled natives                                                 Effects on the unemployment rate of skilled natives
                                                                                                                        2
                      2
   % change in uu1N




                                                                                                     % change in us1N
                                                                                                                        0
                      0

                      -2                                                                                                -2

                       0   -10   -20   -30   -40 -50 -60 -70 -80 -90 -100                                                 0    -10    -20     -30    -40 -50 -60 -70 -80             -90 -100
                                                % change in I                                                                                           % change in I
                                   Effects on the wage of unskilled natives                                                                 Effects on the wage of skilled natives
                      2
   % change in wu1N




                                                                                                     % change in ws1N
                                                                                                                        1
                      0
                                                                                                                        0
                      -2
                                                                                                                        -1
                       0   -10   -20   -30   -40 -50 -60 -70         -80    -90 -100                                      0    -10    -20     -30    -40 -50 -60 -70          -80    -90 -100
                                                % change in I                                                                                           % change in I
                                                                     search cost       deportation                       restrict entry         legalization

Note: Each Panel shows the percentage change of an outcome for native workers in the vertical axis against the percentage change in the number of illegal immigrants
on the horizontal axis produced by four differennt policies. The variables represented are labor market tightness (top two panels), unemployment rate (middle panels)
and wages (bottom panels). The left panels show variables relative to unskillled native workers while the right panels represent the variables relative to skilled ones.



                                                                                           50
                                              Figure 2 :Effects of Policies on Income per Native

                                                              E®ects on the net income of native workers (~1 )
                         0.6

% change in net income   0.4

                         0.2

                           0

                         -0.2

                         -0.4
                             0   -10   -20          -30            -40            -50          -60                -70            -80          -90           -100
                                                                                 % change in I

                                                             E®ects on the net income of native workers (~1 )
                         0.8

                         0.6
% change in net income




                         0.4

                         0.2

                           0

                         -0.2

                         -0.4

                         -0.6
                             0   -10   -20          -30            -40            -50          -60                -70            -80          -90           -100
                                                                                 % change in I
                                                          search cost        deportation         restrict entry         legalization


  Note: The top panel represents the percentage change of income per native (vertical axis) corresponding to a percentage change in the number of illegal immigrants
  (horizontal axis) produced by four different policies. The reduction in the number of illegal immigrants ranges from 10 to 100% (no illegal immigrants left). The
  definition of income per native in the top panel includes income when unemployed. The bottom panel shows a similar graph, when we use the alternative definition
  of income per native that excludes income when unemployed.


                                                                                   51
                                                            Figure 3: Effects of policies on Total and Legal Immigrants




% change in total immigrant population share
                                                                        Effects on total immigrants as a share of population of country 1

                                               100


                                               50


                                                0


                                               -50
                                                  0   -10      -20     -30          -40           -50          -60                -70          -80     -90   -100
                                                                                                 % change in I
% change in legal immigrant population share




                                                                        Effects on legal immigrants as a share of population of country 1
                                               300

                                               250

                                               200

                                               150

                                               100

                                               50

                                                0

                                               -50
                                                  0   -10      -20     -30          -40           -50          -60                -70          -80     -90   -100
                                                                                                 % change in I
                                                                         search cost         deportation         restrict entry         legalization

                        Note: The top panel represents the percentage change of total immiggrants (vertical axis) corresponding to a percentage change in the
                        number of illegal immigrants (horizontal axis) produced by four different policies. The reduction in the number of illegal immigrants ranges
                        from 10 to 100% (no illegal immigrants left). The bottom panel represents the percentage change of legal immiggrants (vertical axis)
                        corresponding to a percentage change in the number of illegal immigrants (horizontal axis) produced by four different policies. The reduction
                        in the number of illegal immigrants ranges from 10 to 100% (no illegal immigrants left).

                                                                                                   52
                                                    Table 3: The Effects of Tighter Border Controls, Robustness Checks

                                                        Baseline               -15% native-           -5% legal-illegal      Double dL           Reduce the       Lower real
                                                        Specification          immigrant wage         wage gap                                   ratio of         interest rate
                                                                               gap                                                               unemployment r=2% per year
                                                                                                                                                 to employment
                                                                                                                                                 income to 0.5
 Specifications:                                              (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)      (9)    (10)    (11)      (12)

  : stock of illegal Immigrants                              -10         -50         -10        -50        -10        -50        -10 -50                -10        -50        -10        -50

    : entry rate for illegal immigrants                  -10.40      -51.03      -10.54     -51.46     -10.51      -51.35     -10.33 -50.86         -10.74     -51.95     -10.38      -50.97

                                                           Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
    : market tightness                                     -0.60       -3.07      -0.44       -2.26      -0.54      -2.73      -0.57      -2.91       -0.37      -1.86      -0.63      -3.18
      : unemployment rate of natives                        0.22        1.14       0.16       0.84        0.20       1.02       0.21       1.09       0.13        0.69       0.23       1.19
      : wage of natives                                     0.11        0.56       0.11       0.55        0.11       0.55       0.10       0.51       0.11        0.54       0.11       0.56

                                                             Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
    : market tightness                                     -0.26       -1.31      -0.25       -1.24      -0.25      -1.28      -0.24      -1.21       -0.15      -0.74      -0.26      -1.32
      : unemployment rate                                   0.11        0.57       0.11       0.54        0.11       0.56       0.10       0.53       0.06        0.32       0.11       0.58
        wage                                               -0.07      -0.35     -0.07   -0.33     -0.07   -0.34                -0.06      -0.32       -0.07      -0.34      -0.07      -0.36
                                                                    Native income per person, percentage change
    : income per native                                    -0.03       -0.13      -0.02       -0.11      -0.02      -0.12      -0.02      -0.12       -0.03      -0.13      -0.02      -0.12
    : income per native net of                             -0.05       -0.28      -0.05       -0.23      -0.05      -0.26      -0.05      -0.26       -0.04      -0.20      -0.05      -0.28
 unemployment benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter . The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show
income per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the baseline specification. Columns (3) and (4) show the case when we have calibrated
parameters to obtain a native-immigrant wage gap of -15% (rather than -20%). Columns (5) and (6) show the case when we have calibrated parameters to obtain a legal-illegal wage gap of -5%
(rather than -7.5%). Columns (7) and (8) show the case when we set the return rate dL to be double the value in the baseline case. Columns (9) and (10) show the case when we calibrate the
parameters to obtain a ratio of unemployment to employment income of 0.5. Columns (11) and (12) show the case when we set the interest rate to 2%.



                                                                                              53
                                                         Table 4: The Effects of Higher Search Cost: Robustness Checks

                                                            Baseline                -15% native-           -5% legal-illegal     Double dL           Reduce the       Lower real
                                                            Specification           immigrant              wage gap                                  ratio of         interest rate
                                                                                    wage gap                                                         unemployment r=2% per year
                                                                                                                                                     to employment
                                                                                                                                                     income to 0.5
  Specifications:                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)     (9)     (10)    (11)      (12)

   : stock of illegal Immigrants                                   -10       -50        -10          -50       -10        -50        -10         -50        -10        -50        -10        -50

     : search cost for illegal immigrants                        2.27      10.89       5.28      25.86       3.37      16.32        2.13      10.28       1.71        8.21       2.43      11.72

                                                              Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                         -0.41      -2.55      -0.07      -1.24      -0.28       -2.02      -0.40      -2.43      -0.27       -1.61      -0.42      -2.62
       : unemployment rate of natives                            0.15       0.95       0.03       0.46       0.10        0.75       0.15       0.90       0.10        0.59       0.15       0.98
       : wage of natives                                         0.11       0.55       0.10       0.53       0.10        0.54       0.10       0.51       0.11        0.53       0.11       0.56
                                                               Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                         -0.24      -1.26      -0.22      -1.16      -0.23       -1.22      -0.23      -1.17      -0.14       -0.72      -0.24      -1.27
       : unemployment rate                                       0.11       0.55       0.10       0.51       0.10        0.53       0.10       0.51       0.06        0.31       0.11       0.56
         wage                                                   -0.07    -0.34    -0.06   -0.31     -0.06    -0.33   -0.06                    -0.31      -0.07       -0.33      -0.07      -0.34
                                                               Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
    : income per native                                         -0.02    -0.12    -0.01   -0.09     -0.02    -0.10   -0.02                    -0.11      -0.02       -0.12      -0.02      -0.11
      : income per native net of unemployment                   -0.04      -0.25      -0.02      -0.17      -0.04       -0.22      -0.04      -0.23      -0.03       -0.19      -0.04      -0.24
  benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter . The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show
income per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the baseline specification. Columns (3) and (4) show the case when we have calibrated
parameters to obtain a native-immigrant wage gap of -15% (rather than -20%). Columns (5) and (6) show the case when we have calibrated parameters to obtain a legal-illegal wage gap of -5% (rather
than -7.5%). Columns (7) and (8) show the case when we set the return rate dL to be double the value in the baseline case. Columns (9) and (10) show the case when we calibrate the parameters to
obtain a ratio of unemployment to employment income of 0.5. Columns (11) and (12) show the case when we set the interest rate to 2%.




                                                                                                54
                                                      Table 5: The Effects of Higher Deportation Rates: Robustness Checks

                                                                 Baseline              -15% native-            -5% legal-illegal    Double dL           Reduce the       Lower real
                                                                 Specification         immigrant               wage gap                                 ratio of         interest rate
                                                                                       wage gap                                                         unemployment r=2% per year
                                                                                                                                                        to employment
                                                                                                                                                        income to 0.5
  Specifications:                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)      (9)    (10)    (11)      (12)
   : stock of illegal Immigrants                                     -10         -50        -10         -50        -10       -50         -10        -50        -10        -50        -10         -50
     : return rate for illegal immigrants                           7.40      52.04       8.55      62.93        8.03      57.91       7.26      50.93        6.72     45.22        6.85      48.36

                                                               Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                            -0.59      -3.03      -0.44         -2.23     -0.53     -2.70      -0.57       -2.88      -0.36      -1.86      -0.62      -3.16
       : unemployment rate of natives                               0.22       1.13       0.16         0.83      0.19       1.00       0.21       1.07        0.13       0.69       0.23       1.18
       : wage of natives                                            0.11       0.56       0.11         0.55      0.11       0.56       0.10       0.52        0.11       0.54       0.11       0.57
                                                                 Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                            -0.26      -1.32      -0.25         -1.25     -0.26     -1.29      -0.24       -1.22      -0.15      -0.74      -0.26      -1.33
       : unemployment rate                                          0.11       0.58       0.11         0.55      0.11       0.57       0.11       0.54        0.06       0.32       0.12       0.58
        wage                                                       -0.07      -0.35      -0.07         -0.34     -0.07     -0.35      -0.07       -0.33      -0.07      -0.34      -0.07      -0.36
                                                                       Native income per person, percentage change
     : income per native                                           -0.03      -0.13      -0.02         -0.11     -0.02     -0.12      -0.02       -0.12      -0.03      -0.14      -0.02      -0.12
     : income per native net of unemployment                       -0.05      -0.28      -0.05         -0.23     -0.05     -0.26      -0.05       -0.26      -0.04      -0.20      -0.05      -0.28
  benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter d. The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show income
per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the baseline specification. Columns (3) and (4) show the case when we have calibrated parameters to
obtain a native-immigrant wage gap of -15% (rather than -20%). Columns (5) and (6) show the case when we have calibrated parameters to obtain a legal-illegal wage gap of -5% (rather than -7.5%).
Columns (7) and (8) show the case when we set the return rate dL to be double the value in the baseline case. Columns (9) and (10) show the case when we calibrate the parameters to obtain a ratio of
unemployment to employment income of 0.5. Columns (11) and (12) show the case when we set the interest rate to 2%.




                                                                                                  55
                                                  Table 6: The Effects of Higher Legalization Rates: Robustness Checks

                                                       Baseline                -15% native-            -5% legal-illegal       Double dL               Reduce the        Lower real
                                                       Specification           immigrant               wage gap                                        ratio of          interest rate
                                                                               wage gap                                                                unemployment      r=2% per year
                                                                                                                                                       to employment
                                                                                                                                                       income to 0.5
  Specifications:                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)      (10)     (11)      (12)

   : stock of illegal Immigrants                             -10         -50         -10         -50         -10         -50         -10         -50      -10      -50      -10        -50

    : legalization rate                                 275.6 1985.3 165.8 1482.5 156.43 1408.2 169.84                                     1536.8      408.02   2339.2   429.53    2255.6
                                                            6
                                                         Unskilled  1
                                                                   market,   3
                                                                           outcomes   4 natives, percentage
                                                                                    for                 6 change                                0                    5                  2
     : market tightness                                   1.10       3.66        0.13        0.60        0.45        2.18        -0.01       -0.05       1.12     2.78     2.15       4.80
       : unemployment rate of natives                    -0.40       -1.31      -0.05        -0.22       -0.16       -0.79       0.00        0.02       -0.41    -1.00    -0.77      -1.70
       : wage of natives                                 -0.34     -1.23    -0.16  -0.78      -0.15    -0.74    -0.05                        -0.26      -0.55    -1.53    -0.60      -1.48
                                                            Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                   0.77       2.81        0.34        1.68        0.33        1.66        0.11        0.55        0.73     2.04     1.36       3.39
       : unemployment rate                               -0.33       -1.20      -0.15        -0.72       -0.15       -0.72       -0.05       -0.24      -0.32    -0.88    -0.58      -1.44
         wage                                             0.21       0.75        0.09        0.45        0.09        0.45        0.03        0.15        0.34     0.95     0.37       0.91
                                                                   Native income per person, percentage change
     : income per native                                  0.06       0.23        0.02        0.11        0.03        0.13        0.01        0.03        0.11     0.31     0.11       0.27
     : income per native net of                           0.13       0.45        0.04        0.19        0.05        0.27        0.01        0.05        0.16     0.44     0.23       0.54
  unemployment benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the
policy parameter n. The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two
rows show income per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the baseline specification. Columns (3) and (4) show the case when we
have calibrated parameters to obtain a native-immigrant wage gap of -15% (rather than -20%). Columns (5) and (6) show the case when we have calibrated parameters to obtain a legal-illegal
wage gap of -5% (rather than -7.5%). Columns (7) and (8) show the case when we set the return rate dL to be double the value in the baseline case. Columns (9) and (10) show the case when we
calibrate the parameters to obtain a ratio of unemployment to employment income of 0.5. Columns (11) and (12) show the case when we set the interest rate to 2%.




                                                                                                 56
                         Table 7: The Role of Native-Immigrant Productivity Differences, Different Policies Effect on Unskilled Natives

                                                          Wage gap due to productivity only             Wage gap due to productivity and                 Wage gap due to search cost only
                                                                                                        search cost




 Specification                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)      (10)      (11)        (12)
 Policy Parameter
  : stock of illegal Immigrants                                -50        -50       -50          -50         -50         -50         -50          -50        -50      -50       -50          -50
 Change in Policy parameter                                -49.01 191.20         67.45     1282.74       -49.98       44.54       64.72 1369.42          -49.55 18.48        56.92     1647.81

                                                             Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
    : market tightness                                       0.25       1.66       0.20        -1.72      -1.75        -0.90       -1.76        0.89      -3.05     -2.55     -3.03         3.80

     : unemployment rate of unskilled                       -0.09       -0.60     -0.07         0.63       0.65         0.33        0.65        -0.32      1.13      0.95      1.13        -1.36
 natives
      : wage of unskilled natives                            0.01       0.04       0.00        -0.04      -0.04        -0.02       -0.04        0.02      -0.07     -0.06     -0.07         0.09

                                                                     Native income per person, percentage change
    : income per native                                      0.09       0.16       0.09         0.00      -0.07        -0.02       -0.07        0.10      -0.18     -0.15     -0.18         0.22

    : income per native net of                               0.13       0.36       0.13        -0.16      -0.25        -0.11       -0.25        0.20      -0.51     -0.43     -0.51         0.62
 unemployment benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter. The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives and the last two rows show income per native. The columns correspond to effects achieved using four different
policies used to reduce illegal immigrants by 50%. Columns (1)-(4) show the effects when we calibrate the whole native-immigrant wage gap to be due to productivity differences. Columns (5)-(8)
show the case in which the calibration allows half of the native-immigrant wage gap to be due to productivity differences and the remaining half to different outside options. Columns (9)-(12) show
the case when the whole native-immigrant wage gap is due to different outside options.




                                                                                                57
Appendix Tables



                 Table A1: Simulation of Policy Effects on Labor Market variables for Immigrants in US (1) and Workers in Mexico (2)
                                                                 (percentage changes)

                                                                      Increased border control            Higher search cost           Increased rates of           Legalization
                                                                      (decrease in )                      (increase in )               deportation                  (increase in )
                                                                                                                                       (increase in )
     Specification                                                               (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
      : stock of illegal Immigrants                                             -10               -50             -10          -50             -10          -50         -10          -50
        : entry rate for illegal immigrants                                  -10.40            -51.03            2.27        10.89            7.40        52.04      275.66       1985.3
                                                                          Unskilled immigrants in Country 1                                                                             1
         : unemployment rate of legal immigrants                             0.30           1.58        0.24                   1.39           0.30          1.58       -1.78        -4.04
         : unemployment rate of illegal immigrants                             0.21                1.10          0.15          0.91           0.76          4.91        2.71        19.28
          : wage of legal immigrants                                           0.10                0.48          0.10          0.51           0.10          0.49       -0.35        -1.29
         : wage of illegal immigrants                                          0.09          0.46     -0.68                   -3.31          -0.08         -0.73       -0.49        -2.17
                                                                                 Workers in Country 2
         : market tightness                                                    0.49          2.43      0.90                    3.54           0.49          2.52       -2.08        -9.30
         : unemployment rate                                                  -0.15              -0.71          -0.26         -1.02          -0.14         -0.73        0.62         2.89
           wage                                                               -0.03              -0.14          -0.05         -0.20          -0.03         -0.14        0.12         0.54

   Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in the number of illegal
   immigrants and in the policy parameters. The next four rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled legal and illegal immigrants in the US, the last three rows show the labor
   market outcomes of workers in Mexico. The columns correspond to different policy changes. Columns (1) and (2) represent the effects of increases in border controls. Columns (3) and
   (4) show the impact of increased search costs for illegal immigrants. Columns (5) and (6) show the effects of an increase in the probability of deportation. Columns (7) and (8) show the
   effects of an increase in the legalization rate. The values of the parameters used in the simulation are those reported in Table 1.




                                                                                              58
                                           Figure 1A: Effects of Policies on Immigrant Labor Market Outcomes

                                       Effects on the wage of illegal immigrants                                                             Effects on the unemployment rate of illegal immigrants
                         2                                                                                                        250

                         0
                                                                                                                                  200
  % change in in w1I




                                                                                                             % change in in u1I
                        -2
                                                                                                                                  150
                        -4
                                                                                                                                  100
                        -6

                                                                                                                                      50
                        -8

                       -10                                                                                                            0
                          0    -10   -20   -30   -40 -50 -60 -70           -80     -90     -100                                        0    -10   -20    -30     -40 -50 -60 -70       -80   -90      -100
                                                    % change in I                                                                                                   % change in I

                                       Effects on the wage of legal immigrants                                                                Effects on the unemployment rate of legal immigrants
                         1                                                                                                            4

                       0.5
                                                                                                                                      2
                         0
% change in w1L




                                                                                                                    % change in u1L
                       -0.5                                                                                                           0

                        -1                                                                                                            -2
                       -1.5
                                                                                                                                      -4
                        -2

                       -2.5                                                                                                           -6
                           0   -10   -20   -30   -40 -50 -60 -70           -80     -90     -100                                         0   -10   -20    -30     -40 -50 -60 -70       -80   -90      -100
                                                    % change in I                                                                                                   % change in I
                                                                 search cost             deportation        restrict entry                        legalization


Note: Each Panel shows the percentage change of an outcome for immigrants workers in the vertical axis against the percentage change in the number
of illegal immigrants on the horizontal axis produced by four differennt policies. The variables represented are wages (left panels) and unemployment
rate (right panels). The top panels show variables relative to illegal immigrants while the bottom panels represent variables relative to legal immigrants.




                                                                                                       59
                                                        Table A2: Tighter Border Controls, Additional Robustness Checks

                                                          Lower elasticity          Higher elasticity        Higher elasticity       Lower elasticity        Larger country       Smaller
                                                          of substitution           of substitution          of the matching         of the matching         2 separation         bargaining
                                                              0.6                       0.33                 function     0.8        function    0.2         rate      0.05       power      0.3
                                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)      (10) (11)        (12)
   : stock of illegal Immigrants                          -10          -50          -10          -50         -10         -50         -10         -50         -10         -50      -10        -50
     : entry rate for illegal immigrants                  -10.14       -50.30       -10.78       -52.09      -9.45       -48.28      -11.03      -52.75      -10.39      -51.01   -10.68     -51.85

                                                              Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                   -0.69        -3.49        -0.48        -2.41       -0.70       -3.53       -0.54       -2.73       -0.60       -3.07    -0.13      -0.65
       : unemployment rate of natives                     0.25         1.31         0.17         0.90        0.41        2.12        0.08        0.41        0.22        1.14     0.05       0.24
       : wage of natives                                  0.09         0.44         0.14         0.73        0.12        0.60        0.10        0.53        0.11        0.56     0.08       0.42

                                                                 Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change

     : market tightness                                   -0.22        -1.09        -0.32        -1.63       -0.33       -1.67       -0.21       -1.05       -0.26       -1.31    -0.22      -1.10

       : unemployment rate                                0.09         0.48         0.14         0.72        0.23        1.18        0.04        0.18        0.11        0.57     0.10       0.48
        wage                                              -0.06        -0.29        -0.09        -0.44       -0.08       -0.43       -0.06       -0.30       -0.07       -0.35    -0.06      -0.29

                                                                       Native income per person, percentage change

   : income per native                                    -0.02        -0.13        -0.03        -0.13       -0.04       -0.21       -0.01       -0.07       -0.03       -0.13    -0.02      -0.11
    : income per native net of                            -0.05        -0.28        -0.05        -0.27       -0.09       -0.49       -0.03       -0.13       -0.05       -0.28    -0.03      -0.17
 unemployment benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter . The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show
income per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the case with lower elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (3) and (4)
represent the case with higher elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (5) and (6) show the case with higher elasticity of the matching function. Columns (7) and (8) show the case with
lower elasticity of the matching function. Columns (9) and (10) show the case with larger separation rate in country 2 (Mexico). Columns (11) and (12) show the case with smaller bargaining power
of workers. The remaining parameters are as in Table 1.




                                                                                                   60
                                                           Table A3: Higher Search Cost: Additional Robustness Checks


                                                          Lower elasticity   Higher elasticity Higher elasticity Lower elasticity Larger country   Smaller
                                                          of substitution    of substitution   of the matching of the matching 2 separation        bargaining
                                                              0.6                0.33          function     0.8 function     0.2 rate       0.05   power      0.3
   : stock of illegal Immigrants                               -10       -50      -10      -50     -10      -50     -10       -50    -10       -50    -10       -50

     : search cost for illegal immigrants                     2.21       10.58         2.35      11.37        2.04        9.83        2.41      11.62        2.25      10.79        7.90      38.98
                                                              Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                      -0.50        -2.98       -0.29       -1.90      -0.51       -3.03       -0.35      -2.22       -0.42       -2.56       0.20        0.27
       : unemployment rate of natives                         0.18         1.11        0.10        0.70       0.30        1.81        0.05       0.33        0.15        0.95      -0.07       -0.10
       : wage of natives                                      0.09         0.44        0.14        0.72       0.11        0.59        0.10       0.52        0.11        0.55       0.09        0.43
                                                                Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                      -0.20        -1.05       -0.30       -1.58      -0.31       -1.60       -0.20      -1.03       -0.24       -1.26      -0.19       -1.03
       : unemployment rate                                    0.09         0.46        0.13        0.69       0.21        1.13        0.04       0.18        0.11        0.55       0.08        0.45
        wage                                                 -0.05        -0.28       -0.08       -0.42      -0.08       -0.41       -0.06      -0.29       -0.07       -0.34      -0.05       -0.28
                                                                       Native income per person, percentage change
     : income per native                                     -0.02        -0.11       -0.02       -0.12      -0.03       -0.19       -0.01      -0.07       -0.02       -0.12      -0.01       -0.08
    : income per native net of                               -0.04        -0.25       -0.04       -0.24      -0.08       -0.44       -0.02      -0.12       -0.04       -0.25      -0.01       -0.11
 unemployment benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter . The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show
income per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the case with lower elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (3) and (4)
represent the case with higher elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (5) and (6) show the case with higher elasticity of the matching function. Columns (7) and (8) show the case with
lower elasticity of the matching function. Columns (9) and (10) show the case with larger separation rate in country 2 (Mexico). Columns (11) and (12) show the case with smaller bargaining power
of workers. The remaining parameters are as in Table 1.




                                                                                                   61
                                                       Table A4: Higher Deportation rates: Additional Robustness Checks


                                                          Lower elasticity   Higher elasticity Higher elasticity Lower elasticity Larger country   Smaller
                                                          of substitution    of substitution   of the matching of the matching 2 separation        bargaining
                                                              0.6                0.33          function     0.8 function     0.2 rate       0.05   power      0.3
   : stock of illegal Immigrants                               -10       -50      -10      -50     -10      -50     -10       -50    -10       -50    -10       -50
     : return rate for illegal immigrants                     7.20       50.66         7.70      54.13        6.67       47.08        7.89      55.44        7.38      51.89        9.02      67.31
                                                              Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                      -0.68        -3.46       -0.46       -2.37      -0.69       -3.50       -0.53      -2.70       -0.59       -3.03      -0.14       -0.69
       : unemployment rate of natives                         0.25         1.29        0.17        0.88       0.40        2.10        0.08       0.40        0.22        1.13       0.05        0.25
       : wage of natives                                      0.09         0.45        0.15        0.74       0.12        0.60        0.11       0.53        0.11        0.56       0.08        0.43
                                                                Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                      -0.22        -1.10       -0.33       -1.65      -0.33       -1.68       -0.21      -1.06       -0.26       -1.32      -0.22       -1.12
       : unemployment rate                                    0.10         0.48        0.14        0.73       0.23        1.18        0.04       0.19        0.11        0.58       0.10        0.49
        wage                                                 -0.06        -0.30       -0.09       -0.44      -0.08       -0.43       -0.06      -0.30       -0.07       -0.35      -0.06       -0.30
                                                                       Native income per person, percentage change
     : income per native                                     -0.02        -0.13       -0.03       -0.13      -0.04       -0.21       -0.01      -0.07       -0.03       -0.13      -0.02       -0.11
    : income per native net of                               -0.05        -0.28       -0.05       -0.27      -0.09       -0.49       -0.03      -0.13       -0.05       -0.28      -0.04       -0.18
 unemployment benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter d. The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show
income per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the case with lower elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (3) and (4)
represent the case with higher elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (5) and (6) show the case with higher elasticity of the matching function. Columns (7) and (8) show the case with
lower elasticity of the matching function. Columns (9) and (10) show the case with larger separation rate in country 2 (Mexico). Columns (11) and (12) show the case with smaller bargaining power
of workers. The remaining parameters are as in Table 1.




                                                                                                   62
                                                       Table A5: Higher Legalization rates: Additional Robustness Checks

                                                          Lower elasticity   Higher elasticity Higher elasticity Lower elasticity Larger country   Smaller
                                                          of substitution    of substitution   of the matching of the matching 2 separation        bargaining
                                                              0.6                0.33          function     0.8 function     0.2 rate       0.05   power      0.3
   : stock of illegal Immigrants                               -10       -50      -10      -50     -10      -50     -10       -50    -10       -50    -10       -50
    : legalization rate                                    292.68       2044.7      253.42      1901.4     343.02      2259.0      247.18     1860.4      278.81      1996.5     130.27      1208.1
                                                              Unskilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                       1.48         4.78        0.63        2.11       1.79        5.41        0.81       2.82        1.12        3.70      -0.06       -0.29
       : unemployment rate of natives                        -0.53        -1.70       -0.23       -0.76      -1.03       -3.05       -0.12      -0.41       -0.41       -1.32       0.02        0.11
       : wage of natives                                     -0.30        -1.03       -0.40       -1.51      -0.47       -1.53       -0.29      -1.10       -0.35       -1.24      -0.09       -0.45
                                                                Skilled market, outcomes for natives, percentage change
     : market tightness                                       0.70         2.44        0.87        3.32       1.24        4.06        0.57       2.20        0.79        2.83       0.21        1.10
       : unemployment rate                                   -0.30        -1.04       -0.37       -1.41      -0.86       -2.74       -0.10      -0.38       -0.34       -1.21      -0.09       -0.48
        wage                                                  0.19         0.65        0.23        0.89       0.32        1.04        0.16       0.62        0.21        0.76       0.06        0.30

                                                                       Native income per person, percentage change
     : income per native                                      0.07         0.23        0.06        0.22       0.13        0.41        0.03       0.13        0.06        0.23       0.02        0.09
    : income per native net of                                0.14         0.47        0.11        0.42       0.29        0.91        0.06       0.21        0.13        0.46       0.02        0.13
 unemployment benefits

Note: Each entry represents the percentage change in the corresponding variable described in the row header. The top two rows show the percentage change in illegal immigrants and in the policy
parameter n. The next three rows show the labor market outcomes for unskilled natives, the following three rows show the labor market outcomes for skilled natives and the last two rows show
income per native. The columns correspond to different robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) represent the case with lower elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (3) and (4)
represent the case with higher elasticity of substitution skilled-unskilled. Columns (5) and (6) show the case with higher elasticity of the matching function. Columns (7) and (8) show the case with
lower elasticity of the matching function. Columns (9) and (10) show the case with larger separation rate in country 2 (Mexico). Columns (11) and (12) show the case with smaller bargaining power
of workers. The remaining parameters are as in Table 1.




                                                                                                   63
