                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DID ROBERT BORK UNDERSTATE THE COMPETITIVE IMPACT OF MERGERS?
                 EVIDENCE FROM CONSUMMATED MERGERS

                                       Orley C. Ashenfelter
                                          Daniel Hosken
                                       Matthew C. Weinberg

                                        Working Paper 19939
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19939


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of
the Federal Trade Commission or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful for
financial support from the Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University. We would like to thank
Pauline Ippolito and Paul Pautler for their assistance, and Dennis Carlton and Sam Peltzman for helpful
comments and suggestions.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Orley C. Ashenfelter, Daniel Hosken, and Matthew C. Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did Robert Bork Understate the Competitive Impact of Mergers? Evidence from Consummated
Mergers
Orley C. Ashenfelter, Daniel Hosken, and Matthew C. Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19939
February 2014
JEL No. K21,L1,L4,L41

                                            ABSTRACT

In The Antitrust Paradox, Robert Bork viewed most mergers as either competitively neutral or efficiency
enhancing. In his view, only mergers creating a dominant firm or monopoly were likely to harm
consumers. Bork was especially skeptical of oligopoly concerns resulting from mergers. In this
paper, we provide a critique of Bork’s views on merger policy from The Antitrust Paradox. Many
of Bork’s recommendations have been implemented over time and have improved merger analysis.
Bork’s proposed horizontal merger policy, however, was too permissive. In particular, the empirical
record shows that mergers in oligopolistic markets can raise consumer prices.


Orley C. Ashenfelter                               Matthew C. Weinberg
Industrial Relations Section                       Department of Economics
Firestone Library                                  Drexel University
Princeton University                               3600 Market St, 7th Floor
Princeton, NJ 08544                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                           mcw325@drexel.edu
c6789@princeton.edu

Daniel Hosken
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20580
dhosken@ftc.gov
    I.       Introduction

         Merger enforcement by the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and the U.S. Federal Trade

Commission (FTC) was extremely aggressive in the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s. In The

Antitrust Paradox Robert Bork argued that U.S. courts and antitrust enforcers of this era were

concerned about the consolidation of economic decision making in the hands of a relatively

small number of corporations and the corresponding decline in the economic importance of small

independent businesses. 1 As a result, U.S. merger policy was focused on maintaining low levels

of market concentration rather than determining how specific mergers would change the

competitive environment in a market. While courts sometimes acknowledged that mergers could

generate efficiencies, efficiencies were not seen as being sufficient to overturn the competitive

concerns caused by increased market concentration.2 Moreover, during this time period the

government was remarkably successful in challenging mergers. In Von’s Grocery, the Supreme

Court affirmed the FTC’s decision to challenge the merger of two Los Angeles grocery retailers

with a combined market share of only 7.5%. In summarizing the (then) Supreme Court’s view of

horizontal merger policy, Justice Stewart wrote in his dissent to Von’s Grocery that “The sole

consistency that I can find is that in litigation under Section 7, the Government always wins.”

         By the late 1980s, the burden of proof required of the U.S. antitrust agencies to challenge

horizontal mergers had dramatically increased.3 Establishing that a merger would increase

market concentration in a well-defined market became the starting place for horizontal merger

analysis rather than the end point. To successfully challenge a merger, the government was



1
  The Antitrust Paradox, pages 202-205.
2
  For example, the Supreme Court majority opinion in FTC vs. Proctor and Gamble stated that, “Possible economies
cannot be used as a defense to illegality. Congress was aware that some mergers which lessen competition may also
result in economies but it struck the balance in favor of protecting competition.”
3
  Kovacic (2003) provides an excellent discussion of the dramatic changes in merger policy and case law that took
place between the 1960s and 1980s.

                                                       2
required to provide the court with an economic theory that described how the transaction at issue

would harm competition and extensive evidence supporting its theory. In addition, the

government was now forced to show that market forces, such as expansion by rivals or the entry

of new firms, would not be sufficient to maintain competition following a potentially

anticompetitive merger. Finally, beginning with the 1984 revision of the Merger Guidelines, the

U.S. antitrust agencies formally acknowledged that mergers can generate important economic

efficiencies. While the burden was on the merging parties to show that reductions in marginal

costs resulting from the merger would offset the merged firms’ incentive to increase price, the

government was now required to rebut an efficiency defense.

       This increase in the evidentiary burden placed on the government has substantially

limited its ability to challenge horizontal mergers. A series of major government losses of

merger cases has led some scholars to conclude that the burden placed on the government is now

too severe (Baker and Shapiro (2009)). The government no longer always wins.

       Robert Bork’s The Antitrust Paradox played an important role in moving horizontal

merger policy from its strict emphasis on market concentration to its current application as seen

in both the modern case law and the Horizontal Merger Guidelines. In The Antitrust Paradox

Bork challenges the logic underlying many prominent merger decisions, and more generally, the

(then) commonly held beliefs underlying merger policy. He felt that most mergers were either

competitively neutral or undertaken to generate economic efficiencies. Because mergers were

frequently socially beneficial, Bork believed that merger policy should be much more permissive

than it was in the 1960s and 1970s. While he conceded that some mergers could generate market

power, Bork believed those problematic cases were limited to the creation of either a monopoly




                                                3
or a dominant firm. Bork was especially skeptical that mergers could create or exacerbate

competitive harm in oligopolistic markets.

         While we agree with some of Bork’s critique of merger enforcement circa 1970, we

believe Bork went too far in dismissing likely competitive harm resulting from mergers that fell

short of creating a monopoly or dominant firm. Subsequent empirical studies examining the

price effects of consummated mergers have shown that, contrary to what Bork believed, mergers

in oligopolistic markets can increase prices.

         The goal of this essay is to evaluate how well the claims Bork made regarding mergers in

The Antitrust Paradox are supported by the current empirical record. To offer a fair criticism of

Bork, however, it is essential to acknowledge how much antitrust analysis generally, and

horizontal merger policy in particular, has changed since the publication of The Antitrust

Paradox. Thus, we begin by briefly describing the U.S. merger policy that Bork was responding

to by highlighting two key Supreme Court decisions from the 1960s: U.S. vs. Von’s Grocery and

FTC vs. Proctor and Gamble. We then discuss Bork’s critique of merger policy and his

suggestions for improvements. Next, we describe the dramatic changes in horizontal merger

policy that followed the publication of The Antitrust Paradox, because these changes resulted in

a very different composition of mergers both allowed and challenged by U.S. antitrust

authorities. Finally, we turn to our review of ex-post merger studies to evaluate Bork’s

predictions regarding how mergers in oligopoly markets have affected competition and the

importance of merger efficiencies.

   II.      Merger Policy Prior to The Antitrust Paradox

   U.S. antitrust authorities were very concerned with the growth of large corporations, and

believed that the diminished role of smaller firms in industries would harm competition. As a



                                                4
result of this concern, antitrust authorities aggressively challenged both mergers that increased

market concentration and expansion by large firms into adjacent markets. The Von’s Grocery

case exemplifies both the aggressiveness of horizontal merger policy and its focus on market

concentration during this era. In 1960, Von’s Grocery, a supermarket chain operating in the

greater Los Angeles area, purchased a rival chain, Shopping Bag Food Stores. At the time of the

merger, Von’s Grocery and Shopping Bag Food Stores had a combined market share of 7.5% of

grocery sales in Los Angeles, and the ten largest firms had a collective market share of roughly

50%.4 The FTC claimed that the merger would harm competition by increasing market

concentration in a market undergoing rapid consolidation, and sued to block the transaction. The

District Court denied the FTC’s request to block the merger, and Von’s acquired Shopping Bag

Food Stores.5 The case was ultimately appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court which reversed the

District Court’s decision and forced Von’s to divest the stores it acquired in 1966.

    Surprisingly, the majority opinion does not cite evidence showing that the merger of Von’s

and Shopping Bag created or enhanced market power despite hearing the case six years after the

merger was consummated.6 Instead, in concluding its decision the Court stated that, “It is

enough for us that Congress feared that a market marked at the same time by both a continuous

decline in the number of small businesses and a large number of mergers would slowly but

inevitably gravitate from a market of many small competitors to one dominated by one or a few

giants, and competition would thereby be destroyed.” The emphasis on market concentration

and concerns of growing concentration in determining which horizontal mergers are likely to



4
  By modern terms, this market does not appear very concentrated. Ellickson (2007) reported that in 1998 the top 6
supermarket retailers in the average U.S. market captured about 70% of industry sales.
5
  United States v. Vons Grocery Co.
6
  Justice Stewart noted in his dissenting opinion that, “There is simply no evidence in the record, and the Court
makes no attempt to demonstrate that the increment in market share obtained by the combined stores can be equated
with an increase in the market power of the combined firm.”

                                                        5
cause competitive problems were formalized in the first edition of the Merger Guidelines

published by the DOJ in 1968. In stating its “General Enforcement Policy” the DOJ stated that,

“the primary role of Section 7 enforcement is to preserve and promote market structures

conducive to competition.”7 The Guidelines implemented this policy by providing very explicit

market share thresholds that would likely generate enforcement action by the agency. For

example, in a highly concentrated market (defined as one where the top 4 firms amount to more

than 75% of sales), the DOJ stated it would “ordinarily challenge” the merger of two firms each

with a 4% market share, and that in markets with a “trend toward concentration” the Department

will ordinarily challenge any acquisition by “any firm who’s market share amounts to 2% or

more.”8

           Regulators and courts were also concerned that mergers could provide firms with a cost

advantage relative to rivals. Perhaps, the most famous example of this concern can be seen in

the Supreme Court’s 1967 decision in FTC v. Proctor and Gamble (often referred to as the

Clorox case). In the 1950s Proctor and Gamble (P&G) was a very successful manufacturer and

marketer of home cleaning products including laundry detergents. However, it did not

manufacturer or market a bleach product. In 1957, P&G choose to enter the liquid bleach

business by purchasing the Clorox Chemical Company, the owner of the most popular bleach

brand in the U.S., Clorox. The FTC sued to break up the merger arguing that P&G’s acquisition

“might substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in the production and sale

of household liquid bleaches.” This merger was not challenged because of a traditional vertical

or horizontal concern. Instead, the FTC described this merger as a “product-extension” merger.

It was concerned that because P&G was such a powerful producer of products complementary to

7
    1968 Merger Guidelines, Horizontal Mergers, Sections 2.
8
    1968 Merger Guidelines, Horizontal Mergers, Sections 5 and 7.


                                                         6
bleach, that the merger would cause the bleach market to become less competitive. The FTC

won an administrative trial and ordered P&G to divest Clorox. The Court of Appeals reversed

the FTC’s decision, but on further appeal the Supreme Court the court ruled in favor of the FTC

and forced P&G to divest Clorox.

           The court cited two primary reasons for challenging the merger. First, P&G might have

entered the bleach market at some point in the future, and that as a very successful consumer

product producer its threat of entry may (somehow) have limited Clorox’s market power.9

Second, the merger would have allowed P&G to more effectively promote Clorox (through

reductions in the cost of advertising), and this decline in promotion costs would have harmed

competition by causing entry to be less likely.10 In essence, the Court ruled that merger

efficiencies are illegal if they cause the merged firm’s costs to be so low that rivals cannot

profitably enter.

    III.      Bork’s View of Effective Merger Policy

    As he describes in the forward to The Antitrust Paradox, Robert Bork completed his first

draft in 1969, shortly after the Supreme Courts Clorox and Von’s Grocery decisions, and the

book reads as a vigorous response to these and other similarly aggressive antitrust actions. In

The Antitrust Paradox, Bork frames his analysis of mergers using Williamson’s (1968) classic

paper outlining the potential welfare tradeoff resulting from horizontal mergers. Using a very

simple model, Williamson described how mergers could simultaneously result in cost reductions

and reductions in output. Williamson suggested that in determining which mergers to challenge,

9
  The court cites the FTC’s statement that “prior to the merger the Commission found, Proctor was the most likely
prospective entrant into the industry, and absent the merger would have remained on the periphery, restraining
Clorox from exercising its market power.” FTC vs. Proctor and Gamble.
10
   The court wrote, “The acquisition may also have the tendency of raising barriers to new entry. The major
competitive weapon in the successful marketing of bleach is advertising. Clorox was limited in this area by its
relatively small budget and its inability to obtain substantial discounts….Proctor would be able to use its volume
discounts to advantage in advertising Clorox. Thus, a new entrant would be much more reluctant to face the giant
Proctor than it would have been to face the smaller Clorox.” FTC vs. Proctor and Gamble.

                                                         7
regulators should explicitly tradeoff the positive productive effects of mergers against the

deadweight loss resulting from mergers that increase market power. As we discuss below in

more detail, Bork did not think that Williamson’s suggested tradeoff could be effectively used in

practice. However, Bork felt that Williamson’s model provided a very important insight for

merger policy: mergers cannot be harmful unless they result in a reduction in output. If the

government cannot produce a credible theory of how a merger harms competition, then it should

allow the merger to proceed.11 Therefore, the primary focus of merger analysis should focus on

determining if there is a reasonable probability that the specific merger before the agencies will

harm competition. While Bork’s policy recommendation seems uncontroversial today, at the

time it represented a significant break from a consensus view as seen in the 1968 Merger

Guidelines and Von’s Grocery; that is, showing that a merger either increased concentration or

was taking place in a market that was experiencing consolidation was sufficient to show that the

a merger was anticompetitive.

     While Bork conceded that some mergers could create market power and reduce consumer

welfare, he felt that those mergers were limited to those that created either a monopoly or a

dominant firm. He was quite skeptical that mergers would create or enhance competitive

problems resulting from oligopoly. For example, Bork wrote that “oligopolistic behavior, to the

extent that it exists at all (and I am not persuaded that such behavior exists outside of economics

textbooks) rarely results in any significant ability to restrict output.”12 The difficulty facing

regulators was in determining whether to challenge a merger when there was evidence

suggesting that a merger would both increase market power and result in important efficiencies.


11
   “If a practice does not raise a question of output restriction, however, we must assume that its purpose and
therefore its effect are either the creation of efficiency or some neutral goal. In that case the practice should be held
lawful.” The Antitrust Paradox, page 122.
12
   The Antitrust Paradox, page 221.

                                                            8
Bork did not think that regulators would be capable of the balancing exercise suggested by

Williamson because precisely measuring either deadweight loss or merger efficiencies was

extremely difficult in the best of circumstances, and often impossible. A formal balancing

exercise would require economists to know or estimate “the demand curve over all possibly

relevant ranges of output and the marginal cost curve over those same ranges.”13 The subsequent

“trial would then proceed to the measurement of efficiency and restriction of output under an

imaginary set of circumstances: what would the net contribution to consumer welfare be if the

two firms were merged into one?”14 Bork also expressed the (in hindsight, prescient) fear that if

courts and regulators attempted to engage in this balancing act, they would focus on only those

efficiencies that can be measured even though those efficiencies may not be the most

important.15 Bork argued that the most important merger efficiencies, such as the transfer of

assets to more capable management, would not be considered valid under a balancing test.16

     Bork did not provide a precise description of how to balance the efficiency benefits and

competitive harms of proposed mergers. He argued that if the regulator believed the chances that

the merger was competitively harmful or beneficial were roughly the same, then the government

should allow the merger to proceed.17 For the remaining cases, Bork suggested that


13
   The Antitrust Paradox, page 125.
14
   The Antitrust Paradox, page 125.
15
   “Economists, like other people, will measure what is susceptible to measurement and will tend to forget what is
not, though what is forgotten may be far more important than what is measured.” The Antitrust Paradox, page 127.
16
   “The most important thing about the Ford Motor Co. in its early years was the genius of Henry Ford, just as the
most important efficiency of General Motors Corp. in later years was the organizational genius of Alfred Sloan. The
acquisition of one of those companies of a rival would have extended to a new group of resources a management
that was enormously superior, even if there were no cost cuts to be expected but only the doing of better things at
higher costs.” The Antitrust Paradox, page 129.
17
   Bork provides two economic justifications for his conclusion. First, he argues that because blocking mergers is
costly, it does not make sense to invest resources where the expected value of harm is zero. Second, if a merger
proves to be anticompetitive, market forces will eventually right the situation. The Antitrust Paradox, page 133.
The counter argument to Bork’s recommendation is that by successfully challenging these marginal mergers the
government can deter firms from filing mergers that might lead to small price increases. Over time, this deterrence
effect could lower the agency’s enforcement costs. Clougherty and Seldeslachts (2013) provide evidence on
deterrence effects in the U.S.

                                                        9
appropriately constructed market share thresholds (much more lenient than those in the 1968

Guidelines) would minimize the harm from anticompetitive mergers. He stated that:

       “My guess is …, that mergers of up to 60 or 70 percent of the market should be

permitted….Partly as a tactical concession to the current oligopoly phobia and partly in

recognition of Section 7’s intended function of tightening the Sherman Act rule, I am willing to

weaken that conclusion. Competition in the sense of consumer welfare would be adequately

protected and the mandate of Section 7’s satisfactorily served if the statute were interpreted as

making presumptively lawful all horizontal mergers up to market shares that would allow for

other mergers of similar size in the industry and still leave three significant companies. 18



Thus, if Bork was correct, a merger policy that banned “3 to 2” mergers but allowed “4 to 3”

mergers would be sufficient to maintain consumer welfare.

       Bork also devoted significant discussion to the federal government’s challenges of

conglomerate mergers such as P&G/Clorox. Bork felt that there was “no threat to competition in

any conglomerate merger,” because conglomerate mergers do not change the incentives of the

merged firm such that it would choose to reduce output.19 Most of the concern about

conglomerate mergers in the 1950s and 1960s was that the acquisition of a (typically) smaller

firm in an unrelated market by a very large corporation, would harm rivals in the unrelated

markets. For example, in the Clorox case, P&G with its deep financial resources would provide

Clorox with access to capital that could be invested in advertising and marketing to the detriment

of Clorox’s rivals. Under conglomerate theories, merger efficiencies (access to capital at lower

prices or even superior management) were often viewed as harmful to competition because they


18
     The Antitrust Paradox, pages 221-222.
19
     The Antitrust Paradox, page 246.

                                                  10
harmed rivals. Bork strongly argued that this policy was only sensible “if ‘competition’ is

defined as a comfortable life for competitors.”20 The one conglomerate theory that Bork felt had

some legitimacy was a threat to potential entry. However, he argued strongly that this theory

was really a horizontal theory: the merger caused the acquiring firm to not enter the market and

expand output. Bork felt that in very limited circumstances the government would be justified in

blocking mergers under a theory of potential competition.21

     Bork’s views of conglomerate mergers have become the consensus view in the U.S. While

U.S. antitrust agencies periodically challenge mergers under potential competition theories,22 to

our knowledge, there have not been any challenges of true conglomerate mergers in the U.S. in

the modern era.23

     IV.     Changes in Antitrust Enforcement Post-Antitrust Paradox

     Merger review has become both more systematized and fact intensive in the U.S. since the

publication of The Antitrust Paradox. Both the federal antitrust agencies and the federal courts

increasingly demand direct evidence demonstrating why a specific proposed acquisition will be

anticompetitive, see, e.g., FTC v. Staples or U.S. v. Oracle. Except in extreme circumstance

(mergers to monopoly or duopoly in undisputed markets), courts are unlikely to block mergers

today solely because of an increase in market concentration. While there are undoubtedly many




20
   The Antitrust Paradox, page 254.
21
   “If there are three significant firms, an outside firm should be permitted to acquire any of them. If there is one
large firm and a scattering of small firms, the outside firm should be allowed to acquire any of the smaller firms, or
it should be allowed to acquire the largest firm unless it has, say, over 70% of the market.” The Antitrust Paradox,
page 260.
22
   For example, in challenging a merger of innovator firms in the pharmaceutical industry where both firms were
attempting to develop a product to serve the same market, the government often requires the merged firms to divest
one of the firm’s research programs before approving the merger.
23
   Conglomerate mergers do appear to be challenged outside the U.S., most notably in the European Union’s
decision to block the GE/Honeywell merger in 2001. See Kolasky (2001) for a discussion available at:
http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/speeches/9536.htm (last checked October 17, 2013).

                                                          11
reasons for these changes in enforcement, we highlight three key changes that have, collectively,

dramatically changed the composition of challenged U.S. mergers.

     First, the market share thresholds that generate competitive concern by antitrust enforcers

have increased substantially since Von’s Grocery. The 1968 Merger Guidelines stated that the

DOJ would “ordinarily challenge” a horizontal merger of two firms each with a 5% market share

in a ‘less highly concentrated market.”24 In contrast, the 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines

states that only mergers taking place in highly concentrated markets (with a post-merger

Hirschman-Herfindahl Index—HHI-- above 2500) are “presumed to be likely to enhance market

power.”25 The change in the concentration thresholds at which the federal antitrust agencies

typically challenge mergers stated in the Guidelines can also be seen in the agencies’

enforcement behavior. According to a recent report by the FTC, of all markets in which mergers

were challenged between fiscal years 1996 and 2011, 85% were in markets with a post-merger

HHI of more than 2400.26 Thus while not as permissive as Bork suggested, U.S. antitrust

agencies now allow mergers in much more concentrated markets than at the time Bork wrote.

     Second, and in sharp contrast to the Court’s opinion in the Clorox case, antitrust enforcers

now understand that merger efficiencies can offset a merged firm’s incentive to increase price.

Mergers are now evaluated under the consumer welfare standard: mergers that are expected to

increase consumer prices (lower consumer welfare) are illegal. 27 The 1984, 1992, 1997, and

2010 Merger Guidelines each devote a separate section to the importance of merger efficiencies,

and describe the circumstances under which merger efficiencies will be considered as part of a



24
   1968 Merger Guidelines, Horizontal Mergers, Section 6.
25
   2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines, Section 5.3.
26
   FTC (2013), table 3.1.
27
   This is a very different policy than the total welfare standard endorsed by many economists, e.g., Williamson
(1968). Under a total welfare standard, mergers that harm consumers by raising prices are permissible so long as the
gains in producer surplus are sufficient to offset the deadweight lost caused by the price increase.

                                                        12
merger investigation. Moreover, efficiency considerations can play an important role in the

antitrust agencies’ enforcement decisions. According to the DOJ, the joint venture of Miller and

Coors, which combined their U.S. operations and dramatically increased market concentration,

was allowed, in part, because:

     “The Division verified that the joint venture is likely to produce substantial and credible

     savings that will significantly reduce the companies’ costs of producing and distributing

     beer… The large amount of these savings and other evidence obtained by the Division

     supported the parties’ contention that the venture should make a lower-cost, and therefore

     more effective, beer competitor.”28

Thus, unlike in the days of Clorox, it is no longer the case that merger efficiencies can cause a

horizontal merger to be ruled illegal. Current enforcement behavior reflects Bork’s view that the

overwhelming majority of mergers are either competitively neutral and/or efficiency enhancing:

over the last decade (2003-2012), 96.8% of the mergers filed with the antitrust agencies were

allowed to proceed without undergoing a full merger investigation.29

     Finally, the major institutional change in merger enforcement—the government’s legal right

to review and challenge proposed mergers prospectively as granted by the Hart-Scott Rodino Act

(HSR Act)—has profoundly changed the process by which federal agencies review mergers.

Prior to the passage of the HSR Act in 1976, most companies were under no obligation to notify

the government of their intent to merge or to delay a merger’s consummation to allow the

government time to investigate the proposed transaction.30 As a result, the government’s merger

review frequently began after a merger was consummated, and in the event the merger was

28
   See DOJ closing statement available at: http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/press_releases/2008/233845.pdf, last
visited October 21, 2013.
29
   That is, 96.8% of mergers were allowed to proceed without receiving a second request from the antitrust agencies.
Authors’ calculations using data in Appendix A of the Hart- Scott-Rodino Annual Report (2012).
30
   See Baer (1997) for a discussion of pre-HSR merger enforcement.

                                                        13
subsequently challenged, years would pass before the litigation was resolved. The social value

of such litigation was dubious. Consumers experienced lost competition for up to a decade.

Moreover, even following a successful trial, it was often difficult for the government and the

combined firms to reconstruct a new entity to replicate the competition removed by the merger

(Elzinga (1969)).

   The passage of the HSR Act eliminated these problems and greatly simplified merger review

in the U.S. The HSR Act established the government’s right to review mergers before they were

consummated. Under the law, all firms participating in a merger of sufficient size must file an

intent to merge with both the DOJ and the FTC which includes key documents describing the

proposed transaction for all mergers of a sufficiently large size. The government then has 30

days to determine if it requires more information to determine if the merger is likely to harm

competition. In that event, the government can issue a detailed request for documents from the

merging parties (“a second request”). The firms cannot consummate their merger until the

government has had 30 days to review all second request material. After its review, the

government can sue to block the merger in Federal District Court.

   The effect of the HSR Act on merger analysis has been enormous. Because merger review

has been routinized, the federal antitrust agencies have been able to systematize merger review in

a way that was not previously possible. Over time, the agencies have developed standardized

methodologies for conducting merger review that are described in a set of formal guidelines. The

post-HSR Horizontal Merger Guidelines and their revisions (1982, 1984, 1992, 1997, 2010)

describe the key questions that must be addressed by the government before challenging a

horizontal merger: entry, efficiencies, market definition, and the articulation of the government’s

theory as to how the merger will harm consumers. As the agencies have modified their



                                                14
procedures over time, the Guidelines are updated to provide transparency to the antitrust

community. The current (2010) version of the Horizontal Merger Guidelines, for example,

provides a detailed description of the types of evidence the agencies consider in evaluating the

competitive effects of a proposed merger.

     In evaluating Bork’s proposals for merger review, it is important to note how much the

process of merger review has changed, and how much more is required of the government to

successfully challenge a merger. In particular, the set of mergers challenged by the federal

agencies has changed substantially in the years following the passage of the HSR Act. While the

Vons Grocery decision has not been explicitly overturned by the Supreme Court, we would be

very surprised to see either U.S. antitrust agency challenge a merger in such an unconcentrated

market today. Bork’s prediction that the typically challenged merger in an oligopolistic industry

would not have harmed consumers may have been correct given the composition of mergers

taking place in the 1960s and 1970s. As we discuss below, given current enforcement

thresholds, the empirical evidence shows that mergers can increase market power in oligopolistic

markets.

V. Can Horizontal Mergers in Oligopolistic Markets be Anticompetitive?

         Whether U.S. merger policy has been effectively employed to maintain consumer welfare

is an open and controversial policy question.31 To evaluate Bork’s claims as to the likely

competitive effects of mergers, and, more generally, to provide evidence on the overall

effectiveness of horizontal merger policy, we have conducted a survey of the literature that




31
  In their analysis of U.S. competition policy, Crandall and Winston (2003) concluded “that efforts by antitrust
authorities to block particular mergers or affect a merger’s outcome by allowing it only if certain conditions are met
under a consent decree have not been found to increase consumer welfare in any systematic way, and in some
instances the intervention may even have reduced consumer welfare.” Crandall and Winston (2003), page 20.

                                                          15
estimates the price effects of consummated horizontal mergers.32 In conducting this survey, we

have excluded papers that have focused on the vertical aspects of mergers33 and transactions

involving horizontal agreements that fall short of complete integration.34 Our survey identified

49 distinct studies examining mergers taking place in 21 industries published over the last 30

years.

         The majority of papers in this paper have a similar study design. 35 Under U.S. law,

antitrust agencies are supposed to block mergers that reduce consumer welfare. If the agencies

are operating effectively, on average, the marginal merger (the merger the agency is on the

margin of challenging) should not result in a quality adjusted price increase. Researchers test the

agencies’ effectiveness by first identifying consummated mergers that were likely to be on the

enforcement margin, and then estimating how prices change following those mergers. If prices

are found to increase systematically following marginal mergers, then enforcement has not been

aggressive enough. Similarly, if prices, on average, fall following marginal mergers, then it

follows that enforcement has been too aggressive. That is, the marginal merger allowed was one

where merger efficiencies more than offset the combined firm’s merger induced incentive to

increase price.

         Most studies in this literature use a case-study approach. The typical study examines one

or a handful of mergers taking place in the same (or similar) industries at roughly the same time

32
   Given both the recent growth in this literature and the variety of industries studied, it is quite likely that we have
inadvertently missed some studies and apologize for any omission. See Pautler (2003), Weinberg (2008), Hunter et
al. (2008), and Kwoka (2013) for other surveys of this literature.
33
   For example, we do not include Hastings and Gilbert (2005) and Hastings (2004) which focus on the vertical
aspects of transactions in the petroleum industry.
34
   Kwoka (2013) includes code-share agreements between airlines in his recent review of horizontal merger studies,
and concludes that most lower consumer prices. While code-share agreements do combine some aspects of
competing airlines operations, these actions are quite different than mergers. Mergers likely offer significantly more
opportunities for both anticompetitive effects (reductions in routes or coordination of pricing) and efficiencies
(consolidation of operations).
35
   See Carlton (2009) and Ashefelter, Hosken, and Weinberg (2009) for a detailed discussion of the methodological
issues involved in measuring the effectiveness of competition policy.

                                                           16
and identify merger price effects relative to some control product. A smaller number of studies

attempt to measure the average price effect of many mergers using a common methodology.

Obviously, in this type of study it is impossible to provide much detail about the specific

transactions being analyzed. Even in these broader studies, however, the authors frequently

provide some evidence on the competitive significance of the mergers studied. For example,

Prager and Hannan (1998) and Focarelli and Panetta (2003) both include estimates of merger

price effects for those markets experiencing large changes in market concentration.

         Unfortunately, the mergers studied do not constitute a representative sample of all

potentially anticompetitive mergers. The set of mergers which can be studied is severely limited

by data availability. Most merger studies examine mergers in one of four industries which have

experienced a large number of mergers and where data is available: airlines, banking, hospitals,

and petroleum. The remainder of the literature is quite diverse reflecting circumstances where a

researcher can identify both a potentially anticompetitive merger and data sufficient to estimate

the price effects of the merger.

       For each study we have included in the survey, we identify the specific mergers studied

(when enumerated by the researcher), provide a terse description of the study, describe what (if

any) evidence the author provides that the merger(s) was on the enforcement margin, and state

the study’s estimated merger price effect. To facilitate comparison across studies, we have

grouped the studies together for the airline (Table 1), banking (Table 2), hospital (Table 3), and

petroleum (Table 4) studies. The summary of the studies in “Other Industries” is shown in Table

5.

       As can be seen by a quick review of Tables 1-5, the estimated price effects of mergers

varies dramatically across industries, and even across studies estimating the price effects of a



                                                 17
given merger. Four studies have estimated the price effect of the 1986 merger of Northwest

Airlines and Republic Airlines, for example, and found price effects of: 9.5%, 5.6%, -1.8%, and

7.2% (Table 1). Because of important differences in methodology, industry, data, and time

period across studies, we do not calculate aggregate estimates of the “typical” price effect of a

merger. Instead, we present the findings of each study separately and then draw general

conclusions about the competitive impact of horizontal mergers.

         The empirical evidence that mergers can cause economically significant increases in

price is overwhelming. Of the 49 studies surveyed, 36 find evidence of merger induced price

increases.36, 37 All of the airline merger studies find evidence of price increases, although the

magnitude of the price increases appears to be more modest following recent mergers (2-6%)

when compared to the mergers that took place in the 1980s. Similarly, most of the banking (6 of

7), hospital (5 of 7), and “other industry” (13 of 18) studies find evidence that mergers have

resulted in price increases.

         It is unclear if mergers in the petroleum industry have increased consumer prices. Of the

nine studies that have estimated the price effects of horizontal mergers, four (three examining

multiple mergers) found that mergers increased prices, while the remaining studies found either

no meaningful change in pricing associated with mergers or ambiguous results. Institutional

characteristics of petroleum markets, in particular the sensitivity of gasoline pricing to supply

shocks, make the results of these studies especially sensitive to modeling assumptions. While

36
   We define a merger as increasing price if the merger caused as least some product prices to rise, and no product
prices to fall. For example, Ashenfelter, Hosken, and Weinberg (2013a) find that the acquisition of Maytag by
Whirlpool caused the prices of some dryers and dishwashers to increase while not lowering the price of other
appliances. From this evidence we conclude the Maytag/Whirlpool merger caused prices to increase. Similarly, if a
merger lowers some prices and leaving other prices unchanged, we conclude that merger lowered prices. A merger
that raises some prices while lowering others, e.g., Thompson (2011), has ambiguous price effects.
37
   Because many of the studies examined multiple mergers, it is possible for a study to find evidence of both merger
price increases and merger price decreases. For example, Hosken, Olson, Smith (2012) find that of the 14
supermarket mergers they examine, five lead to price increases, five lead to price decreases, and four resulted in no
meaningful change in consumer prices.

                                                         18
the literature is not be able to tell us if mergers at observed levels of market concentration have

increased gasoline prices, it does provide information to bound the potential price effects of

mergers. Of those studies finding price increases, most report very small price effects, on the

order of 1-2 cents per gallon (see Table 4). Only one study, GAO (2004), reports larger price

effects, varying from 1-7 cents per gallon. Thus, relative to the typical price variation associated

with gasoline prices, even the maximum estimated price effects associated with petroleum

mergers are quite modest.

        Overall, the results from the merger retrospective literature show that mergers in

oligopolistic markets can result in economically meaningful price increases. While some of the

airline merger studies discussed above examined mergers that reduced the number of airlines

serving city pairs to one or two firms, many studies in this literature find that prices have

increased in markets with at least three major firms operating post-merger.38 The Ashenfelter,

Hosken, and Weinberg (2013a) study, for example, estimates the price effects of the 2008

acquisition of the major appliance manufacturer, Maytag, by Whirlpool. As predicted by a

conventional unilateral effects theory, the authors find that for those appliance categories

experiencing a price increase, the prices of products sold by the combined Maytag/Whirlpool

increased more than those sold by rivals. Contrary to Bork’s prediction, three major firms in an

industry are not sufficient to maintain competition.

        While the literature shows that mergers on the enforcement margin increase prices more

often than not, it is not the case that every marginal merger increases consumer prices. Of the 49

studies we surveyed, 13 find evidence of price reductions following a merger, and 13 find

evidence of no meaningful change in price following a merger. Ashenfelter and Hosken (2010),


38
  See, for example, McCabe (2002), Ashenfelter and Hosken (2010), Tenn (2011), Dafny, Duggan, and
Ramanarayanan (2012), and Hosken, Olson, and Smith (2012).

                                                     19
for example, estimate the price effects of mergers in five consumer goods industries: liquor,

feminine hygiene, passenger car motor oil, breakfast cereals, and pancake syrups. While they

found that prices rose in four of five markets, the market experiencing the largest increase in

market concentration (pancake syrups) did not experience a post-merger price increase.

Similarly, Haas-Wilson and Garmon (2011) estimate the price effects of two hospital mergers

taking place in the Chicago, Illinois suburbs in 2000. The first merger involved two hospitals

located in the same city that were relatively distant from other hospitals. This merger did not

increase prices. The second merger combined hospitals both more distant from one another and

facing competition from rivals located closer than those in the first merger, and resulted in a

price increase. We highlight these two examples to show the importance of institutional factors

in merger analysis. The ability to generalize findings from one market to another is limited.

Markets facing what may appear to be similar levels of pre-merger competition (e.g., levels of

market concentration) can experience very different post-merger outcomes. Thus, while market

concentration can provide a useful screen in determining which mergers to investigate, case-

specific evidence (industry documents, explicit estimates of consumer substitution patterns) are

critically important to decision makers in making correct enforcement decisions.

       The merger retrospective literature focuses almost exclusively on measuring the short-run

effect of mergers on prices. This limitation is largely driven by data availability. Obtaining

access to the detailed price data required to credibly estimate the price effects of mergers is

difficult, and most often only relatively short price series are available. However, even in those

cases where relatively long price series are readily available, e.g., banking or petroleum markets,

it is often difficult to build a credible forecast of the counterfactual using the standard program

evaluation techniques frequently used in this literature. That is, while it is often possible to find



                                                 20
candidate “control” products whose prices track the prices of the merging products well in the

years immediately prior to the merger, it often strains credibility to claim that these same

products’ prices continue to provide a reasonable forecast of the counterfactual 5, 10, or 15 years

following a merger. Over such long time periods, idiosyncratic shocks to costs or demand are

likely to cause the merger and control products’ prices to diverge.

        This limitation of the literature is potentially important. As we discuss in more detail in

the next section, the efficiencies which act to offset the anticompetitive effects of mergers take

time to be realized. Four of the five studies we are aware of that attempt to estimate intermediate

or long-run effects of mergers find that the short run price increases associated with mergers

dissipate or are reversed in the long run.39

VI. Are Merger Efficiencies Important?

        While a large literature addresses the efficiency of mergers,40 we limit our attention here

to a very small empirical literature that examines those efficiencies relevant to antitrust analysis:

efficiencies that can potentially offset the combined firm’s incentive to increase price as a result

of increased market power. The best known published paper finding evidence of this type of

merger efficiency is the Focarelli and Panetta (2003) study of Italian banking mergers. Focarelli

and Panetta find that while deposit rates paid to consumers fall in the years directly following a

merger, in later years deposit rates increase above pre-merger levels. Focarelli and Panetta argue

that initially the merging firms were able to lower deposit rates because of increased market


39
   See, Focarelli and Panetta (2003), Winston, Maheshri, and Dennis (2011), Ashenfelter, Hosken, and Weinberg
(2013b), and Huschelrath and Muller (2013).
40
   This literature is primarily focused on measuring whether mergers and acquisitions increase shareholder wealth
(most often using stock market event studies) or examining how mergers affect the efficiency with which a firm is
operated. This latter literature is largely focused on the regulated industries (most often the financial industry)
where measures of firm inputs are available from regulatory filings. See DeYoung, Evanoff, and Molyneux (2009)
for a review of merger efficiency studies in the financial services industry. Other industries studied include
electricity generation (Kwoka and Pollitt’s (2010)), railroads (Breen (2004) and Bitzan and Wilson (2007)), and
hospitals (Harrison (2011)).

                                                        21
power, and over time, as the firms gained efficiencies from consolidation they began to pass

through reductions in costs in the form of increased deposit rates. Focarelli and Panetta do not

identify the mechanism by which the combined firm lowers its costs. Instead, they infer

efficiencies through increases in the deposit rate offered to consumers over time. These results

are often cited as evidence that the market power effects of mergers are often felt shortly after a

merger, while efficiency effects may take much more time to materialize.

        The most direct evidence of merger efficiencies we are aware of comes from Ashenfelter,

Hosken, and Weinberg’s (2013b) study of the 2008 joint venture between Coors and Miller that

combined their U.S. brewing operations. The U.S. brewing industry has long been subject to

aggressive antitrust enforcement.41 Given this extensive history, it was perhaps surprising that

the DOJ allowed the merger to proceed without modification despite a high level of market

concentration.42, 43 As noted previously, the DOJ stated that it allowed this merger, in part,

because the firms showed the merger would likely result in credible efficiencies that would lower

the cost of producing and distribution beer. One of the leading costs of beer is distribution:

shipping beer from the brewery to the retail outlet. Prior to the merger Coors operated two U.S.

breweries, one in Colorado and one in Virginia, while Miller operated six breweries that were

more evenly spread throughout the U.S. Because Miller’s breweries were not capacity

constrained, the combined firm may have been able to lower its shipping costs by moving some

Coors production to Miller plants closer to final consumers.



41
   See the Tremblay and Tremblay (2005) study of the U.S. brewing industry for an extensive discussion of U.S.
antitrust enforcement in brewing.
42
   In concluding their discussion of mergers in the U.S. brewing industry, Tremblay and Tremblay (2005) state,
“Today the only potential mergers with anti-trust implications would involve Anheuser-Busch, Miller, Coors, and
Pabst. A merger between any two of these would undoubtedly be challenged unless one firm was clearly failing.”
page 247.
43
   Ashenfelter, Hosken, and Weinberg report that in their sample of 48 markets, the average pre-merger HHI was
2170 with an increase of roughly 480 caused by the merger.

                                                       22
       Ashenfelter, Hosken, and Weinberg separately identify market power effects and

efficiency effects of the merger by exploiting geographic variation in how the merger was

expected to increase concentration and reduce costs. They find that increased market

concentration increased beer prices, and that reductions in shipping distances lowered prices. On

net, in the average market, the merger efficiencies appeared to almost exactly offset the price

increase resulting from increased concentration. In addition, like Focarelli and Panetta, the

authors find compelling evidence that market power effects caused by the merger occurred

shortly after the merger was consummated, while merger efficiencies were realized later

(roughly 18 months following the merger) as the combined firm re-optimized its production.



VII. Conclusion

       In The Antitrust Paradox, Robert Bork called for a revolutionary change in merger

policy. He directly challenged the orthodoxy that increasing levels of market concentration

generally harmed consumers. He emphasized that many factors associated with mergers, such as

attaining economies of scale in production or advertising, harmed competitors and not

competition. Bork’s advocacy clearly played an important role in changing the consensus view

of the purpose of competition policy in the U.S.: to protect consumers rather than competitors.

       Bork did not think that the typical horizontal merger would harm consumers. He argued

that most horizontal mergers allowed successful firms to expand by better utilizing the assets of a

rival. Bork viewed the major potential harm of horizontal mergers as the creation of a dominant

firm or monopoly, and was quite dubious that mergers could create harm in oligopolistic

markets. In speculating what market share thresholds should guide horizontal merger policy,




                                                23
Bork, in essence, argued that mergers that resulted in at least three significant firms would not be

likely to harm competition.

       Although Bork was surely right that most horizontal mergers have no meaningful

negative impact on competition, the empirical record rejects Bork’s views on mergers in

oligopolistic industries. Ex-post evaluations of consummated mergers have found that prices can

increase following mergers leaving only three or four major market participants. This implies

that mergers within oligopolistic industries can lead to consequential increases in market power,

even if they do not result in monopolies or dominant firms.

       Our conclusions, however, should not be read as an indictment of Bork’s general views

on merger policy. Given the aggressiveness of horizontal merger policy when Bork was writing

The Antitrust Paradox, it is quite probable that the price effect of the marginal merger was then

negative. Because so many of the merger policy recommendations Bork advocated have gone

into effect, the composition of challenged and nearly challenged mergers has changed

dramatically since the publication of The Antitrust Paradox. Moreover, economists and attorneys

no longer advocate challenging mergers because of some vague sense that an oligopoly problem

will be made worse. Instead, direct evidence is brought to bear to show whether the products

produced by the merging firms are (or are not) close substitutes. While Bork’s specific policy

recommendations may have been too permissive, the general changes he advocated for

horizontal merger policy have likely improved consumer welfare.




                                                24
                                            References

         Aguzzoni, Luca, Elena Argentsi, Lorenzo Ciari, Tomaso Duso, and Massimo Tognoni.

2013. “Ex Post Merger Evaluation in the UK Retail Market for Books.” mimeo

         Allen, Jason, Rob Clark, and Jean Francois Houde. 2013. “The Effects of Mergers in

Search Markets: Evidence from the Canadian Mortgage Industry,” NBER Working Paper 19126

         Allain, Marie-Laure, Claire Chambolle, Stephane Turolla, and Sofia Villas-Boas. 2013.

“The Impact of Retail Merges on Food Prices: Evidence from France,” ALISS Working Paper

2013-1

         Ashenfelter, Orley, and Daniel Hosken. 2010. "The Effect of Mergers on Consumer

Prices: Evidence from Five Mergers on the Enforcement Margin." Journal of Law And

Economics 53, no. 3: 417-466.

         Ashenfelter, Orley, Daniel Hosken, and Matthew Weinberg. 2009. "Generating Evidence

to Guide Merger Enforcement." Competition Policy International 5, no. 1: 67-85.

         ----. 2013a. "The Price Effects of a Large Merger of Manufacturers: A Case Study of

Maytag-Whirlpool." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5, no. 1: 239-261.

         ----. 2013b. "Efficiencies Brewed: Pricing and Consolidation in the U.S. Beer Industry."

NBER Working Paper 19353

         Baer, William J. 1997. "Reflections on twenty years of merger enforcement under the

Hart-Scott-Rodino Act." Antitrust Law Journal 65, no. 3: 825-864.

         Baker, Jonathan and Carl Shapiro. 2009. “Reinvigorating Horizontal Merger

Enforcement” in How the Chicago School Overshot the Mark, ed. Robert Pitofsky. Oxford

University Press: New York.




                                                25
       Barton, David M., and Roger Sherman. 1984. "The Price and Profit Effects of Horizontal

Merger: A Case Study." Journal Of Industrial Economics 33, no. 2: 165-177.

       Bitzan, John D., and Wesley W. Wilson. 2007. "Industry Costs and Consolidation:

Efficiency Gains and Mergers in the U.S. Railroad Industry." Review of Industrial Organization

30, no. 2: 81-105.

       Bjornerstedt, Jonas, and Frank Verboven. 2013. "Does Merger Simulation Work? A

'Natural Experiment' in the Swedish Analgesics Market Market." mimeo

       Borenstein, Severin. 1990. "Airline Mergers, Airport Dominance, and Market Power."

American Economic Review 80, no. 2: 400-404.

       Bork, Robert. 1979. The Antitrust Paradox . Basic Books: New York.

       Breen, Denis A. 2004. "The Union Pacific/Southern Pacific Rail Merger: A Retrospective

on Merger Benefits." Review of Network Economics 3, no. 3: 283-322.

       Calomiris, Charles W., and Thanavut Pornrojnangkool. 2005. "Monopoly-Creating Bank

Consolidation? The Merger of Fleet and BankBoston." NBER Working Paper 11351

       Carlton, Dennis W. 2009. "Why We Need to Measure the Effect of Merger Policy and

How to Do It." Competition Policy International 5, no. 1: 87-100.

       Chandra, Ambarish, and Allan Collard-Wexler. 2009. "Mergers in Two-Sided Markets:

An Application to the Canadian Newspaper Industry." Journal Of Economics And Management

Strategy 18, no. 4: 1045-1070.

       Chone, Philippe, and Laurent Linnemer. 2012. "A Treatment Effect Method for Merger

Analysis with an Application to Parking Prices in Paris." Journal Of Industrial Economics 60,

no. 4: 631-656.




                                              26
       Chouinard, Hayley H., and Jeffrey M. Perloff. 2007. "Gasoline Price Differences: Taxes,

Pollution Regulations, Mergers, Market Power, and Market Conditions." B.E. Journal of

Economic Analysis And Policy: Contributions To Economic Analysis And Policy 7, no. 1: 1-26.

       Clougherty, Joseph A., and Jo Seldeslachts. 2013. "The Deterrence Effects of US Merger

Policy Instruments." Journal Of Law, Economics, And Organization 29, no. 5: 1114-1144

       Connor, Robert A., Roger D. Feldman, and Bryan E. Dowd. 1998. "The Effects of

Market Concentration Horizontal Mergers on Hospital Costs and Prices." International Journal

Of The Economics Of Business 5, no. 2: 159-180.

       Crandall, Robert W., and Clifford Winston. 2003. "Does Antitrust Policy Improve

Consumer Welfare? Assessing the Evidence." Journal Of Economic Perspectives 17, no. 4: 3-26.

       Dafny, Leemore. 2009. "Estimation and Identification of Merger Effects: An Application

to Hospital Mergers." Journal of Law And Economics 52, no. 3: 523-550.

       Dafny, Leemore, Mark Duggan, and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan. 2012. "Paying a

Premium on Your Premium? Consolidation in the US Health Insurance Industry." American

Economic Review 102, no. 2: 1161-1185.

       Deneckere, Raymond, and Carl Davidson. 1985. "Incentives to Form Coalitions with

Bertrand Competition." RAND Journal of Economics 16, no. 4: 473-486

       DeYoung, Robert, Douglas D. Evanoff, and Philip Molyneux. 2009. "Mergers and

Acquisitions of Financial Institutions: A Review of the Post-2000 Literature." Journal Of

Financial Services Research 36, no. 2-3: 87-110.

       Ellickson, Paul B. 2007. "Does Sutton Apply to Supermarkets?." RAND Journal of

Economics 38, no. 1: 43-59.




                                               27
       Elzinga, Kenneth G. 1969. "The Antimerger Law: Pyrrhic Victories?." Journal of Law

And Economics 12, no. 1: 43-78

       FTC v. The Proctor and Gamble Company, 386 U.S. 568 (1967).

       FTC v. Staples, Inc. 970 F.Supp. 1066 (DDC 1997)

       Federal Trade Commission 2013. Horizontal Merger Investigation Data Fiscal Years

1996-2011. Washington, DC: FTC

       Focarelli, Dario, and Fabio Panetta. 2003. "Are Mergers Beneficial to Consumers?

Evidence from the Market for Bank Deposits." American Economic Review 93, no. 4: 1152-1172

       Garmaise, Mark J., and Tobias J. Moskowitz. 2006. "Bank Mergers and Crime: The Real

and Social Effects of Credit Market Competition." Journal Of Finance 61, no. 2: 495-538.

       Guardado, Jose, David Emmons, and Carol Kane. 2013. “The Price Effects of a Large

Merger of Health Insurers: A Case Study of UnitedHealth-Sierra.” Health Management, Policy

and Innovation 1, no. 3: 16-35.

       Haas-Wilson, Deborah, and Christopher Garmon. 2011. "Hospital Mergers and

Competitive Effects: Two Retrospective Analyses." International Journal of The Economics of

Business 18, no. 1: 17-32.

       Harrison, Teresa D. 2011. "Do Mergers Really Reduce Costs? Evidence from Hospitals."

Economic Inquiry 49, no. 4: 1054-1069.

       Hastings, Justine S. 2004. "Vertical Relationships and Competition in Retail Gasoline

Markets: Empirical Evidence from Contract Changes in Southern California." American

Economic Review 94, no. 1: 317-328.

       Hastings, Justine S., and Richard J. Gilbert. 2005. "Market Power, Vertical Integration

and the Wholesale Price of Gasoline." Journal Of Industrial Economics 53, no. 4: 469-492.



                                               28
       Hosken, Daniel, Luke Olson, and Loren Smith. 2012. “Do Retail Mergers Affect

Competition: Evidence from Grocery Retailing,” FTC Bureau of Economics Working Paper

#313

       Hosken, Daniel, Louis Silvia, and Christopher Taylor. 2011. "Does Concentration

Matter? Measurement of Petroleum Merger Price Effects." American Economic Review 101, no.

3: 45-50.

       Houde, Jean-Francois. 2012. "Spatial Differentiation and Vertical Mergers in Retail

Markets for Gasoline." American Economic Review 102, no. 5: 2147-2182.

       Huang, Kun and Kyle Stiegert. 2009. “Evaluating a Supermarket Merger Event: The

Case of Copps and Kohl’s in Madison WI,” FSRG Monograph Series, #21

       Hunter, Graeme, Gregory K. Leonard, and G. Steven Olley, (2008) “Merger

Retrospective Studies: A Review,” Antitrust Magazine, 23:1, 34-41.

       Hüschelrath, Kai and Kathrin Müller. 2013. “The Competitive Effects of Firm Exit

Evidence from the U.S. Airline Industry.” Economics of Transportation 2, 72-85.

       Karikari, John Agyei, Stephen M. Brown, and Mehrzad Nadji. 2002. "The Union

Pacific/Southern Pacific Railroads Merger: Effect of Trackage Rights on Rates." Journal Of

Regulatory Economics 22, no. 3: 271-285.

       Kim, E. Han, and Vijay Singal. 1993. "Mergers and Market Power: Evidence from the

Airline Industry." American Economic Review 83, no. 3: 549-569

       Kovacic, William. 2003. “The Modern Evolution of U.S. Competition Policy

Enforcement Norms.” Antitrust Law Journal 71, no. 2: 377-478.

       Kreisle, Nicholas. 2013. “Merger Policy at the Margin: Western Refineries Acquisition of

Giant Industries,” FTC Bureau of Economics Working Paper #319



                                              29
       Krishnan, Ranjani. 2001. "Market Restructuring and Pricing in the Hospital Industry."

Journal Of Health Economics 20, no. 2: 213-237.

       Kwoka, John. 2013. “Does Merger Control Work? A Retrospective on U.S. Enforcement

Actions and Merger Outcomes.” Antitrust Law Journal 78, no. 3: 619-650.

       Kwoka, John, and Michael Pollitt. 2010. "Do Mergers Improve Efficiency? Evidence

from Restructuring the US Electric Power Sector." International Journal of Industrial

Organization 28, no. 6: 645-656.

       Kwoka, John, and Evgenia Shumilkina. 2010. "The Price Effect of Eliminating Potential

Competition: Evidence from an Airline Merger." Journal Of Industrial Economics 58, no. 4:

767-793.

       Luo, Dan. 2014. “The Price Effects of the Delta/Northwest Airline Merger.” Review of

Industrial Organization 44, 27-48.

       McCabe, Mark J. 2002. "Journal Pricing and Mergers: A Portfolio Approach." American

Economic Review 92, no. 1: 259-269

       McCabe, Mark J. 2004. "Law Serials Pricing and Mergers: A Portfolio Approach."

Contributions To Economic Analysis And Policy 3, no. 1: 1-29.

       Montoriol-Garriga, Judit. 2008. "Bank mergers and lending relationships." mimeo

       Morrison, Steven A. 1996. "Airline Mergers: A Longer View." Journal Of Transport

Economics And Policy 30, no. 3: 237-250

       Pautler, Paul A. 2003. "Evidence on Mergers and Acquisitions." Antitrust Bulletin 48, no.

1: 119-221

       Perry, Martin K., and Robert H. Porter. 1985. "Oligopoly and the Incentive for Horizontal

Merger." American Economic Review 75, no. 1: 219-227



                                              30
       Peters, Craig. 2006. "Evaluating the Performance of Merger Simulation: Evidence from

the U.S. Airline Industry." Journal of Law And Economics 49, no. 2: 627-649.

       Prager, Robin A., and Timothy H. Hannan. 1998. "Do Substantial Horizontal Mergers

Generate Significant Price Effects? Evidence from the Banking Industry." Journal of Industrial

Economics 46, no. 4: 433-452

       Sapienza, Paola. 2002. "The Effects of Banking Mergers on Loan Contracts." Journal of

Finance 57, no. 1: 329-367.

       Schumann, Laurence, James D. Reitzes, and Robert P. Rogers. 1997. "In the Matter of

Weyerhaeuser Company: The Use of a Hold-Separate Order in a Merger with Horizontal and

Vertical Effects." Journal Of Regulatory Economics 11, no. 3: 271-289.

       Simpson, John, and Christopher Taylor. 2008. "Do Gasoline Mergers Affect Consumer

Prices? The Marathon Ashland Petroleum and Ultramar Diamond Shamrock Transaction."

Journal of Law And Economics 51, no. 1: 135-152.

       Silvia, Louis, and Christopher T. Taylor. 2013. "Petroleum Mergers and Competition in

the Northeast United States." International Journal of The Economics of Business 20, no. 1: 97-

124.

       Taylor, Christopher T., and Daniel S. Hosken. 2007. "The Economic Effects of the

Marathon-Ashland Joint Venture: The Importance of Industry Supply Shocks and Vertical

Market Structure." Journal of Industrial Economics 55, no. 3: 419-451.

       Tenn, Steven. 2011. "The Price Effects of Hospital Mergers: A Case Study of the Sutter-

Summit Transaction." International Journal of The Economics of Business 18, no. 1: 65-82.

Kriesle (2013)




                                               31
       Thompson, Aileen. 2011. "The Effect of Hospital Mergers on Inpatient Prices: A Case

Study of the New Hanover-Cape Fear Transaction." International Journal Of The Economics Of

Business 18, no. 1: 91-101

       Tremblay, Victor J., and Carol Horton Tremblay. 2005. The U.S. Brewing Industry: Data

and Economic Analysis. MIT Press.: Cambridge and London.

       Vita, Michael G., and Seth Sacher. 2001. "The Competitive Effects of Not-for-Profit

Hospital Mergers: A Case Study." Journal of Industrial Economics 49, no. 1: 63-84.

       United States v. Von’s Grocery Co., 384 U.S. 270 (1966).

       United States v. Oracle Corp., 331 F. Supp. 2d 1098 (N.D. Calif. 2004).

       U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) 1968. Merger Guidelines. Washington, DC: DOJ.

       ---- 1982. Merger Guidelines. Washington, DC: DOJ.

       ---- 1984. Merger Guidelines. Washington, DC: DOJ.

       U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and FTC. 1992. Horizontal Merger Guidelines.

Washington, DC: DOJ and FTC.

       ----. 1997. Horizontal Merger Guidelines. Washington, DC: DOJ and FTC.

       ----. 2010. Horizontal Merger Guidelines. Washington, DC: DOJ and FTC.

       ----. 2012. Hart-Scott-Rodino Annual Report. Washington, DC: DOJ and FTC.

       United States Government Accountability Office. 2004. Energy Markets: Effects of

Mergers and Market Concentration in the U.S. Petroleum Industry.

       ----. 2009. Energy Markets: Estimates of the Effects of Mergers and Market

Concentration on Wholesale Gasoline Prices.

       Weinberg, Matthew. 2008. "The Price Effects of Horizontal Mergers." Journal of

Competition Law And Economics 4, no. 2: 433-447.


                                              32
       Werden, Gregory J., Andrew S. Joskow, and Richard L. Johnson. 1991. "The Effects of

Mergers on Price and Output: Two Case Studies from the Airline Industry." Managerial And

Decision Economics 12, no. 5: 341-352.

       Williamson, O. E. 1968. "Economies as an antitrust defense: the welfare tradeoffs."

American Economic Review 58, 18-36.

       Winston, Clifford, Vikram Maheshri, and Scott M. Dennis. 2011. "Long-Run Effects of

Mergers: The Case of U.S. Western Railroads." Journal Of Law And Economics 54, no. 2: 275-

304.




                                              33
                                                   Table 1: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in the Airline Industry

Study                Study Description                          Evidence on Enforcement Margin                             Merger                           Price Effects Reported
                     Compare how airline fares on routes directly
                                                                Author shows that Northwest and Republic had large                                                             9.5%
                                                                                                                           Northwest/Republic (1986)
Borenstein (1990)    affected by merger compared to other routesmarket shares at Minneapolis/St Paul, and TWA and
                     of similar length.                         Ozark had very large shares in St. Louis.                  TWA/Ozark (1986)                                 unchanged
                                                                Authors state that, "DOJ (Department of Justice)
                                                                                                                           Northwest/Republic (1986)                           5.6%
Werden, Joskow, and Use a forecasting and backcasting method to concluded that the two mergers would have significant
Johnson (1991)      estimate merger price effects.              anticompetitive effects on many city pairs out of the
                                                                                                                                                                               1.1%
                                                                common hubs."                                              TWA/Ozark (1986)

                                                                                                                                                            Average merger effect: 9.55% price
                     Compare merging firms prices to those on      Authors state that the government did not challenge any
Kim and Singal                                                                                                                                              increase, normal firms: 3.25% price
                     routes not operated by either merging firm of airline merger during this period (mergers were reviewed 14 airline mergers
(1993)                                                                                                                                                      increase, financially distressed firm:
                     similar length.                               by the Department of Transportation). This allows them
                                                                                                                                                            26.35%
                                                                   to measure price effects of relaxed antitrust policy.
                     Estimates 68 separate quarterly regressions                                                                                               Short Run: -1.8%, Long Run: 2.5%
                                                                   Describes competitive concerns regarding                   Northwest/Republic (1986)
                     using data on 1000 largest US city pairs,
                                                                   Northwest/Republic and TWA/Ozark. Suggests at time                                          Short Run: 4.4%, Long Run: -15.3%
Morrison (1996)      examines how markets served by merging                                                                   TWA/Ozark (1986)
                                                                   of merger USAir/Piedmont was less controversial
                     parties evolved over time. Estimates separate
                                                                   because they did not have overlapping hubs.                                                 Short Run: 4.4%, Long Run: 22.8%
                     long and short run price effects                                                                         USAir/Piedmont
                     Calculates the relative price change                                                                     Northwest/Republic (1986)                         7.2%
                     associated with the merger on overlap routes
                                                                   Author writes that, "antitrust enforcement in the industry TWA/Ozark (1986)                                 16.0%
                     as the difference between the observed price                                                                                                              20.3%
Peters (2006)                                                      was relatively lax, with every proposed airline merger USAir/Piedmont
                     change and an average industry wide                                                                                                                       11.8%
                                                                   receiving regulatory approval."                            Delta/Western
                     percentage price change conditional on route
                     distance.                                                                                                Continental/Peoples Express                     29.4%
                     Estimate merger price effect by comparing The author discusses the lax enforcement of airline                                          Estimate prices rose 10% in overlap
Kwoka and
                     prices to other firms on routes not served by mergers during this time period and the two previous       USAir/Piedomont               markets and 6% where one of the two
Shumilkina (2010)
                     either USAir or Piedmont prior to merger.     studies of the merger finding price increases.                                           firms was likely a potentially entrant
                                                                                                                              Delta/Northwest (2009),
                                                                                                                              Frontier/Midwest (2009), US
                                                                                                                              Airways/America West          Estimate short-run price increase of 5.6%,
                     Estimates the average price effect caused by
Huschelrath and                                                    No specific discussion of mergers being marginal, some (2005), American                  medium-run price increase of 4.7%, and
                     a horizontal merger (using information from                                                              Airlines/TWA (2001),
Muller (2013)                                                      discussion of regulatory review.                                                         long-run price effect of 2.7% (but not
                     six mergers).                                                                                            American Airlines/Reno Air    statistically different than zero).
                                                                                                                              (1999), AirTran/Valujet
                                                                                                                              (1998)
                     Estimates price effects of merger holding     States that DOJ reviewed merger but allowed because of                                   No price effect on non-stop routes, 2.3%
Luo (2013)                                                                                                                    Delta/Northwest (2009)
                     competition from other firms constant.        minimal overlap and likely merger efficiencies.                                          price increase on connecting routes.
                                                      Table 2: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in the Banking Industry

Study                    Study Description                              Evidence on Enforcement Margin                             Merger                        Price Effects Reported
                         Study estimates how interest rates paid to
                                                                        Limit attention to significant horizontal mergers (those
Prager and Hannan        consumers on saving accounts changed in                                                                   7 mergers taking place        NOW Accounts: -17.7%; Money Market
                                                                        leading to relatively large changes in market
(1998)                   markets affected by mergers relative to                                                                   between 1992 and 1994.        Accounts: -9.5%, 3-Month CDs: -1.7%.
                                                                        concentration).
                         unaffected markets
                                                                                                                                                                 Estimate that mergers of firms of banks
                                                                                                                                                                 with small market shares lowered loan
                         Estimates how firms loan prices changed                                                                   138 bank mergers taking
                                                                        No specific discussion of regulatory treatment of specific                               rates (typical reduction 41 basis points),
Sapienza (2002)          following a merger as a function of the                                                                   place in Italy between 1989
                                                                        mergers.                                                                                 while mergers of firms with large market
                         relative size of the merger.                                                                              and 1995.
                                                                                                                                                                 shares increase loan rates (as much as 80
                                                                                                                                                                 basis points).
                         Study estimates how interest rates paid to
                                                                        Estimate the price effects of all mergers in data,                                       All Mergers: Short Run Effect: -13.5%,
                         consumers on saving accounts changed in
 Focarelli and Panetta                                                  however, the authors also separately examine a sample Mergers taking place in Italy      Long Run Effect: 12.6%; Substantial
                         markets affected by mergers relative to
(2003)                                                                  of substantial mergers (those generating a large change between 1990 and 1998.           Mergers: Short Run Effect: -19%, Long
                         unaffected markets. Study estimates short
                                                                        in market concentration).                                                                Run Effect: 10.7%
                         and long run price effect of mergers.
                                                                       Banks were required to divest branch locations. Despite
                       Estimates how loan prices changed in                                                                                                      Medium-Sized banks loan rates increased
Calomiris and                                                          divestitures, the merger substanitally increased            Merger of Fleet and Bank
                       markets affected by the merger relative to                                                                                                between 80 and 100 basis points for
Pornrojnangkool (2005)                                                 concentration for medium sized firms needing bank           Boston, 1999.
                       other similar markets.                                                                                                                    customers in New England.
                                                                       loans.
                         Estimates how local loan prices are affected Examine large mergers of financially healthy competing       80 Large Bank Mergers         Find that the largest bank mergers could
Garmaise and
                         by mergers as a function of the relative size banks. No specific discussion of antitrust review of        taking Place between 1992     increase loan prices by about 40.1 basis
Moskowiotz (2006)
                         of the merger.                                mergers studied.                                            and 1999.                     points.
                                                                                                                                                                 Estimate that loan prices fall following all
                         Estimates how firms estimated loan price                                                                                                mergers, however, prices fall less in
Montoriol-Garriga                                                       No specific discussion of regulatory treatment of specific
                         changes as a result of horizontal mergers in                                                              Bank Mergers in Spain.        markets experiencing larger mergers.
(2008)                                                                  mergers.
                         markets of different concentration levels.                                                                                              Estimated price decreases vary from 0 to
                                                                                                                                                                 20 basis points.
                        Estimate how mortgage prices change in          Authors provide a generall discussion of how the
Allen, Clark, and Houde markets affected by the merger relative to      Canadian mortgage market has become relatively                                           Estimate mortgage rates increase between
                                                                                                                                   A banking merger in Canada.
(2013)                  markets where the merging firms did not         concentrated, however, specific transaction is not                                       5.7 and 7.39 basis points.
                        compete.                                        described in detail.
                                                      Table 3: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in the Hospital Industry

Study                    Study Description                              Evidence on Enforcement Margin                        Merger                        Price Effects Reported
                                                                                                                                                            Estimate that, on average, merging
Connor, Feldman,         Study estimates how merging hosptials prices Does not provide information on individual mergers      112 Mergers taking place      hospitals prices fell by about 5%. Find
Dowd (1998)              changed relative to non-merging hospitals. studied.                                                  between 1986 and 1994.        evidence that prices fell less in more
                                                                                                                                                            concentrated markets.
                         Estimates how the prices of high-volume
                                                                                                                              Examine change in price of Estimates the price of high volume
                         procedures at hospitals directly affected by   Does not provide detailed information on individual
Krishnan (2001)                                                                                                               22 Ohio hospitals affected by procedures increased by 16.5% at merging
                         mergers changed relative to hospital in the    mergers studied.
                                                                                                                              mergers in 1994 or 1995.      hospitals.
                         same market and other markets.
                                                                     Authors state that, "Had the FTC had the opportunity to Dominican Santa Cruz
                         Study estimates how merging hospital prices                                                                                        Estimate Dominican price rose by 23%
Vita and Sacher (2001)                                               seek a preliminary injunction in this case, it would have Hospital's acqusition of AMI
                         changed relative to a control group.                                                                                               and AMI price rose by 17%.
                                                                     done so."                                                 Community Hosiptal (1990).
                                                                                                                              Uses a sample of many
                         Study estimates how rival hospitals changed Does not provide information on individual mergers                                    Estimate that rival hosptials increase by
Dafny (2009)                                                                                                                  mergers taking place between
                         price following a merger.                   studied.                                                                              roughly 40%.
                                                                                                                              1989 and 1996
                                                                                                                                                           Estimated price effects vary by control
                                                                                                                              Merger of St. Therese and    group, insurer, and estimation method
                                                                        Merger of only 2 hospitals in Waukegan, Illinois.
                                                                                                                              Victory hospitals (2000).    (-20% - 29%). In most cases prices
                                                                                                                                                           decreased.
Haas-Wilson and          Study estimates how merging hospital prices
                                                                                                                                                            Estimated price effects vary by control
Garmon (2011)            changed relative to a control group.                                                                 Merger of Evanston
                                                                                                                                                            group, insurer, and estimation method
                                                                        Merger challenged by FTC four years after merger      Northwestern Healtcare
                                                                                                                                                            (-2% - 80%). The overwhelming majority
                                                                        consummation.                                         Corporation and Highland
                                                                                                                                                            of estimated price increase were positive,
                                                                                                                              Park Hospital (2000).
                                                                                                                                                            economically and statistically significant.
                                                                                                                                                          Large price increases for Summit varying
                                                                                                                                                          by insurer and estimation method (23%-
                         Study estimates how merging hospital prices State of California unsuccesfully attempted to block     Sutter's purchase of Summit
Tenn (2011)                                                                                                                                               50%). No systematic evidence of a price
                         changed relative to a control group.        merger.                                                  Hospital (1999).
                                                                                                                                                          increase or decrease for Sutter owned
                                                                                                                                                          hospital.
                                                                                                                                                            Estimated price effects vary dramatically
                                                                                                                              New Hannover Regional
                                                                                                                                                            by insurer (-30% - 65%). Two insurers
                         Study estimates how merging hospital prices Merging hospitals much closer to each other than rival   Medical Center acquisition
Thompson (2011)                                                                                                                                             experienced a price increase, one a price
                         changed relative to a control group.        hospitals.                                               of Columbia Cape Fear
                                                                                                                                                            decrease, and one little meaningful change
                                                                                                                              Memorial Hospital (1998).
                                                                                                                                                            in price relative to the control group.
                                                    Table 4: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in the Petroleum Industry

Study                   Study Description                              Evidence on Enforcement Margin                          Merger                       Price Effects Reported
                                                                                                                               Tosco's purchase of Unocal   Branded CARB Gas: 6.8 cpg, Unbranded
                                                                                                                               refinery in 1997.            CARB Gas: -1.58 cpg
                                                                                                                               UDS purchase of Total in     Branded Conventional Gas: -.89 cpg,
                                                                                                                               1997.                        Unbranded Conventional Gas: -1.25 cpg
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Conventional Gas: .7 cpg,
                                                                                                                               Joint venture between
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Conventional Gas: .39 cpg,
                                                                                                                               Marathon and Ashland
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Reformulated Gas: .71cpg,
                                                                                                                               Petroleum in 1998.
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Reformulated Gas: .86 cpg
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Conventional Gas: .99 cpg,
                                                                                                                               Shell Texaco I (Creation of Unbranded Conventional Gas: 1.13 cpg,
                                                                                                                               Equilon) 1998                Branded CARB Gas: -.69 cpg, Unbranded
                        The study estimates the change in wholesale    Mergers selected because of, "their transaction size,
                                                                                                                                                            CARB Gas: -.24 cpg
                        prices due to merger. Separate price effects   FTC's review of them, or concerns expressed by some
GAO (2004)                                                                                                                                                  Branded Convnetional Gas: -1.77 cpg,
                        estimated for each specification of gasoline   industry participants and state officials we [GAO]
                                                                                                                               Shell Texaco II (Creation of Unbranded Conventional Gas: -1.24 cpg,
                        and branded and unbranded wholesale price.     interviewed."
                                                                                                                               Motiva) 1998                 Branded Reformulated Gas: .39cpg,
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Reformulated Gas: .09 cpg
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Conventional Gas: .4 cpg,
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Conventional Gas: .97,
                                                                                                                               BP-Amoco 1998
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Reformulated Gas: .55cpg,
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Reformulated Gas: .4 cpg
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Conventional Gas: 1.38 cpg,
                                                                                                                               MAP-UDS
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Conventional Gas: 2.63 cpg
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Conventional Gas: 3.71 cpg,
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Conventional Gas: 5.00 cpg,
                                                                                                                               Exxon-Mobil 2000
                                                                                                                                                            Branded Reformulated Gas: 1.61 cpg,
                                                                                                                                                            Unbranded Reformulated Gas: 1.01 cpg
                        Estimates a price equation separately for
                                                                                                                                                            Retail price: mean refining merger price
                        retail and wholesale gasoline prices. Using
                                                                                                                               6 refinery and 25 retail     effect: .43 cpg, mean retailing merger
Chouinard and Perloff   this model they estimate merger price effects No information providing as to whether mergers were
                                                                                                                               mergers taking place between price effect: -.04 cpg, Wholesale price:
(2007)                  of the 31 mergers. The authors report the     marginal.
                                                                                                                               1989 and 1998.               mean refining merger effect: .57 cpg,
                        mean and range of estimated merger effects
                                                                                                                                                            mean retailing merger effect: -.06.
                        rather than seperate price effects by merger.
                        Estimates change in wholesale and retail                                                                Joint venture between       Wholesale price increases in 2/4 markets.
Taylor and Hosken                                                       A press report stated that the FTC reviewed and allowed
                        gasoline prices prices resulting from the                                                               Marathon and Ashland        Retail changes in only 1 of those 2, likely
(2007)                                                                 the merger without conditions.
                        merger in four markets.                                                                                 Petroleum in 1998.          due to a cost shock.
                                                                                                                             Marathon Ashland Petroleum
                        Estimates change in retail gasoline price      No challenge. Authors argue that the merger increased
Simpson and Taylor                                                                                                           (MAP) aquires Michigan     No meaningful change in retail gasoline
                        resulting from transaction in 6 affected       market concentration more than many other prominent
(2008)                                                                                                                       Assets of Ultramar Diamond prices.
                        markets in U.S. Midwest.                       mergers in petroleum industry.
                                                                                                                             Shamrock (UDS) (1999)
                                                  Table 4: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in the Petroleum Industry

Study                 Study Description                             Evidence on Enforcement Margin                           Merger                     Price Effects Reported
                                                                                                                             Chevron/Texaco (2000): Oil
                                                                                                                                                        Results not statistically significant
                                                                                                                             and Gas Reserves
                                                                                                                             Phillips Petroleum
                                                                                                                             Company/Tosco (2001): 8
                                                                                                                                                             Results not statistically significant
                                                                                                                             refineries and appoximately
                                                                                                                             6,400 retail gasoline stations.

                                                                                                                             Valero/UDS (2001): 7            Branded Gasoline Price: 1.06 cpg,
                                                                                                                             refineries and approximately Unbranded Gasoline Price: not statistically
                                                                                                                             5,000 retail gasoline stations. significant.
                      Estimates the price effects of 7 petroleum
                                                                    Mergers selected into study if: value was greater thanRoyal Dutch Shell/Texaco
                      mergers taking place between 2001 and
GAO (2009)                                                          $200 million, occurred between 2000 and 2007, and if  (2001): Texaco's share of
                      2005. All specifications of gas pooled in a                                                                                      Results not statistically significant
                                                                    adequate price data was available.                    Motiva and Equilon
                      single regression.
                                                                                                                          downstream joint ventures.
                                                                                                                          Phillips Petroleum
                                                                                                                          Company/Conocco
                                                                                                                                                       Branded Gasoline Price: -1.64, Unbranded
                                                                                                                          (2001):Oil and Gas Reserves,
                                                                                                                                                       Gasoline Price: -1.14
                                                                                                                          refining and marketing
                                                                                                                          assets.
                                                                                                                          Premcor/Williams (2002): 1
                                                                                                                                                       Results not statistically significant
                                                                                                                          refinery.
                                                                                                                                                       Branded Gasoline Price: not statistically
                                                                                                                          Valero/Premcor (2005): 4
                                                                                                                                                       significant, Unbranded Gasoline Price:
                                                                                                                          refineries.
                                                                                                                                                       1.13 cpg
                                                                                                                                                       Branded wholesale prices decrease by 1-3
                      Estimates change in wholesale and retail      Two previous studies found this merger increased some Tosco's purchase of Unocal cpg, unbranded prices may have increased
                      gasoline prices resulting from merger.        wholesale prices.                                     refinery in 1997.            by 1 cpg, and retail prices were essentially
                                                                                                                                                       unchanged.
Hosken, Silvia, and   Authors examine how a reduction in market
Taylor (2011)         concentration resulting from a sale of a                                                                                               Branded and unbranded wholesale prices
                      refinery by affected gasoline prices in San Merger reduced market concentation (not a marginal         UDS purchase of Tosco           decreased between 2-5 cpg. Evidence on
                      Francisco. This merger essentially returned merger).                                                   refinery in 2000.               retail pricing is mixed varying from no
                      market concentration to the pre-                                                                                                       change to a 3 cpg increase.
                      Tosco/Unocal Level.
                                                                                                                             Ultramar's 1997 purchase of Prices estimated to increase between .15
                      Estimates change in retail gasoline price     Canadian Competition Bureau reviewed merger and
Houde (2013)                                                                                                                 12 Sunoco gasoline stations and .45 cents-per-liter depending on
                      relative to a comparison group.               allowed it to proceed.
                                                                                                                             in Quebec City, Quebec.      sample.
                                                                                                                                                          Estimates depend on control group and
                      Estimates change in wholesale and retail gas The FTC unsuccessfully attempted to challenge this        Western Refining's purchase price measure (-12 to 3 cpg). Most are
Kreisle (2013)
                      and diesel prices due to merger.             merger.                                                   of Giant Industries in 2007. negative and statistically significantly
                                                                                                                                                          different than zero.
                                                      Table 4: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in the Petroleum Industry

Study                    Study Description                               Evidence on Enforcement Margin                         Merger                        Price Effects Reported
                                                                                                                                Sunono buys El Paso's
                                                                                                                                refinery in Eagle Point New   No meaningful change in branded
                         Estimate changes in retail and wholesale                                                               Jersey (2004)                 wholesale or retail gasoline/diesel prices.
                                                                         Authors state FTC investigated but did not challenge
Silvia and Taylor (2013) prices of gasoline and diesel prices in three                                                          Valero Energy Corporation
                                                                         merger.
                         markets in the Northeastern U.S.                                                                       purchases Premcor in 2005.
                                                                                                                                Aquires refinery in           No meaningful change in branded
                                                                                                                                Wilmington Deleware.          wholesale or retail gasoline/diesel prices.
                                                              Table 5: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in Other Industries

Study                           Study Description                             Evidence on Enforcement Margin                        Merger                             Price Effects Reported
                                Estimates how prices changed after the        FTC sued Xidex after mergers were consummated. The
                                                                                                                                    Two microfilm mergers              First merger raised prices by 11 percent,
Barton and Sherman (1984)       merger relative to substitute brands not      suit settled after Xidex aggreed to a divestiture and
                                                                                                                                    involving Xidex Corporation.       the second by 23 percent.
                                involved in merger.                           licensing agreements.
                                                                                                                                      Weyerhaueser purchase of west
                              Examine how the prices of cardboard and     FTC sued and failed to block merger, however, market                                         Estimate that cardboard box prices fell
Schumann, Reitzes, and Rogers                                                                                                         coast assets of Menasha in 1980.
                              cardboard inputs changed following a merger unconcentrated by current standards (post-merger HHI                                         between 10% and 13%. No significant
(1997)                                                                                                                                Both produced cardboard and
                              holding cost and demand factors constant.   of 1166).                                                                                    change in cardboard input prices.
                                                                                                                                      cardboard inputs.

                              Examine various shipping prices for the Salt
                              Lake City market following the merger. Study
                                                                           Department of Justice forced the merging parties to
                              focuses on examining the efficacy of the                                                               1996 merger of Union Pacific      All statistically significant price effects are
Karikari, Brown, Nadji (2002)                                              allow rivals access to tracks on all routes where only UP
                              merger remedy: how did the prices of                                                                   and Southern Pacific railroads.   negative, vary from -8% to -26%.
                                                                           and SP operated prior to the merger.
                              consumers who previously were only served
                              by UP and SP change following the merger.
                                Estimates how prices of merging academic                                                                                                Reed Elsevier/Pergamon: 10%; Wolters
                                journals changed relative to journals owned                                                                                             Kluwert/Lippincott: 5%; Wolters
McCabe (2002)                   by other publishers. Some mergers occurred None mentioned.                                           Seven academic journal mergers. Kluwer/Thomson/Waverly/Pelnum: 3-6%;
                                concurrently. These are not individually                                                                                                Harcourt/Churchill Livingstone/Mosby: 3-
                                identified.                                                                                                                             6%
                                                                                                                                                                        Effects estimated separately for acquiring
                                                                                                                                     Six mergers of law serial          and acquired firms' serials. 7/9 reported
                                Estimates how prices of merging firms serials At least one of the mergers (Thomson's purchase of
McCabe (2004)                                                                                                                        publishers, one involved a partial estimates are positive, ranging between 1
                                changed relative to other serials.            West) was reviewed by DOJ.
                                                                                                                                     divestiture.                       and 21%. Divested journals prices rose by
                                                                                                                                                                        15%.
                                Changes in circulation and advertising prices Authors describe how the mergers significantly
Chandra and Collard-Wexler                                                                                                           Several Canadian newspaper        No significant changes in advertising or
                                of papers involved in mergers are compared increased market concentration, including multimarket
(2009)                                                                                                                               mergers                           circulation prices.
                                to changes for other newspapers.              contact.
                                Estimates how prices of merging stores in                                                                                              No significant price changes 6 months
                                                                                                                                     Retail supermarket merger in
Huang and Steigert (2009)       Madison changed relative to stores in Green Assets had value below HSR threshholds.                                                    following merger. Two years after merger:
                                                                                                                                     Madison, WI
                                Bay.                                                                                                                                   price increases of between 2 and 5%.
                                                                                                                                     Pennzoil/Quaker State (Motor
                                                                                                                                     Oil)                                                  5.0%
                                                                                                                                     General Mills/Chex (Cereal)                           3.2%
                                                                              Each merger involved large firms in already
                                                                                                                                     P&G/Tambrands (Feminine
                              Estimates how prices of product's owned by      concentrated industries. FTC required a change in
                                                                                                                                     Hygiene Products)                                     7.0%
Ashenfelter and Hosken (2010) merging firms increased after the mergers       GMI/Chex merger agreement and required
                                                                                                                                     Aroura/P&G (Breakfast Syrup)                          0.4%
                              relative to private label prices.               Guinness/Grand Metropolitan to divest a Scotch and a
                                                                              gin brand.                                               Guinness/Grand Metropolitan
                                                                                                                                                 Scotch                                    7.1%
                                                                                                                                                  Gin                                      2.2%
                                                                                                                                                 Vodka                                     1.1%
                                                             Table 5: Estimated Price Effects of Consummated Horizontal Mergers in Other Industries

Study                          Study Description                               Evidence on Enforcement Margin                           Merger                            Price Effects Reported
                               Estimates how predicted increases in
Dafny, Duggan, and                                                             Investigated by DOJ, and approved after Aetna divested Health insurer merger involving The merger is predicted to increase prices
                               concentration due to merger changed
Ramanarayanan (2011)                                                           Texas plans.                                           Aetna and Prudential            by .5% in the average market.
                               insurance premiums.
                                                                           Describe merger as having both vertical and horizontal                                        Prices rose in years directly following the
                                                                           components. No discussion of whether the merger was          1995 merger of Burlington        merger, but eventually fell to pre-merger
                              Examine how the prices of shipping grain for
Winston, Maheshri, and Dennis                                              on the enforcement margin.                                   Northern and Santa Fe railroads. levels.
                              export changed following the mergers using
(2011)                                                                     Department of Justice forced the merging parties to                                           Prices rose in years directly followign
                              both a reduced form and structural model.
                                                                           allow rivals access to tracks on all routes where only UP    1996 merger of Union Pacific     merger, but eventually fell to pre-merger
                                                                           and SP operated prior to the merger.                         and Southern Pacific railroads. levels.
                                                                               Merger resulted in large increases in concentration,     The merger of two large parking Rivals increase price by about 3%,
                               Estimates changes in rival prices relative to
Chone and Linnemer (2012)                                                      however, approved by regulator with only behavioral      lot companies operating in Paris, however, the estimates are sensitive to
                               various control groups.
                                                                               remedies.                                                France in 2000.                   control measure.
                               Estimate price effects sepatately by merger.
                                                                                                                                                                           Prices fell following five mergers (-2% to -
Hosken, Olsen, and Smith       Price effects identified by price change        Authors analyze mergers both likely and unlikely to be   14 retail supermarket mergers
                                                                                                                                                                          8%), rose following five mergers (2%-
(2012)                         relative to various control groups from         on the enforcement margin.                               taking place in 2007 or 2008
                                                                                                                                                                          6%), and were unchanged following four.
                               regions unaffected by the mergers.
                               Estimates how prices changed in regions with    UK Competition Commission investigaged the merger
Aguzzoni et al. (2013)                                                                                                                  U.K. book retailers               No significant change
                               overlap relative to other regions.              and approved with no modifications.
                                                                               Merger was investigated by antitrust authorities and
                               Estimates changes in rival prices relative to a                                                          Merger of two large French        Rivals increased prices by 1.5% to 2.5% as
Allain et al. (2013)                                                           divestitures were ordered. However, local market
                               control groups.                                                                                          supermarket firms in 2000.        a result of merger.
                                                                               concentration increased significantly in many markets.
                                                                                                                                                                          New Maytag dishwashers: 5%; New
                               Estimates how prices increased in appliance                                                                                                Whirlpool dishwashers: Unchanged; New
                                                                            Merger reviewed by U.S. DOJ, but cleared without
Ashenfelter, Hosken, and       categories where merger raised concentration                                                             Maytag/Whirlpool appliance        Maytag driers: 5%; New Whirlpool driers:
                                                                            conditions. The merger resulted in large increases in
Weinberg (2013a)               relative to other categories. Compares                                                                   merger.                           13%; New Maytag fridges: unchaged;
                                                                            concentration.
                               merging parties price changes to rivals.                                                                                                   New Whirlpool fridges: 3%; Clothes
                                                                                                                                                                          Washers: Unchanged
                           Correlates change in price with anticipated                                                                                                    Increases in concentration predicted price
                                                                         Merger reviewed by U.S. DOJ, but approved without
Ashenfelter, Hosken, and   change in concentration and reduction in                                                                                                       increases, reductions in shipping distance
                                                                         conditions. The merger reduced number of U.S. macro- Miller/Coors brewing merger
Weinberg (2013b)           shipping distances due to merger across local                                                                                                  predicted price reductions. In average
                                                                         brewers from 3 to 2.
                           markets                                                                                                                                        market effects offset each other.
                                                                                                                                 Merger berween AstraZeneca
                           Estimates how prices changed before and       Investigated but cleared by Swedish Competition
Bjornerstedt and Verboven                                                                                                        Tica and GlaxoSmithKline, both 42% in absolute terms, 35% relative to
                           after merger absolutely and relative to a     Authority primarily because of coming deregulation of
(2013)                                                                                                                           OTC analgesic producers in      competing firm.
                           competitor.                                   state-owned pharmacy monopoly.
                                                                                                                                 Sweden.
                                                                         Authors searched for a merger with the potential to
Guardado, Emmons, and Kane Estimates how prices changed in state with facilitate the exercise of market power (a merger of large Health insurer merger involving
                                                                                                                                                                 13.7% price increase
(2013)                     overlap (NV) relative to other areas.         insurers resulting in a large increase in market        UnitedHealth and Sierra
                                                                         concentration).
