                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      UNDERSTANDING THE ROLE OF TIME-VARYING UNOBSERVED ABILITY
               HETEROGENEITY IN EDUCATION PRODUCTION

                                              Weili Ding
                                           Steven F. Lehrer

                                        Working Paper 19937
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19937


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2014




We would like to thank Richard Murnane, two anonymous reviewers and seminar participants at Queen’s
University, Simon Fraser University, 2008 CSWEP/CEMENT workshop, 2008 CEA Annual meetings
and the AEA annual meetings session on Education for the Disadvantaged for helpful comments and
suggestions. We are grateful to Alan Krueger for generously providing a subset of the data used in
the study. Lehrer wishes to thank SSHRC for research support. We are responsible for all errors. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Weili Ding and Steven F. Lehrer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Understanding the Role of Time-Varying Unobserved Ability Heterogeneity in Education
Production
Weili Ding and Steven F. Lehrer
NBER Working Paper No. 19937
February 2014
JEL No. C23,I21

                                          ABSTRACT

Unobserved ability heterogeneity has long been postulated to play a key role in human capital
development.Traditional strategies to estimate education production functions do not allow for
varying role or developmentof unobserved ability as a child ages. Such restrictions are highly
inconsistent with a growing bodyof scientific evidence; moreover, in order to obtain unbiased
parameter estimates of observed educationalinputs, researchers must properly account for
unobserved skills that may be correlated with other inputsto the production process. To illustrate
our empirical strategy we use experimental data from Tennessee’sStudent/Teacher Achievement
Ratio experiment, known as Project STAR. We find that unobservedability is endogenously
developed over time and its impact on cognitive achievement varies significantlybetween grades
in all subject areas. Moreover, we present evidence that accounting for time-varyingunobserved
ability across individuals and a more general depreciating pattern of observed inputs areboth
important when estimating education production functions.


Weili Ding
Queens University
138 Union Street
Sutherland Hall
Kingston
Ontario K7L 3N6
Canada
dingw@queensu.ca

Steven F. Lehrer
School of Policy Studies
and Department of Economics
Queen's University
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6
CANADA
and NBER
lehrers@queensu.ca
1         Introduction
Since the landmark publication of the 1966 U. S. Department of Education study titled Equality of
Educational Opportunity (aka The Coleman Report), hundreds of studies in the economics and ed-
ucation literatures have estimated education production functions to examine whether educational
“inputs” correlate with cognitive achievement. Perhaps the major obstacle in production function
estimation is that the decisions that a parent makes depend on their child’s characteristics. Be-
cause many of the child’s characteristics that aﬀect these investment decisions are unobserved to
the analyst, this gives rise to an endogeneity problem. Intuitively, if a parent adjusts to a change
in unobserved innate characteristics by increasing or decreasing their investments depending on
whether the change is favorable or not, then these unobserved characteristics and inputs are corre-
lated and biased estimates result. Many researchers interpret these unobserved factors to be either
innate ability or unobserved ability heterogeneity.
        Many classic studies in the economics literature, including Ben-Porath (1967) and Griliches
(1977), emphasize that unobserved ability is an input into the production of human capital, but are
ambiguous about how they influence human capital accumulation. As a result, within the economics
of education literature researchers often use imperfect proxies for unobserved ability or assume their
impacts are constant over time or between siblings including twins. These strategies allow the
researcher to either (partially) control for this factor or diﬀerence it out in the analysis. However,
a large and growing multi-disciplinary literature summarized within Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron,
and Shonkoﬀ (2006) and Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov (2006) has demonstrated the
malleability of cognitive (and non-cognitive) ability during childhood.1 These skills are not fixed
following conception but rather are related to development of specific brain structures that emerge
from both epigenetic and genetic processes. Since unobserved ability heterogeneity is potentially an
important contributor to the development of human capital,2 it would be advantageous to account
    1
        Evidence that gaps in unobserved (cognitive) ability between individuals develop at early ages has been docu-
mented within economics (Carneiro and Heckman (2003)) as well as the child development literature (e. g. Shonkoﬀ
and Phillips (2000)).
   2
     Within the labor economics literature the empirical importance of unobserved ability heterogeneity to lifetime


                                                           2
for its impacts when estimating education production functions in a more flexible manner than
existing methods. More generally, to obtain unbiased parameter estimates of educational inputs
researchers must properly control for unobserved ability when estimating education production
functions.
    Since human capital accumulation is a dynamic processes, it is important to understand how
the role of heterogeneous ability evolves over the lifecycle, particularly during periods in which it is
most adaptable to policy intervention. To estimate the changing importance of heterogeneous abil-
ity diﬀerences on academic performance, we introduce a straightforward empirical approach that
permits estimation of the time-varying eﬀect of unobserved ability heterogeneity within the stan-
dard framework of education production functions.3 Our empirical strategy exploits the triangular
structure implied by the underlying model of human capital production and it is important to state
explicitly that this empirical approach does not require measures that either proxy for unobserved
ability or make assumptions regarding the process by which unobserved ability develops over the
lifecycle.4 Most importantly, the estimates provide guidance on not only the changing impacts of
unobserved ability heterogeneity at both diﬀerent ages and in diﬀerent subject areas, but also shed
light on how researchers should treat this factor in their analyses.
welfare has been clearly demonstrated. Keane and Wolpin (1997) report that age 16 measures of unobserved ability
endowments account for 90% of the total variance in lifetime earnings. Murnane, Willett, and Levy (1995) find that
a substantial fraction of the rise in the return to educations between 1978 and 1986 for young workers is attributable
to a rise in the return to ability. Heckman and Vytlacil (2001) find this result robust only for a portion of the sample
with high scores (in the fourth quartile) on the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery achievement test.
   3
     The relationship between empirical specifications of education production functions and the underlying theory
is examined in Todd and Wolpin (2003), Boardman and Murnane (1979) and Hanushek (1979). Researchers have
also studied the appropriateness of diﬀerent specifications of an education production function by considering the
functional form (Figlio (1999)), levels of aggregation (Hanushek, Rivkin and Taylor (1996), relevant control variables
(Haveman and Wolfe (1995)) and what constitute the appropriate measures of school output (Card and Krueger
(1992)).
   4
     The empirical strategy allows the observed education inputs to both have impacts that vary at diﬀerent ages
and where these inputs could be potentially correlated with the time varying unobserved ability heterogeneity. We
discuss the conditions to achieve consistent estimates with both exogenous and endogenous inputs.



                                                           3
       To improve our understanding of the importance of unobserved ability heterogeneity in the pro-
duction of achievement at diﬀerent ages we use experimental data from Tennessee’s Student/Teacher
Achievement Ratio experiment, known as Project STAR. We make use of the feature that teachers
were randomly assigned within schools to classrooms in each year of the experiment to overcome
important sources of bias in estimating education production functions, including student-teacher
sorting bias (Rothstein (2010)). We empirically demonstrate that it is important to account for the
time-varying eﬀects of unobserved individual ability heterogeneity, particularly in reading, listening
skills and word recognition. Further, specification tests suggest that this factor should be treated
as endogenous in the empirical analysis. While our empirical application is within the economics
of education, this empirical strategy could be used in other contexts where unobserved unit-specific
heterogeneity is believed to play an important role and may have time-varying impacts. For ex-
ample, this strategy could be used to estimate whether this source of unobserved heterogeneity
accounts for much of the gaps that develop among individuals, groups, countries on outcomes such
as health and wealth accumulation.
       Similar to Andrabi et al (2011) dynamic panel methods are used to estimate an education
production function. The approach introduced diﬀers from commonly used strategies by exploiting
the triangular structure of the underlying economic model of human capital accumulation, allowing
us to i) provide a structural interpretation of what is often termed the persistence parameter,5 ii)
relax some of the assumptions implicitly made when using a traditional value added estimator,
and iii) easily employ semiparametric estimators to explore the extent of student heterogeneity in
their endogenous learning rates.6 We present evidence of substantial heterogeneity in learning rates
across students, particularly in mathematics.
   5
       Andrabi et al (2011) conclude their investigation by stating that the economic interpretation of the persistence
parameter remains an area open for enquiry. This paper is able to provide a clear economic interpretation by
exploiting the triangular structure of the underlying economic model.
   6
     As we discuss in further detail in the next section, feasible approaches to estimate conditional quantiles with
panel data and endogenous regressors are diﬃcult to develop since standard demeaning (or diﬀerencing) techniques
do not generally remove the time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity. Our approach involves first solving for the
unobserved heterogeneity so that estimators based on the 1 -norm penalty can be utilized.


                                                            4
       The empirical strategy introduced in this paper can be widely applied given the growing avail-
ability of both longitudinal data sets and administrative databases that allow researchers to track
students as they develop. Researchers only need to have access to at least two years of data on both
education outputs and inputs.7 Our results not only shows the benefits of a more general treat-
ment of unobserved ability but also demonstrates how the inclusion of lagged observed inputs can
aﬀect the interpretation, magnitude and statistical significance of coeﬃcients on contemporaneous
inputs when estimating education production functions. Thus, decisions on how to operationalize
the conceptual specification of the education production function can explain diﬀerences in research
findings across studies that use the same data source, even when the data used is collected from
an experimental design. Since the empirical strategy introduced imposes fewer restrictions on the
production process it could also serve as a nice complement to analysis using alternative specifica-
tions of education production functions, to determine if results are robust to the possibility that
unobserved ability heterogeneity has distinct eﬀects on achievement at diﬀerent grade levels.
       This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the general conceptual model of
cognitive achievement and introduce an empirical strategy that allows for very general patterns
of the impacts of both observed and unobserved inputs to the education production process. The
estimator requires that a researcher has at least two years of data on education outputs and inputs
and identifies the time-varying impacts of unobserved ability heterogeneity using a GMM procedure.
We detail the conditions under which this empirical strategy can obtain consistent estimates of
the production function parameters, both with and in the absence of ideal data.8 Project STAR
   7
       In addition, as we detail in Section 2 a moment condition needs to be satisfied and there are specification tests
available to examine the validity of exclusion restrictions using lagged outputs.
   8
     As such, the empirical strategy we discuss nests several popular approaches to estimate education production
functions. These approaches place implicit and constraining assumptions on how the impacts of both observed and
unobserved inputs to the production process vary as a person ages. Recently, Todd and Wolpin (2007) use NLSY79-
CS data to investigate the assumptions underlying commonly used achievement production functions (assuming
the impact of unobserved ability heterogeneity to be time invariant) and found little empirical support for these
assumptions. Our results also complement Andrabi et al (2011) who demonstrate that failing to properly specify
and estimate education production functions can yield wildly diﬀerent results, particularly when there are large gaps
in baseline achievement. In Section 4, we conduct model specification tests to determine which (if any) of these

                                                            5
experimental data is described in Section 3. The empirical results that shed light on how researchers
should treat unobserved ability heterogeneity are presented and discussed in Section 4. In this
section, we also demonstrate that the sign, magnitude and statistical significance of the impact
of educational inputs on measures of academic performance is sensitive to restrictions imposed on
both unobserved ability heterogeneity and the empirical specification of the education production
function. A concluding section summarizes our findings on how researchers should empirically treat
unobserved ability heterogeneity in their analyses and discusses direction for future research.


2     Economic Model
We draw on the human capital production function framework introduced by Ben-Porath (1967)
and extended by Leibowitz (1974) to the context of investment in children. The general conceptual
model depicts the level of achievement,  , for a given student  at a point in time  to be a
function of the full history of family, community, school inputs and own innate ability. These
variables may interact with each other in a nontrivial, unknown way. This general model expresses
current achievement over time as

                                  =   (  0   0    0 )         (1)

where  is a vector of individual and family characteristics,  is a vector of school and commu-
nity characteristics,  is a vector of individual current unobserved heterogeneity, including such
factors as student innate abilities and determination and  is assumed to be distributed with
zero mean and no serial correlation. Empirical researchers estimate education production functions
to understand the nature of this dynamic process and to assess how specific inputs influence the
development of  .
alternative assumptions is supported.




                                                            6
2.1        Empirical Cumulative Model
Linearizing the achievement relationship (equation (1)) yields

                                                          X
                                                           −1
                 =  0 + 1  + 2  +   +      ( 0 +  1  +  2  +   ) +     (2)
                                                               =0

We are essentially extending the traditional panel data model by imposing a multi-factor error
structure, where   is a vector of factor loadings and  corresponds to common unobserved factors.9
Since the regressors can include higher order terms and interaction terms to capture nonlinear
relationships, the linearization of the theoretical model imposes few restrictions other than additive
separability of  and the idiosyncratic error terms onto the theory. For ease of exposition, we will
assume that  is a individual scalar. Note, the classical individual eﬀects model that is used in the
economics of education literature can be obtained by setting   = 1.10 We place no restrictions
on how   ( = 0   ) evolves over time, allowing us to re-express the relationship as

                                                                X
                                                                 −1
                                  =    +    +           (   +   ) +                    (3)
                                                                =0

where  is a matrix containing the intercept and all the inputs, ([1    ]) ∀  that we will assume
are independent from  .11 Note that   represents the matrix of the estimated coeﬃcients that
   9
       For ease of exposition, we will ignore factor dynamics and assume that  is a individual scalar fixed over time.
Strategies to estimate panel data models with multi-factor error structures are developed in Bai (2009) when the
observed covariates are exogenous, and in Harding and LaMarche (2009) for endogenous observed covariates. In
this paper, we exploit the triangular structure of the empirical cumulative model of human capital development to
estimate how a scalar    varies in early childhood across subject areas. Our approach can accommodate both
exogenous and endogenous observed covariates.
  10
     Variants of this model assuming this classical individual fixed eﬀects structure are also the starting point for
analyses of coeﬃcient biases from estimates of education production function. Boardman and Murnane (1979) begin
with equation (2), assuming only the current serially uncorrelated residual is included. Todd and Wolpin (2003)
include current random shocks but not the full history in equation (2) and assume that shocks are serially correlated.
Hanushek (1979) does not include residuals in equation (2).
 11
    Later in this section, we discuss how one could estimate education production functions with both time varying
ability heterogeneity and endogenous inputs.

                                                                7
capture how all the inputs from period  aﬀect achievement in period  Similarly, the relationship
in the previous period can be expressed as
                                                                     X
                                                                      −2
                           −1      =   −1  −1 +   −1  +      (  −1  +  −1  ) +  −1           (4)
                                                                           =0

Notice the diﬀerence in coeﬃcient vectors between equations (3) and (4) as distinguished by super-
script T and T-1. We do not impose any restrictions on how the eﬀects of the full set of education
inputs on achievement levels varies over time. Further note that the system of equations generated
by equations (3) and (4) is triangular in structure. Reexpressing the relationship in equation (4) as
a function of unobserved heterogeneity yields:

                                             1                             X
                                                                            −1                     X
                                                                                                     −2
                                 =                ( −1 −  −1 −              −1    −           −1  )   (5)
                                            −1                          =0                      =0

Substituting equation (5) into equation (3) yields

                                                                 X        −1
                                                                              
                             =              +   −1 +     (  −    −1 ) +                        (6)
                                                       −1      =0
                                                                               −1
                           P −1                   
where  =  +              =0     ( −            −1 )
                                                   −1 
                                                                     with  −1
                                                                              −1 = 1

       Direct OLS estimation of equation (6) will not yield unbiased estimates since  −1 is correlated
with the error term  , which contains  −1 – a component of  −1  An instrumental variables
(IV) approach can be used to overcome this endogeneity problem and provide consistent estimates
                            
of the parameter            −1
                                     the ratio of the cumulative eﬀect of individual unobserved heterogeneity (i.e.
innate ability) between  and  − 1. Candidates for instruments in this setting could be suitably
lagged endogenous and predetermined variables such as test scores from period  − 2 or earlier, or
diﬀerences in lagged test scores.12 Eﬃcient GMM estimation will typically exploit a larger number
  12
       Similar to the dynamic panel data literature (Arellano and Bond (1991)), identification of the model via lagged
dependent variables as instruments requires restrictions on the serial correlation properties of the error term. The
moment conditions (using test scores in levels and ignoring other covariates) in this case are given by [( −
  
  −1  −1 )− ]   = 0 ∀ = 2   − 1 and  = 3  More generally, if the optimal vector of instruments for
                                     0
period T is denoted by   then [  ] = 0

                                                                          8
of instruments at each grade level as more information becomes available. This strategy provides
a complete picture of how both observed inputs and unobserved heterogeneity aﬀect achievement
levels at diﬀerent points in time. Finally, note if  contains endogenous inputs to the production
process, consistent estimates of these factors could be obtained using the same IV strategy, provided
one has access to enough additional instruments to identify both the impacts of these inputs and
unobserved ability.13
       Hausman tests comparing IV and OLS estimates of equation (6) can be used to test for the en-
dogeneity of educational inputs and unobserved heterogeneity. Researchers could also use estimates
                                                                    
of equation (6) to conduct specification tests on                   −1
                                                                          .   Tests on this parameter could be used to
examine the validity of assumptions on the impacts of unobserved ability heterogeneity that several
popular empirical methods adopt to estimate education production functions.14
       Even without data on the full history of inputs one can still account for the time-varying impacts
of unobserved ability heterogeneity. For example, with only recent data on inputs beginning with
period  ( =    ), we can use the same logic that generated equation (6) and express  as

                                                        X −1
                                                                         
                          =    +          −1 +        (  −    −1 ) + 
                                                                                            
                                                                                                                        (7)
                                           −1          = −
                                                                          −1
                         P −                                  P −1          
       
where  =  +            =0   (  −     −1
                                                       −1
                                                           ) +  =0 ( −   −1 
                                                                                         −1
                                                                                             )   with  −1
                                                                                                             −1 = 1. We can
                                              
                                                              P −              −1
re-express  in terms of  as             =  + =0 (  −                ) 
                                                                             −1

       Estimation of equation (7) could also be undertaken via instrumental variables estimation. Ad-
ditional diﬃculties may arise in choosing lagged dependent variables as instruments for  −1 since
 
 now implicitly contains inputs from earlier periods for which we have no data on. Lagged depen-
dent variables are valid instruments, provided that for some period  ( −      − 1) 
  13
       In this situation, the moment conditions are slightly more stringent. As in the previous footnote, if the optimal
                                                               0
vector of instruments for period T is denoted by   then [   ] = 0 where we define   to be the matrix
consisting of  and all the residuals from all of the the first stage equations.
  14
     Appendix 1 reviews the three most popular empirical approaches to estimate education production functions,
the contemporaneous model, linear growth model and value added model. These approaches are often taken due
to data limitations but also ease of implementation. Each approach either implicitly assumes that the impacts of
unobserved ability heterogeneity is fixed as a child ages or that the impact does not exist.

                                                                 9
             
  =              −1
             −1 
                           holds ∀  = 0. This is an assumption similar to those underlying various
value-added models but has 1) the advantage of allowing for time-varying impacts of unobserved
ability heterogeneity, and 2) is somewhat less restrictive in assuming that some past achievement
 is a suﬃcient statistic for  periods of lagged inputs as opposed to assuming the immediate
past achievement  −1 as a suﬃcient statistic for all  − 1 periods of lagged inputs. Intuitively,
this implies that the only way some past inputs could aﬀect current achievement in equation (7) is
through the lagged dependent variable.15 Of course if one has access to exogenous variables other
than lagged dependent variables, this assumption about how past inputs enter into the current
education production process is unnecessary. As we will discuss in detail in section 4, we consider
using information from both random assignment of kindergarten class type from the experiment
itself and lagged test scores in other subject areas as instrumental variables. Lastly, it is important
to note that it is possible to adopt the Arellano and Bond (1991) specification tests that detect
serial correlation in the error term in a dynamic panel data model, where the disturbances are un-
correlated under the Null and follow a moving average process under the alternative. Results from
these specification tests provide stronger evidence regarding instrument validity than traditional
overidentification tests that are known to have poor statistical power.16
       In our analysis, we consider both OLS and IV estimation of equation (7) and similar to Dewey
et al. (2000) we will conduct specification tests to determine if the unobserved ability input to the
                                                                                                     
production process could be treated as exogenous. Further, we will test whether                      −1
                                                                                                             = 1 and con-
sider the consequences of imposing this restriction on both the coeﬃcients and statistical inference
  15
       Similar to footnote 11, with multiple endogenous inputs and  −1 , each element in the set of instruments 
                                                                                                      
is required to be uncorrelated with all of the structural errors in the system of equations not just  
   16
      Yamagata (2008) presents evidence that the small sample properties of the Arellano and Bond (1991) second
order searial correltation specification test are quite good when using data sets composed of a large number of
individuals/students and a small number of fixed time periods; a situation frequently encountered by researchers
in the economics of education. Further, researchers should use these tests to investigate each moment condition
separately since the absence of second order serial correlation does not rule out the existence of higher order serial
correlation. After all, certain skills and abilities taught in ealy years may have diﬀerential eﬀects on tests in diﬀerent
subject areas at diﬀerent grades.



                                                           10
of the remaining inputs; we will investigate situations where the data supports this restriction as
well as when it refutes it. Finally, we will examine the consequences of imposing   = 0 ∀  the
case where unobserved ability heterogeneity is ignored.
       Last, a key advantage of estimating equation (7) in place of alternative equations that account
for student unobserved heterogeneity with panel data is that many semiparametric estimators can
be used. After all, as with non-linear panel data models, standard demeaning (or diﬀerencing) tech-
niques do not result in feasible approaches with conditional quantiles.17 By substituting equation
(5) into equation (3) reduces the dimensions of unobserved variables permitting us to use estimators
based on the 1 -norm penalty.
       In our context, with an endogenous regressor we can use the quantile regression instrumental
variables (QRIV) estimator introduced in Cherzonukov and Hansen (2005) to determine if there are
potentially diﬀerent impacts from unobserved ability in diﬀerent parts of the conditional achieve-
ment distribution within grades.18 This estimator assumes that achievement outcomes are linked to
the inputs to the production process by a structural quantile function that is strictly monotonically
increasing in a nonseparable scalar disturbance;19 where the disturbance is independent of the set of
instruments. In addition, a rank invariance condition is required that imposes the assumption that
a given unobserved factor would place each individual to be at the same percentile of the conditional
  17
       See Canay (2011) and the references within for more details on the challenges of estimating quantile regression
models with exogenous covariates and panel data
 18
    We selected this estimator over other alternatives for quantile models with continuous endogenous regressors
including those which use a control variable approach such as proposed in Imbens and Newey (2009), since the
independence assumption on the instruments is weaker and more likely to be satisfied. That is, the instruments
need only to be independent of just the structural error term and not both the structural and the reduced-form
disturbances as in Imbens and Newey (2009).
  19
     Explicitly imposing monotonicity of the disturbance term on the distribution function is a very strong assumption.
For example, the relationship may be non-monotonic if either the quantile regression model is misspecified or if the
sample size is small. Chernozhukov et al. (2010) propose rearranging the original estimated non-monotone curve into
a monotone rearranged curve by sampling from the estimated non-monotone model, and then taking the resulting
conditional quantile curves which by construction are monotone in the probability index. Our main finding of there
being heterogeneity in learning rates across the quantiles is robust to rearrangement.



                                                           11
outcome distribution across all potential (unobserved ability) states.20 Intuitively, using this esti-
                        
mator to recover        −1
                                provides us with an opportunity to examine whether there is heterogeneity
in the learning rates over the student population.


3        Data
We use data from Tennessee’s highly influential class size experiment, Project STAR to conduct
this analysis. This experiment was conducted for a cohort of students in 79 schools over a four-year
period from kindergarten through grade 3. Within each participating school, incoming kindergarten
students were randomly assigned to one of the three intervention groups: small class (13 to 17
students per teacher), regular class (22 to 25 students per teacher), and regular-with-aide class (22
to 25 students with a full-time teacher’s aide). Students who would newly enter the Project STAR
schools in later grades were conditionally randomly assigned to class type. In each year of the
experiment teachers were also randomly assigned to classrooms.
       This dataset has four features which make it ideal to use the empirical strategy described in the
preceding section to improve our understanding of the impacts of unobserved ability. First, strictly
speaking, one would need data from at least conception to estimate education production functions.
Randomization ensures that the requirement of exogeneity for the inputs holds in the initial period
of analysis. Omitting pre-kindergarten inputs should not aﬀect the coeﬃcient estimate on class
size or the other structural parameters in kindergarten.21 Second, random assignment overcomes
selection bias that arises not solely by decisions made by parents, but also by school principals.
School inputs are well known to be choice variables and with non-experimental data we would be
required to find credible sources of exogenous variation to identify their impacts. Further, since
teachers were re-randomized to classrooms each year, we can obtain unbiased estimates of the eﬀects
  20
       See Chernozhukov and Hansen (2005) for details and proofs concerning identification.   Estimation is per-
formed in Matlab using software developed by Chernozhukov and Hansen and available for download at
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/christian.hansen/research/ and inference is conducted using the robust standard
error formula in Chernozhukov and Hansen (2008).
  21
     The standard error or the precision of the estimates may be aﬀected in this case.


                                                         12
of both current and past teacher characteristics.22 Third, this data set reduces measurement error
from aggregation bias by precisely matching each student to the classroom and the teacher within
a school, so that we can focus on estimates of the time-varying impacts of individual unobserved
ability. Finally, Project STAR was conducted for a single cohort of children between Kindergarten
to grade 3, stages in the lifecycle child development specialists have suggested either the impact or
stock of cognitive ability is malleable.
       At the end of each school year the majority of the students completed multiple exams to measure
their performance in diﬀerent dimensions. In this paper, our outcome measures ( ) are total scaled
scores from the Reading, Listening Skills, Mathematics, Word Recognition sections of the Stanford
Achievement test.23 Scaled scores are calculated from the actual number of correct items, adjusting
for the diﬃculty level of the question to a single scoring system across all grades. Scaled scores are
usually not comparable across diﬀerent tests; within the same test they have the advantage that a 1
point change on one part of the scale is equivalent to a 1 point change on another part of the scale.
                                                                                   
This scaling oﬀers an important advantage in the identification of                 −1
                                                                                            the ratio of the eﬀects of
unobserved heterogeneity in between two periods. If the achievement measures in alternative years
are not measured in units from the same scale, for example SAT scores and GRE scores, estimates
       
of     −1
               will combine information on the ratio of the eﬀects of unobserved heterogeneity with the
ratio that places these scores on a similar metric.
       A challenge in using Project STAR data is that violations to the experimental protocol were
prevalent. By grade 3 over 50% of the subjects who participated in kindergarten left the STAR
sample and approximately 10% of the remaining subjects switched class type annually. Ding and
  22
       Rothstein (2010) presents evidence from North Carolina that teacher assignments to students are non-random.
While the classroom assignment process is the responsibility of school principals, Jacob and Lefgren (2007) present
evidence that parents often have strong preferences for specific teachers and are willing to advocate for them, which
further influences class assignment.
  23
     The Stanford Achievement Test is a norm-referenced multiple-choice test designed to measure how well a student
performs in relation to a particular group, such as a representative sample of students from across the nation. Norm-
referenced tests are commercially published and are based on skills specified in a variety of curriculum materials used
throughout the country. They are not specifically referenced to the Tennessee curriculum.



                                                          13
Lehrer (2010) present evidence of selective attrition and demonstrate that the conditional random
assignment of the newly entering students failed in the second year of the experiment.24 In order
to minimize issues related to the changing composition of the sample that may aﬀect the estimates
of unobserved ability heterogeneity, we only include students who participated in all four years of
Project STAR and completed exams in all four subject areas each year in this study. Last, an
important limitation of Project STAR data is that it contains no information on family inputs
beyond free lunch status.
       Summary statistics for this sample of 2203 students are provided in Table 1. Each column
presents summary information on this cohort of students with complete data at diﬀerent grade
levels. The percentage of this sample that receives small class treatment increases by almost one
third over this four year period. While there are few diﬀerences in the percentage of the sample on
free lunch across the grades, between grade levels approximately 15% of the students on free-lunch
are new recipients. Since our test scores are scaled scores, they increase across the grades. Not
surprisingly, there is a increase in the variance of both reading and word recognition tests scores
over this period. In contrast, there is reduced dispersion in math test scores. Teachers in higher
grades (on average) have more years of experience. In all of our empirical specifications the matrix
 consists of class size, school eﬀects, years of teaching experience, the education level and race
of the teacher, the gender, race and free lunch status of the student  in year .25
  24
       Among this group of students those on free lunch were significantly more likely to be assigned to regular (larger)
classes. It should be noted that in 1986 attendance of kindergarten was not mandatory in Tennessee. Thus, students
who entered school in grade one may diﬀer in unobservables to those who started in kindergarten.
 25
    These variables are identical to those used in the base specifications in Krueger (1999). For robustness, we
replicated the entire analysis with two alternative specifications that allowed teacher experience to have nonlinear
eﬀects. The first approach allowed diﬀerent impacts in each of the first two years and the second approach included
experience up to a cubic. All of the results discussed in the next section are robust to these alternative treatments of
teacher experience. Note that the results are also robust to using the full sample of kindergarten students where the
samples are reweighted by either series logit estimates of the probability of remaining in the sample or the probability
of writing the exam in the previous academic year.




                                                            14
4        Results
In this section, we present evidence that accounting for the time-varying impact of unobserved
                                                                                   
ability heterogeneity is important. Table 2 shows IV estimates of                  −1
                                                                                            the ratio of the eﬀects of
unobserved individual heterogeneity from equation (7) using inputs from kindergarten onwards with
two alternative instrument sets. As noted earlier, we first use initial class assignment by itself as
an instrument since due to random assignment it should be uncorrelated with unobservables to the
production process at every grade level.26 Second, we use two or more periods lagged achievement
scores from all of the other subject areas in the earlier grades.27 That is, if we are instrumenting
for second grade mathematics in equation (7), we can potentially use kindergarten and first grade
test scores in the three remaining subject areas. Andrabi et al. (2011) present evidence that by
employing test scores in other subject areas, biases from measurement error are reduced relative
to using suﬃciently lagged test scores in the same subject. To formally examine the validity of
the exclusion restriction with these lagged test scores as instruments, we will conduct a simple
modification of the Arellano and Bond (1991) 2 specification tests to see if lagged residuals in
other subjects areas are suﬃciently correlated with residuals in equation (7).28
       Employing only the initial random assignment to class type as an instrument provides imprecise
                                                      
and statistically insignificant estimates of          −1
                                                              in each subject and grade. The sign and magnitude
       
of     −1
               varies substantially with this instrument. Examination of the first stage regression presented
in the left panel of Table 3, demonstrates that random assignment to a small class is a very weak
instrument for every grade-subject area measure of  −1 .
  26
       Krueger (1999) verified whether individuals attended the class type to which they were assigned for 18 of the 79
STAR schools. 99.7% of the kindergarten students attended the class type to which they were assigned. However, if
kindergarten class type is being used to instrument later class size and kindergarten class size is omitted from the
estimating equation, class type may not be a valid instrument based on the cumulative model of achievement.
  27
     The second instrument set could expand in higher grades as more past test scores become available to serve as
additional instruments, which presents eﬃciency gains. That is, when estimating the grade 2 achievement equations,
test scores from kindergarten can be used as instruments, but both kindergarten and grade 1 test scores could be
instruments for the grade 3 achievement equation.
  28
     Results from these specification tests are presented and discussed later in this subsection.


                                                              15
       IV estimates of equation (7) with the same education inputs but using two or more periods of
lagged achievement scores in other subject areas as instruments, provide more precise evidence on
  
  −1
        .   As indicated in the right panel of table 2, the estimated time-varying impact of unobserved
ability heterogeneity appears fairly constant across grades in both mathematics and word recogni-
tion. In mathematics, the contribution of unobserved ability declines slightly (approximately 8%)
                                                                                       
between grades 2 and 3. However, in grade 3, the constraint that                       −1
                                                                                               = 1 is supported. Results
from t-tests of this constraint appear in the lower panel of Table 2. With IV set 2, this constraint is
firmly rejected in both grades 2 and 3 reading, grade 3 word recognition and grade 3 listening skills
tests. Whereas the estimated magnitude of the time-varying impact in reading changes little across
grade levels, the estimates suggest (on average) a declining role ( 1) for this factor. Overall, the
positive impact of unobserved heterogeneity declines by approximately 7.97% between grades one
to three in mathematics. In word recognition and listening skills the estimated magnitude of the
time-varying eﬀect respectively declines by 15.3% and 10.5% between grades 2 and 3.29 On average,
the estimated impact of unobserved ability heterogeneity on test scores in these three subject areas
declines (on average) in grade 3 from grade 2.
       IV estimates that use lagged test scores as instruments strongly reject the assumption that in
grades 2 and 3 unobserved heterogeneity has no eﬀect (i.e.   = 0 ) in all subject areas. It
is important to note that the popular methods used to estimate education production function
(reviewed in Appendix 1) assume that (if non-zero) the contemporaneous eﬀects of unobserved
heterogeneity are fixed. The results presented in table 2 indicate that this implicit assumption
would only be satisfied in the subject area of mathematics with Project STAR data.
       Intuitively, these empirical results confirm ideas from the education literature that students
require more cumulative knowledge (i.e. literacy) in reading, listening and word recognition, and
therefore less reliant on unobserved “ability”. While acquiring mathematics knowledge is also a
gradual process, the structure of test questions changes sharply from one grade to another. Mathe-
matics tests in grades 2 and 3 focus less on recognizing shapes and numbers and more on problem
solving, which requires the development of new mental skills to visualize problems (as opposed
  29
       Note the results are robust to using a single two-period lagged test score in the same subject area as an instrument.


                                                             16
to sounds or shapes). Taken together, the results in Table 2 suggest that one must account for
unobserved heterogeneity in a flexible manner, both across time and in diﬀerent subjects.
       In order to examine the importance of accounting for unobserved ability heterogeneity we next
calculated the partial R-squared for this variable. The partial R-squared ranged between 20 and
40% of the variation in test scores; the values were close to 40% in both grades 2 and 3 reading
and mathematics. In all subject areas and grades, the inclusion of unobserved ability heterogeneity
accounted for more than twice of the variation in test scores outcomes compared to what is explained
by the full set of current and past observed education inputs.
       Table 3 indicates that weak instruments are not a concern for our instrument set containing
lagged test scores from other subject areas. The first stage F-statistic of the hypothesis that the
coeﬃcients on the excluded instruments are all 0, range from 164.98 to 410.52, with a p-value
less than 0.01 in all cases. Additionally, the individual coeﬃcient on most of the instruments is
significant at the 1% level, indicating that there is a strong first stage relationship with IV set 2.
The sole negative and statistically significant eﬀect of an instrument on the endogenous regressor is
Kindergarten word recognition on the grade 2 listening score and this arises due to its correlation
with the reading scores in the instrument set. Excluding kindergarten reading as an instrument turns
the eﬀect of kindergarten word recognition on grade two listening to be positive and statistically
significant and does not result in a diﬀerent eﬀect of unobserved individual heterogeneity on grade
3 listening from that which is reported in Table 2.
       To further assess the validity of IV set 2 (and the corresponding moment restrictions), we
conducted tests of second-order serial correlation in the residuals from the full system of equations.
The test statistic, which is distributed (0 1) and the p-value of the hypothesis that residuals
are serially uncorrelated are reported by instrument endogenous regressor pair in Appendix Table
1. There is little evidence of higher order serial correlation in the residuals. There were only four
exceptions where there is some failure at the 10% level and these instruments were removed from the
specification.30 Given few diﬀerences in the raw correlation between the outcome variables where
  30
       Since all of the specifications we considered are over-identified, we did replicate the full analysis where we did
not drop these invalid instruments and found that the full set of results is robust to their inclusion.


                                                            17
failures of this test did or did not occur, we could not devise a rule of thumb that might predict when
these failures are most likely to happen. Overall, the tests in Appendix Table 1 generally reject that
there is second (or third) order serial correlation in the residuals, increasing our confidence that the
statistical properties of the instruments are met.
   The estimates presented in this subsection focus on the impacts of unobserved ability hetero-
geneity early in the life-cycle and it would be interesting to examine if and how they diﬀer at
higher grades. Unfortunately, while the publicly available data from Project STAR includes stu-
dent achievement information collected after the experiment concluded from grades 4 through 8,
there is no information on either contemporaneous student characteristics or family demographics
collected for these grades as well as there only being partial information on teachers collected in
grade 4. Thus, we do not have access to the same observed inputs in higher grades and this would
require introducing alternative observed inputs when estimating equation (7). This alternative
specification imposes slightly stronger assumptions on the production process and F-tests clearly
reject the additional restrictions for each subject area in grades 2 and 3. Yet if more data becomes
available and with alternative administrative databases that contain rich information on student
performance and school inputs this analysis would be possible providing us knowledge on how the
role of unobserved ability changes as one develops.


4.1    How should unobserved ability be treated?
To provide further guidance on how researchers should treat unobserved ability heterogeneity, we
consider several alternative strategies to estimate equation (7). Table 4 illustrates how the sign,
magnitude and statistical significance of the estimated coeﬃcient on four contemporaneous inputs
(class size, student race, gender and free lunch status) from equation (7) diﬀer based on how one
treats    in equation (3). The first column contains IV variable estimates where the lagged
                                             
achievement scores are used to identify      −1
                                                     and this is our preferred specification. Estimates
of equation (7) between columns 1 and 2 diﬀer in whether  −1 is treated as endogenous. Not
                                                                           
surprisingly, given the evidence in Nickell (1981), OLS estimates of       −1
                                                                                   presented in the second


                                                     18
column are downward biased in all grades and subject areas when school fixed eﬀects are included in
the specification. Further, Hausman tests between OLS and IV estimates of equation (7) presented
in Appendix Table 3 reject both the Null of exogeneity for the entire coeﬃcient vector in all subject
                       
areas as well as       −1
                               by itself in grades 2 and 3. Thus, to estimate education production functions
with Project STAR it is necessary to account for individual specific unobserved heterogeneity that
is correlated with the full set of inputs.
                                                                             
       In column 3 of Table 4, we impose the restriction that                −1
                                                                                     = 1 that unobserved ability
heterogeneity has the same eﬀect in all periods when estimating equation (7). As indicated in
the lower panel of Table 2, using estimates from column 1, we can reject this restriction for the
grade 3 math, grade 2 listening and word recognition exams. If we impose the coeﬃcient restriction
for these grade-subject pairs, we do not observe many diﬀerences in the other coeﬃcient estimates.
However, the residual variation increases due to misspecification resulting in larger standard errors.31
In the remaining subject-grade pairs where estimates from column 1 reject restricting unobserved
ability heterogeneity to have a constant eﬀect, we find that in general the estimated coeﬃcient on
contemporaneous class size is larger in magnitude relative to column 1. Further, when restricting
  
  −1
          = 1 the impact of class size becomes statistically significant on the grade 3 word recognition
exam and is roughly 40% larger in magnitude on the grade 3 reading exam. On the grade 2 reading
exam, the coeﬃcients on the student characteristics diﬀer substantially in magnitude from those
presented in columns 1 and 2. Last, as in the grade-subject pairs where the restriction cannot be
rejected, the standard errors on the impacts of the other education inputs reported in column 3
increase in size relative to column 1. Taken together, these results indicate that the constant eﬀect
assumption, even when valid, could aﬀect statistical inference of the education input estimates and
when clearly rejected could lead to very diﬀerent results.
       In column 4 of Table 4, we consider the consequences from omitting unobserved ability het-
erogeneity, that is,   = 0 ∀ . There are serious consequences from ignoring unobserved ability
  31
       In fact, the standard errors in column 3 are either approximately the same size or larger than the IV estimates
in column 1. This is worth noting since the standard errors for IV estimates are always larger than those obtained
by using OLS with the same specification; otherwise the denominator in the Hausman test would be undefined.



                                                           19
heterogeneity in the empirical analyses. Notice, that the coeﬃcients on many student characteris-
tics such as race or free lunch status increase sharply relative to those presented in column 1. This
increase suggests that diﬀerences in ability heterogeneity which significantly aﬀects achievement
account for a large portion of the performance gap across ethnic and income groups. In addition,
estimates of the impact of current class sizes often diﬀer in significant ways between columns 1 and
4 of table 4. For instance, ignoring the role of ability would now suggest that small classes boost
achievement on both grade 3 mathematics and grade 2 listening tests, but they are no longer eﬀec-
tive for grade 3 reading and word recognition. The large diﬀerences in the estimated magnitude of
these coeﬃcients between columns 1 and 4 could have large importance for public policy but should
                                             
not be a surprise since tests that           −1
                                                     = 0 using estimates from either columns 1 and 2 strongly
reject this restriction for any grade and subject level.
       In column 5, we employ the same instruments and estimator as column 1. These columns diﬀer
solely in the number of lagged observed inputs in the specification of equation (7).32 Estimates
       
of     −1
               as well as contemporaneous home and school inputs on achievement barely exhibited any
diﬀerences between columns 1 and 5 of Table 4 for each grade-subject pair, only the sign but not
the statistical significance of the impact of current free lunch status on reading in both grades 2
and 3 changed. This diﬀerence arises from the fact that kindergarten free lunch status has a large
eﬀect on grade 3 reading, so its exclusion in column 5 leads to omitted variable bias since free lunch
status is highly correlated across grades. If one has access to more lagged years of observed inputs,
it can reduce concerns related to omitted variable bias and increase the plausibility of using lagged
tests scores as instruments.
       Our results using Project STAR data suggest that in practice the data requirements to estimate
equation (7) may not be diﬃcult to satisfy. The results also reinforce that in the absence of clear
exogenous variation in education inputs to identify their impacts, the assumptions a researcher
imposes on the education production function may drive any conclusions. This suggests there
may be benefits to examining the robustness of any findings from studies estimating education
  32
       As noted in Section 2 when we include fewer years of lagged inputs as controls, the exclusion restriction assump-
tion may require greater defense in column 5.


                                                            20
production functions to alternative assumptions on how historical inputs and unobserved ability
influence achievement.


4.2        How much unobserved student-level heterogeneity is there in learn-
           ing?
                                                  
Figure 1 presents QRIV estimates of               −1
                                                          at each vingtile and its 95% confidence interval as well
as the standard instrumental variables point estimate for each subject in grades 2 and 3. Statistical
tests within grades reject the assumption of constant eﬀect across the conditional achievement
                                                                                                                    
distribution in all subject areas, providing clear evidence of substantial heterogeneity in                         −1
                                                                                                                          .
For instance, in mathematics the impact at higher deciles is statistically greater than 1, whereas
the impact in the lowest deciles is significantly below 1. The impact at the highest deciles is
approximately 54% larger in magnitude relative to the impact in the lowest deciles.33 The gap
between an individual at the highest quantile in both grades relative to an individual at the lowest
                                                                            
quantile is over 115%. Not only can we reject the equality of               −1
                                                                                    across quantiles, but at a handful
of quantiles in most of the panels contained in Figure 1, the linear IV estimate is not contained
within the 95% confidence interval of the QRIV estimate.
       Figure 1 suggests that even at early ages in school, large diﬀerences in the impacts of unob-
served ability heterogeneity across the population appear. In each grade, the gaps in the impacts
from unobserved ability across deciles are largest in mathematics and substantially smaller in word
recognition. Across grades, the gaps between the highest and lowest quantile are fairly constant
in mathematics but decrease by a large fraction in both reading, listening skills and word recogni-
  33
       With the exception of grade two word recognition individuals at higher deciles generally experience larger impacts
from unobserved ability heterogeneity. Note since the specifications include a large number of explanatory variables
caution should be taken with estimates at the extreme quantile (5/95) as the asymptotics rely on there being enough
observations on both sides of the quantile in order to apply a conditional central limit theorem. More details and
rules of thumbs are provided in Chernozhukov (2000). The full set of QRIV estimates is available from the authors by
request and Ding and Lehrer (2011) present evidence of the eﬀects of current class size from unconditional quantile
regression.



                                                              21
tion. While Table 1 reported that the impact of unobserved ability was on average not significantly
diﬀerent from one in mathematics, Figure 1 presented substantial heterogeneity in these estimated
impacts across the distribution. This heterogeneity further demonstrates that if rank invariance
holds then traditional diﬀerencing approaches of education production functions may not be ap-
propriate since for individuals at many quantiles unobserved ability does not evolve at a constant
rate. In addition, from a policy perspective estimating quantile impacts of inputs to an education
production function (in addition to mean impacts) is likely of importance since societal costs as-
sociated with poor human capital development exist primarily at the low end of the achievement
distribution, with the costs increasing substantially at the very low end.
       A potential concern with the earlier analyses relates to sample selection since we only included
students who wrote all 16 examinations. Following Becketti et al. (1988), we estimated a linear
regression relating kindergarten achievement to both kindergarten inputs and interactions of these
inputs with an indicator variable for whether the subject remains in our estimation sample. The
estimates are presented in Appendix Table 2 and indicate that individuals who remain in our sample
on average scored from 14.38 to 32.13 points higher on the respective kindergarten subject area tests
relative to those whose records are dropped from the analysis. Thus, we postulate that our IV and
QRIV estimates of the impacts of time-varying unobserved ability heterogeneity may be presenting
a lower bound on their eﬀects since we only include individuals who scored higher on their tests
and likely have higher ability.34 Further, reinforcing this conjecture is that since kindergarten was
voluntary during this time, it appears plausible that parents who elected to start sending their
children for formal schooling at a higher grade level would on average have children with a lower
ability measure.


4.3        Comparing education production function specifications
Estimating equation (7) using lagged dependent variables as instruments not only allows researchers
to recover the time-varying impacts of unobserved ability but also is more flexible in the restrictions
  34
       Without imposing additional assumptions on our empirical models, we are unable to state the direction of bias
from sample selection unequivocally, particularly if there is selection to our sample based on unobserved factors.

                                                          22
that the method imposes on how the impact of past observed education inputs decay compared
to the popular approaches detailed in Appendix 1. Similar to Todd and Wolpin (2007), when
we compare models of education production based on the amount of historical inputs included,
we do not find evidence to support restrictive models, which assume test scores depend only on
contemporaneous inputs. In this subsection, we reinforce the findings from earlier research that
lagged observed inputs matter in the production of current achievement and that the impact of
diﬀerent inputs decay at diﬀerent rates, but it is important to repeat that the data also suggests
that a more general treatment of how unobserved heterogeneity aﬀects achievement is required.
       Since the impact of unobserved ability heterogeneity varies between grades, this implies that
researchers should be cautious in pooling data on student achievement across grade levels when esti-
mating education production functions. If unobserved ability heterogeneity has diﬀerential impacts
at diﬀerent ages than restricting this parameter to have a common impact may introduce biases.
For example, the coeﬃcients on contemporaneous inputs reported in table 4 varied sharply between
grades 2 and 3, indicating that specifications which restrict contemporaneous inputs to have the
same impact on contemporaneous achievements at diﬀerent grade levels are highly restrictive.35
       In order to see which of the empirical specification is most appropriate for equation (1), we
reestimate equation (7) by limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) allowing us to con-
duct model specification tests between this model and alternative specifications of the education
production function.36 We examine the less flexible methods common in the economics of educa-
tion literature that are reviewed in Appendix 1.37 Appendix Table 3 presents likelihood ratio test
  35
       Specification tests strongly reject empirical models that restrict the impacts of contemporaneous inputs to have
the same eﬀect on both grades 2 and 3 achievement levels.
  36
     LIML places additional distributional assumptions on the residual of equation (7), but it is asymptotically
equivalent to the GMM strategy assuming homoskedastic and serially uncorrelated errors. While LIML is much less
susceptible to weak instruments problem than 2SLS, it could result in drastically diﬀerent estimates if the residuals
are not normally distributed. As these distributional assumptions are unattractive, we only consider this method for
                                                                                                           
the purpose of conducting these specific model specification tests. Note that the LIML estimates of        −1   did not
diﬀer substantially (i.e. less than an order of 3%) from the GMM estimates presented in Tables 2 and 4, and are
available upon request.
  37
     The empirical methods discussed in Appendix 1 include current education inputs as explanatory variables and


                                                           23
statistics and their p-values from tests that compares the alternative nested specifications of the
education production function. All of the p-values are well below 0.05, indicating that the restric-
tions of each approach reviewed in Appendix 1 are soundly rejected. Reinforcing this finding, it is
worth pointing out that these diﬀerences in the specification of the education production function
are highly relevant in practice as placing restrictions on the impacts of observed and unobserved
inputs to the education production function leads to substantially diﬀerent estimates and policy
recommendations. In particular, estimates of the contemporaneous model (equation (8)) suggest
that in all subject areas there is a large statistically significant benefit from reduced class sizes
whereas the estimated impact of current class size on achievement from equation (10)) is opposite
in sign to that presented in column 1 of Table 4 for all grade 2 subjects and for math in grade 3.38
are known as i) the contemporaneous model, which assumes full and complete decay of the eﬀects of all past observed
and unobserved inputs   = 0 ∀ ∈ [0 − 1] and   = 0 ii) the linear growth model uses gains in test scores as
a dependent variable and assumes that the eﬀects of all past observed and unobserved inputs do not decay,   = 
∀   =   −1  and iii) value added model additionally includes  −1 as an explanatory variable, assuming
that  −1 is a suﬃcient statistic for all past observed and unobserved inputs. For comparison, we use identical
terminology to Todd and Wolpin (2007) to describe these empirical models. Within the economics of education
literature other names do exist. It should also be noted that all of the empirical methods described in Appendix 1
can be nested within equations (7) assuming  is exogenous, which presents an opportunity to conduct a variety of
simple specification tests. Using Wald tests that compare the more general model with one that is restricted and
nested within the first model, we found that in all grades and subject areas, the restrictions that underlie each of the
three empirical approaches described in Appendix 1 are rejected. Further, the results from grade 3 suggest that while
 −1 is not a good suﬃcient statistic,  −2 indeed shows promise. Last, we also conducted model specification
tests using the Akaike information criterion (AIC) methods and reached the same conclusions as those presented in
Appendix Table 3.
 38
    Estimates from the value added, linear growth and contemporaneous models of education production are avail-
able in Appendix table 5. Many of these models underlie specifications used in other studies that evaluate Project
STAR data and reinforce our finding that diﬀerent assumptions on the production process can lead to wildly dif-
ferent conclusions. In particular, estimates from the contemporaneous model suggest that smaller class size would
boost achievement in all subject areas and grades. This model imposes the assumptions that both past inputs and
unobserved ability do not influence current achievement, both of which are rejected by the data. The larger eﬀect
of class size results, in part, since Project STAR students were not re-randomized to diﬀerent classrooms each year
so the class size variables are highly correlated across grades and many of the estimates on past class size variables


                                                          24
    This set of results reinforces that even when studies in the economics of education literature use
an identical data source, irrespective of whether the data is from an experimental or observational
study, that the selection of which inputs to condition on, can drastically influence the conclusions
that are drawn. Thus, it is important to examine the sensitivity of any conclusions to the specifica-
tion of the education production function, since alternative specifications not just impose diﬀerent
assumptions on the impacts of lagged observed inputs but also on the role of unobserved ability
heterogeneity.


5     Conclusion
In the economics of education literature researchers often implicitly assume that both the impact and
stock of unobserved ability are constant over time when estimating education production functions.
This appears inconsistent with a rapidly growing body of scientific evidence which indicates that
the impacts and development of these unobserved factors vary substantially over the lifecycle. In
this paper, we propose specifications of an education production functions that allow for both time-
varying unobserved ability within individuals and a more general decaying pattern of past inputs in
an eﬀort to improve our understanding of the role of time-varying unobserved ability heterogeneity
in the education production process. We present evidence that accounting for both observed inputs
and unobserved heterogeneity in a more flexible manner is both appealing and important empirically.
Our results suggest that unobserved ability is correlated with observed inputs to the production
process. The impacts of unobserved ability on achievement between grade 1 to grade 3 diminish
by approximately 9% and 15% in mathematics and word recognition (on average) respectively.
Since the eﬀects of unobserved ability on cognitive achievement vary between 3 grade levels even in
the same subject area, traditional diﬀerencing approaches of education production functions such
as the within individual transformation may be invalid. Further, our results indicate that when
estimating education production functions with data from multiple grade levels, researchers should
be cautious about pooling data, which places unsupported restrictions on how contemporaneous
when   = 0 presented in Table 4 are statistically diﬀerent from 0.


                                                         25
inputs aﬀect achievement measures. Finally, the impacts of unobserved ability vary substantially
over the population particularly in mathematics.
       Our analysis further supports earlier research that demonstrates how the diﬀerent empirical ap-
proaches that are used to estimate education production functions can present substantially diﬀerent
pictures of the eﬀectiveness of inputs such as smaller classes. Specifically, our results demonstrate
that not only does the selection of observed inputs to condition on but also how unobserved abil-
ity heterogeneity is treated can influence the conclusions drawn even with experimental data from
Project STAR. Thus, readers must consider the sensitivity of any findings to the credibility of the
assumptions that the alternative approaches implicitly impose on the education production process
when interpreting the evidence.39 Since estimates of equation (7) include lagged educational inputs,
one could also notice that the way in which home and school inputs decay varies in an unsystematic
manner. This is suggestive that the restrictions imposed on both observed and unobserved inputs
by traditional strategies to estimate education production functions could be quite restrictive and
may further bias parameter estimates of observed educational inputs. The result that the impact
of unobserved ability diﬀers across subjects also has important implications for accountability and
policies that both reward and make retention decisions for teachers based on value added. After
all, if one were to ignore student unobserved ability heterogeneity in the analyses and if this factor
has diﬀerential time-varying eﬀects across subject areas as with the Project STAR data, then the
resulting ordering of teacher eﬀects may not reflect teaching quality but rather captures the nature
of the subjects taught.
       Although our empirical results may not generalize universally, they suggest that researchers
should consider adopting more general estimation strategies that place fewer restrictions on the
underlying model of education production, particularly given the increasing number of rich longi-
tudinal education datasets being made available around the world. In particular, future research
  39
       Similarly, estimates of causal impacts from Project STAR diﬀer based on the assumptions researchers use to
handle violations to the experimental protocol (e.g. Krueger (1999) compared with Ding and Lehrer (2010)). These
studies also diﬀer in the causal estimate reported and diﬀerent results should not be a surprise if the class size
treatment has diﬀerent eﬀects for diﬀerent students.



                                                        26
is needed with datasets that contain more years of both student achievement measures as well as
inputs to the production process to understand how the eﬀect of unobserved ability develops from
early childhood to adolescence. Since the empirical strategy introduced in the paper exploits the
triangular structure of the underlying model to identify the impact of time-varying unobserved
ability heterogeneity, it may extend beyond education production functions and have implications
for empirical researchers that seek to explain cumulative gaps between groups or countries such as
growth or wealth as well as those working with other cumulative models of individual human capital
development such as health production.
   Our empirical strategy continues to impose two important restrictions on the production process.
First, education inputs are additively separable from unobserved ability heterogeneity. Second,
unobserved ability is assumed to be captured by a unidimensional scalar term. Extending the
methodology to allow unobserved ability to be multidimensional is clearly important since there
is growing evidence from multiple disciplines that students not only demonstrate that they have a
wide variety of cognitive and non-cognitive skills, but also the structure of questions on tests are
sensitive to diﬀerent kind of skills. However, Sarafidis and Robertson (2009) show that the GMM
procedure considered in this paper may not provide consistent estimates of the time-varying impact
of unobserved ability heterogeneity when the error has a multi-factor additively separable structure.
   Thus, in future research we hope to extend the methodology described in this paper to develop
an estimable panel data model in which the individual eﬀect has multiple components and each
of these components is time-varying. Developing estimable education production functions from
the underlying economic model that adopts recent econometric methods which assume that the
unobservable individual eﬀects has a factor structure (i.e. Bai (2009), Harding and Lamarche
(2011) and Ahn et al. (2007)) could potentially lead to new policy relevant insights. For instance
it may allow us to identify the time-varying impacts of diﬀerent dimensions of unobserved abilities
(i.e. cognitive vs. non cognitive) as well as observed inputs on measures of academic performance
to shed light on which targeted education interventions could yield the largest returns.




                                                 27
References
 [1] Ahn, S. C., Y. H. Lee and P. Schmidt (2007), “Panel Data Models with Multiple Time-Varying
     Individual Eﬀects,” Journal of Productivity Analysis 27(1), 1-12.

 [2] Andrabi, T., J. Das, A. I. Khwaja, and T. Zajonc (2011) “Do Value-Added Estimates Add
     Value? Accounting for Learning Dynamics,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
     3(3), 29—54

 [3] Arellano, M., and S. Bond (1991), “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
     Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies 58(2),
     277-297.

 [4] Bai, J., (2009), “Panel Data Models with Interactive Fixed Eﬀects,” Econometrica 77(4), 1229-
     1279.

 [5] Becketti, S., W. Gould, L. Lillard and F. Welch (1988), “The Panel Study of Income Dynamics
     after Fourteen Years: An Evaluation,” Journal of Labor Economics 6(4), 472-492.

 [6] Ben-Porath, Y. (1967), “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings,”
     Journal of Political Economy 75(4), 352-365.

 [7] Boardman, A. E. and R. J. Murnane (1979), “Using Panel Data to Improve Estimates of the
     Determinants of Educational Attainment,” Sociology of Education 52(1), 113-121.

 [8] Canay, I. A. (2011), “A Simple Approach to Quantile Regression for Panel Data,” The Econo-
     metrics Journal 14 (3), 368-386.

 [9] Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1992), “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education
     and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy
     100(1), 1-40.

[10] Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2003). Human Capital Policy. In J. J. Heckman, A. B. Krueger,
     and B. M. Friedman (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?,
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[11] Chernozhukov, V., I. Fernandez-Val and A. Galichon (2010), “Quantile and Probability Curves
     Without Crossing,” Econometrica 78(3), 1093—1125.

[12] Chernozhukov, V. and C. Hansen (2008), “Instrumental Variable Quantile Regression: A Ro-
     bust Inference Approach,” Journal of Econometrics 142(1), 379-398.


                                               28
[13] Chernozhukov, V., and C. Hansen (2005), “An IV Model of Quantile Treatment Eﬀects,”
     Econometrica, 73(1), 245-261.

[14] Chernozhukov, V. (2000) Conditional Extremes and Near-Extremes: Estimation, Inference,
     and Economic Applications," Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University.

[15] Coleman, J. S., E. Q. Campbell, C. J. Hobson, J. McPartland, A. M. Mood, F. D. Weinfeld
     and R. L. York, Equality of Educational Opportunity, (Washington D.C.: U.S. Government
     Printing Oﬃce, 1966).

[16] Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008), “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology
     of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Journal of Human Resources 43(4), 738-782.

[17] Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010), “Estimating the Technology of Cog-
     nitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Econometrica 78(3), 883—931.

[18] Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner and D. Masterov (2006), “Interpreting the Evidence on
     Life Cycle Skill Formation,” in E. Hanushek and F. Welch, (eds.), Handbook of the Economics
     of Education, North Holland: Amsterdam

[19] Dewey J., T. A. Husted and L. W. Kenny (2000), “The ineﬀectiveness of school inputs: a
     product of misspecification?,” Economics of Education Review 19(1), 27—45.

[20] Ding, W., and S. F. Lehrer. (2011). Experimental Estimates of the Impacts of Class Size on
     Test Scores: Robustness and Heterogeneity, Education Economics 19(3), 229-252.

[21] Ding, W. and S. F. Lehrer (2010), “Estimating Treatment Eﬀects from Contaminated Multi-
     Period Education Experiments: The Dynamic Impacts of Class Size Reductions,” Review of
     Economics and Statistics 92(1), 31-42.

[22] Figlio, D. N., (1999), “Functional Form and the Estimated Eﬀects of School Resources,” Eco-
     nomics of Education Review 18(2), 241-252.

[23] Griliches, Z., (1977), “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,”
     Econometrica 45(1), 1-22.

[24] Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman and K. J. Mullen (2004), “The Eﬀect of Schooling and Ability
     on Achievement Test Scores,” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2), 39-98.

[25] Hanushek, E. A., S. G. Rivkin and L. L. Taylor (1999), “Aggregation and the Estimated Eﬀects
     of School Resources,” Review of Economics and Statistics 78(4), 611-627.


                                               29
[26] Hanushek, E. A., (1979), “Conceptual and Empirical Issues in the Estimation of Educational
     Production Functions,” Journal of Human Resources 14(3), 351-388.

[27] Harding, M. and C. Lamarche (2011), “Least Squares Estimation of a Panel Data Model with
     Multifactor Error Structure and Endogenous Covariates,” Economics Letters 111(1), 197-199.

[28] Heckman, J. J. and E. Vytlacil (2001), “Identifying The Role of Cognitive Ability in Explaining
     The Level of and Change in The Return to Schooling,” Review of Economics and Statistics
     83(1), 1-12.

[29] Heckman, J. J., (2000), “Policies to Foster Human Capital,” Research in Economics 54(1),
     3-56.

[30] Imbens, G. W. and W. Newey (2009), “Identification and Estimation of Triangular Simultane-
     ous Equations Models Without Additivity,” Econometrica 77(5), 1481-1512.

[31] Jacob, B. and L. Lefgren (2007), “What Do Parents Value in Education? An Empirical Exami-
     nation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4),
     1603-1637.

[32] Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997), “The Career Decisions of Young Men,” Journal of
     Political Economy 105(3), 473-522.

[33] Krueger, A. B., (1999) “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 114(2), 497-532.

[34] Leibowitz, A., (1974), “Home Investments in Children,” Journal of Political Economy 82(2),
     S111—131.

[35] Murnane, R., J. Willett, and F. Levy (1995), “The Growing Importance of Cognitive Skills in
     Wage Determination,” Review of Economics and Statistics 77(2), 251-266.

[36] Nickell, S. (1981), “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Eﬀects,” Econometrica 49(6), 1417-
     1426.

[37] Rothstein, J., (2010), “Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and
     Student Achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1), 175-214.

[38] Sarafidis, V. and D. Robertson (2009), ‘On the Impact of Error Cross-Sectional Dependence
     in Short Dynamic Panel Estimation,” Econometrics Journal 12(1), 62—81.



                                                30
[39] Shonkoﬀ, J. and D. Phillips eds. (2000), “From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of
     Early Childhood Development,” Washington DC: National Academy Press.

[40] Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin, (2007), “The Production of Cognitive Achievement in Children:
     Home, School and Racial Test Score Gaps,” Journal of Human Capital 1(1) 91-136.

[41] Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin (2003), “On the Specification and Estimation of the Production
     Function for Cognitive Achievement,” Economic Journal 113(1), 3-33.

[42] Yamagata, T. (2008), A Joint Serial Correlation Test for Linear Panel Data Models, Journal
     of Econometrics 146(1), 134-145.

[43] Zimmer, R. and E. Toma (1999), “Peer Eﬀects in Private and Public Schools Across Countries,”
     Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19(1), 75-92.




                                               31
                     Appendix I: Traditional Methods to Estimate
                          Education Production Functions
       The three most popular empirical approaches in the economics of education literature to estimate
education production functions impose assumptions on equation (2) regarding how the impacts of
observed historical inputs into the production function decay.40 These approaches additionally
assume that (if non-zero) the contemporaneous eﬀects of unobserved heterogeneity are fixed as
students age.
       The first approach is often referred to as the contemporaneous education production function as
it only includes current measures of education inputs as explanatory variables. Researchers estimate

                                                 =  0  +                                               (8)

                          P −1
where  =    +       =0      +   Unbiased parameter estimates from equation (8) require
that past inputs to the production process and unobserved ability decay immediately.41
       The second approach requires that the researcher has access to two periods of achievement
measures and is commonly called a value added model. This model reexpresses the achievement
function as:
                                         =    +  −1 +                                          (9)
                                             P −1
where  =  + (  −   −1 ) +       =0   (  −   −1 )  The inclusion of  −1 in the regres-
sion equation (9) is to pick up a variety of confounding influences including the prior, and often
unrecorded as well as unobserved history of parental, school and community eﬀects. Consistent
and unbiased parameter estimates from equation (9) require that the eﬀect of both observed and
  40
       We provide a brief review below and guide the reader to Todd and Wolpin (2003) for a more comprehensive
discussion.
  41
     This requires   = 0 ∨ ∈ [0 − 1] and   = 0 Parameter estimates of current inputs would be biased if past
inputs or unobserved ability both directly aﬀect current achievement and are correlated with current inputs.



                                                          32
unobserved factors in the production process to decay over time at the same rate as no past inputs
and shocks are left unrepresented by −1 .42
       The third approach is often referred to as either the linear growth or the gains model since
the estimating equation is expressed as a function of the growth rate in test scores (∆ =
 −  −1 ),43 as
                                                ∆ =  0  + e
                                                                                                                  (10)
                                          P −1                            P −1
where e
       =  +(  − −1 ) +         =0   (  −  −1 ) +     =0   ( −  ) . Unbiased and consistent
parameter estimates from equation (10) require that past inputs to the production process have
constant impacts on achievement at diﬀerent points in time.44
  42
       This requires   =     −  and that any serial correlation is constant over time. Thus, the empirical
strategy assumes  −1 to be a suﬃcient statistic of all the previous influences, which means that  −1 is a state
variable following a Markov process.
  43
     This was introduced in Hanushek (1979), who noted that if one were to assume that unobserved heterogeneity
had a constant eﬀect then by diﬀerencing equation (4) from equation (3) removes  from the regression equation.
  44
     This assumption is fairly restrictive as it implies that having a good second grade math teacher has the same
impact on an achievement measure when an individual was in college as when she was a second grader. Note, a variant
of the linear growth model allows unobserved heterogeneity to aﬀect the growth rate of achievement. Researchers
estimate
                                              ∆ =  0  +  0  + e
                                                                         e
                                                                                                                   (11)

and several of these researchers argue that this would result in less bias for the empirical model than estimating
equation (9). For example, Zimmer and Toma (1999 p.80) state “by estimating the value added model the biases are
reduced below that which would result from estimating levels of achievement because only the growth eﬀect of innate
ability is omitted.” Such claims are unfounded since the focus is misplaced on the empirical model rather than the
underlying model of cumulative achievement. Empirically, without data on innate abilities, one can not distinguish
between estimates of equation (10) or equation (11).




                                                            33
Table 1: Summary Statistics on Sample of Project STAR Participants who Participated in Each Year of the Experiment and Have Completed all
Reading, Listening Skills, Mathematics and Word Recognition Exams.

                                 Kindergarten                 Grade One                  Grade Two                     Grade 3
Class Size                         19.9079                     20.3323                     20.2015                     20.3931
                                   (3.8279)                    (4.0179)                   (4.1943)                     (4.4458)
Receiving Small Class               0.3137                      0.3137                      0.3137                      0.3137
Treatment                          (0.4641)                    (0.4641)                    (.4641)                     (0.4641)
Math Test Score                   500.0545                    545.9033                    594.5833                    628.0118
                                  (45.1513)                   (40.4594)                  (43.5603)                    (40.0972)
Reading Test Score                445.7054                    541.8566                    599.4453                    625.6645
                                   (31.506)                   (52.4381)                  (43.3322)                    (37.0832)
Word Recognition Test             443.7236                    532.8634                    600.0785                    622.8652
Score                             (37.3205)                   (46.8292)                  (46.9727)                    (43.8917)
Listening Test Score              546.3895                     577.621                    604.1943                    629.5511
                                   (31.607)                   (33.0834)                  (34.2712)                    (31.0411)
Free Lunch Status                   0.3565                      0.3681                      0.3522                      0.3499
                                   (0.4791)                    (.04824)                   (0.4778)                      (0.477)
Student is White of                 0.7553                      0.7553                      0.7553                      0.7553
Asian                               (0.43)                       (0.43)                     (0.43)                       (0.43)
Student is Female                   0.5207                      0.5207                      0.5207                      0.5207
                                   (0.4997)                    (0.4997)                   (0.4997)                     (0.4997)
Teacher Race is                     0.1256                      0.1389                      0.1744                      0.1626
Non-White                          (0.3315)                    (0.3459)                   (0.3796)                      (0.369)
Teacher has a Masters               0.3802                      0.3432                      0.3621                      0.4452
Degree                             (0.4855)                    (0.4749)                   (0.4807)                     (0.4971)
Teacher Years of                    9.4701                     11.6936                     13.0882                     13.5635
Experience                         (5.5013)                    (8.6052)                   (8.5536)                     (8.4419)
New Teacher                         0.0689                      0.0908                       0.074                      0.0548
                                   (0.2534)                    (0.2874)                   (0.2619)                     (0.2276)

Note: Each cell reports the mean and standard deviations in parentheses. There are 2203 students who participated and completed all four exams in each
year of the experiment.




                                                                          34
Table 2: Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Ratio of the Effects of Unobserved Individual Heterogeneity on Achievement at Various Grade
Levels by Subject

                                          IV SET 1                                                             IV SET 2
                                 Random Class Type Assignment                                      Two or More Period of Lagged Test
                                                                                                     Scores in Other Subject Areas
   Subject       Mathematics      Reading            Word             Listening         Mathematics Reading          Word           Listening
   Area                                              Recognition      Skills                                         Recognition    Skills
   Grade 1            0.829             1.275            -1.211             0.615           N/A           N/A            N/A             N/A
                    (2.334)           (7.431)           (10.97)             0.542
   Grade 2            0.946             0.058            -0.323            -1.122          1.053***         0.778***        1.013***           0.993
                    (3.371)           (1.575)           (2.334)           (2.441)           (0.040)          (0.031)         (0.041)          (0.044)
   Grade 3           -0.551           -32.640            -1.462             0.153          0.961***         0.847***        0.858***         0.889***
                    (3.409)            (2756)           (3.578)            0.805)           (0.029)          (0.023)         (0.028)          (0.031)

                                                Results from two sided Wald tests of the Null that βiT /βiT-1 =1

   Grade 1             0.01            0.00              0.04              0.50              N/A               N/A             N/A              N/A
                    (0.942)           (0.970)           (0.840)          (0.048)
   Grade 2            0.00             0.36              0.32              0.76              1.75              52.94***        0.11          0.02
                     (0.987)          (0.550)           (0.571)           (0.385)         (0.185)           (0.000)          (0.746)       (0.875)
   Grade 3             0.21            0.00              0.47              1.11              1.80              44.10***       26.63*** 12.89***
                     (0.649)          (0.990)           (0.491)           (0.293)          (0.180)          (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)

Note: In the top panel, specifications include school effects, the full history of student demographic (race, gender), free lunch status, class size, and
teacher characteristics (race, gender, years of experience and highest education level completed). Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,*
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively. In the bottom panel, the chi squared-statistic and in parentheses the
associated p-value from a two sided test that the parameter equals one are presented. In total, without missing data there are 2138, 2047 and 1973
individuals are used for regressions with outcomes measured in grades 1, 2 and 3 respectively.




                                                                               35
 Table 3: Impact of the Instruments in the First Stage Regressions
Endogenous Regressor      Grade 1            Grade 1            Grade 1 Word     Grade 1      Grade 2                    Grade 2           Grade 2 Word       Grade 2
                          Mathematics        Reading Test       Recognition Test Listening    Mathematics                Reading Test      Recognition        Listening Skills
                          Test Score         Score              Score            Skills Score Test Score                 Score             Test Score         Score
                                                                    IV Set 1 Random Assignment
Randomly Assigned to          -1.397             -3.748             -3.679             3.835              -2.531            0.0753             4.365               -5.053
Small Class Treatment        (5.279)            (7.905)            (7.205)            (4.747)            (6.243)            (6.252)           (7.446)             (5.315)
First Stage F statistic         0.18             0.864               2.78           0.040                  0.15           0.090                 0.00                0.56
                              [0.676]           [0.353]            [0.095]        [0.025]                [0.683]         [0.821]              [0.610]            [0.375]
                                                                     IV Set 2 Lagged Test Scores
Kindergarten               Not included in     Not included       0.139***           0.228***         Not included in        0.037             0.026           0.078***
Mathematics Score           specification    due to Appendix
                                                                  (0.0279)            (0.018)          specification        (0.023)           (0.022)          (0.020)
                                                table 2 tests
Kindergarten Reading        0.325***         Not included in     0.556***            0.247***         0.134**            Not included in    0.077**               0.227**
Score                       (0.0629)           specification     (0.038)              (0.047)           (0.067)           specification      (0.030)                (0.051)
Kindergarten Word            0.0686            0.651***          Not included in      -0.0202         -0.002             0.165**            Not included in         -0.093**
Recognition Score           (0.0475)           (0.0294)           specification
                                                                                     (0.0398)            (0.053)            (0.025)          specification          (0.041)
Kindergarten Listening      0.338***           0.177***            Not included     Not included in   0.225***           0.093**            0.101**             Not included in
Skills Score                (0.0258)           (0.0339)          due to Appendix     specification      (0.032)            (0.029)          (0.032)              specification
                                                                    table 2 tests
Grade 1 Mathematics        Not included in    Not included in     Not included in   Not included in   Not included in    0.186**            0.087**            0.222***
Score                       specification      specification       specification     specification     specification          (0.027)       (0.030)             (0.025)
Grade 1 Reading            Not included in    Not included in    Not included in    Not included in   0.279***           Not included in   0.504***            0.135***
Score                       specification      specification      specification      specification     (0.034)            specification     (0.023)             (0.017)
Grade 1 Word               Not included in    Not included in    Not included in    Not included in     Not included     0.356***           Not included in      Not included
Recognition Score           specification      specification      specification      specification    due to Appendix      (0.019)           specification     due to Appendix
                                                                                                         table 2 tests                                            table 2 tests
Grade 1 Listening          Not included in    Not included in    Not included in    Not included in   0.216***           0.116***              0.053           Not included in
Skills Score                specification      specification      specification      specification     (0.034)             (0.036)            (0.035)            specification
First Stage F statistic         221.37             410.52              293.22            175.43            204.03              259.58           262.42               164.98
                                [0.000]            [0.000]             [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]             [0.000]           [0.000]             [0.000]
 Note: Specifications include school effects, current and the full history of student demographic (race, gender), free lunch status, class size, and
 teacher characteristics (race, gender, years of experience and highest education level completed). Standard errors clustered at the classroom level in ()
 parentheses, Prob >F in [] parentheses. ***,**,* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively. Note the grade 1 and grade
 2 endogenous regressors listed in the first row are used to identify the time varying impact of unobserved heterogeneity in the specific subject areas
 respectively in grades 2 and 3 in table 2. Appendix table 2 test results refer to tests of serial correlation in the residuals of the education production
 function. In total, without missing data there are 2138, 2047 and 1973 individuals are used for regressions with outcomes measured in grades 1, 2
 and 3 respectively.

                                                                                    36
Method                      IV Estimation       OLS Estimation      Constrained OLS Estimation   Constrained OLS Estimation   IV Estimation
Years of Lagged Inputs      From Kindergarten   From Kindergarten   From Kindergarten            From Kindergarten            From Grade One Inputs
Included in Specification
                                                                 Grade 2 Mathematics
Unobserved Ability Ratio         1.053***           0.701***              βiT=1 is assumed             βiT=0 is assumed              1.054***
                                 (0.0402)           (0.0242)                                                                         (0.0404)
Current Class Size                 -0.174             -0.349                    -0.200                       -0.698                    -0.275
                                  (0.400)            (0.502)                   (0.535)                      (0.570)                   (0.392)
Female Student                      2.137              1.325                    2.014                        -0.290                    2.016
                                  (1.421)            (1.410)                   (1.517)                      (1.772)                   (1.419)
Student is White/Asian            -5.818*              1.002                    -4.786                    14.57***                     -4.834
                                  (3.434)            (2.859)                   (3.138)                      (3.576)                   (3.432)
Current Free Lunch Status          -2.581            -3.790*                    -2.764                     -6.196**                    -2.283
                                  (2.508)            (2.123)                   (2.288)                      (2.725)                   (2.372)
Grade 1 Class Size               1.078**               0.720                   1.023*                       0.00723                   0.852**
                                  (0.455)            (0.578)                   (0.610)                      (0.661)                   (0.431)
Kindergarten Class Size            -0.426             -0.375                    -0.418                       -0.273               Not included in
                                  (0.313)            (0.320)                   (0.360)                      (0.366)                specification
Grade 1 Free Lunch                 -1.891           -5.692**                    -2.466                    -13.26***                    -1.296
                                  (2.623)            (2.445)                   (2.467)                      (3.401)                   (2.399)
Kindergarten Free Lunch             0.533             -0.175                    0.426                        -1.582               Not included in
                                  (2.410)            (2.197)                   (2.272)                      (3.074)                specification
                                                                 Grade 3 Mathematics
Unobserved Ability Ratio        0.961***              0.661***             βiT=1 is assumed            βiT=0 is assumed              0.966***
                                (0.0294)              (0.0190)                                                                       (0.0286)
Current Class Size                -0.143               -0.0679                   -0.169                     -0.179                     -0.197
                                 (0.319)               (0.383)                  (0.404)                     (0.457)                   (0.317)
Female Student                     1.446                 1.412                   1.563                       1.218                      1.592
                                 (1.263)               (1.186)                  (1.388)                     (1.753)                   (1.245)
Student is White/Asian           -5.225*                -1.669                 -5.480**                     7.124*                    -4.696*
                                 (2.773)               (2.909)                  (2.783)                     (3.892)                   (2.725)
Current Free Lunch Status          0.590                -1.508                   0.674                     -6.655**                    -0.123
                                 (2.296)               (1.958)                  (2.297)                     (2.777)                   (2.209)
Grade 2 Class Size                 0.470                 0.180                   0.481                      -0.235                      0.617
                                 (0.423)               (0.505)                  (0.608)                     (0.615)                   (0.421)
Grade 1 Class Size                -0.559                -0.483                   -0.590                     -0.400                    -0.700*
                                 (0.428)               (0.535)                  (0.649)                     (0.602)                   (0.426)
Kindergarten Class Size            0.198                 0.126                   0.237                      0.0769                Not included in
                                 (0.278)               (0.266)                  (0.315)                     (0.348)                specification
Grade 2 Free Lunch                 0.909               0.0574                    1.089                      -1.246                      0.258
                                 (2.510)               (2.209)                  (2.415)                     (3.047)                   (0.274)
Grade 1 Free Lunch                -3.735             -7.166***                   -3.375                     -0.242                     -0.301
                                 (2.356)               (2.285)                  (2.459)                     (2.060)                   (2.185)
Kindergarten Free Lunch            2.195                 1.978                   2.116                      3.693*                Not included in
                                 (2.073)               (2.084)                  (1.973)                     (1.968)                specification


                                                                                      37
                                                Reading Grade 2
Unobserved Ability        0.778***   0.568***           βiT=1 is assumed   βiT=0 is assumed     0.767***
Ratio                     (0.0305)   (0.0164)                                                    (0.0297)
Current Class Size          -0.447     -0.461                -0.432             -0.500             -0.415
                           (0.362)    (0.461)                (0.551)           (0.566)            (0.351)
Female Student              1.947    3.541***                 0.264           7.845***             2.058
                           (1.304)    (1.295)                (1.501)           (1.737)            (1.288)
Student is White/Asian      2.967      4.256                  1.607            7.735**             3.039
                           (2.966)    (2.733)                (3.377)           (3.720)            (2.922)
Current Free Lunch          0.337      -2.416                 3.245           -9.851***            -0.686
Status                     (2.372)    (2.115)                (2.630)           (2.991)            (2.260)
Grade 1 Class Size          0.523      0.330                  0.727             -0.193            0.638*
                           (0.402)    (0.481)                (0.587)           (0.579)            (0.379)
Kindergarten Class Size     0.164     0.0705                  0.263             -0.182        Not included in
                           (0.299)    (0.272)                (0.335)           (0.363)         specification
Grade 1 Free Lunch          1.718      -1.914                5.553*           -11.72***            0.193
                           (2.525)    (2.383)                (2.872)           (3.509)            (2.321)
Kindergarten Free Lunch     -2.889     -2.632                -3.159             -1.940        Not included in
                           (2.246)    (2.292)                (2.517)           (3.247)         specification
                                                    Grade 3
Unobserved Ability        0.847***   0.643***           βiT=1 is assumed   βiT=0 is assumed      0.845***
Ratio                     (0.0230)   (0.0162)                                                    (0.0226)
Current Class Size        -0.641**     -0.474               -0.743*              -0.142          -0.637**
                           (0.292)    (0.347)               (0.387)             (0.421)           (0.289)
Female Student              1.351    2.904***                 0.216           7.616***             1.403
                           (1.115)    (1.094)               (1.251)             (1.639)           (1.099)
Student is White/Asian      2.060      3.208                  1.196             7.622**            1.548
                           (2.574)    (2.230)               (2.865)             (3.120)           (2.542)
Current Free Lunch          -0.299     -1.718                 0.826            -6.305**            0.586
Status                     (2.045)    (1.782)               (2.216)             (2.694)           (1.948)
Grade 2 Class Size         0.808**     0.606                1.023*               0.204            0.873**
                           (0.362)    (0.440)               (0.542)             (0.535)           (0.360)
Grade 1 Class Size          -0.225     -0.308                -0.318              -0.683            -0.380
                           (0.369)    (0.419)               (0.521)             (0.496)           (0.356)
Kindergarten Class Size     -0.253     -0.296                -0.186              -0.369       Not included in
                           (0.255)    (0.261)               (0.298)             (0.353)        specification
Grade 2 Free Lunch          -1.802     -3.167                -0.771            -7.220**            -0.176
                           (2.236)    (2.078)               (2.335)             (3.114)           (0.254)
Grade 1 Free Lunch          -0.384     -2.391                 1.121           -9.000***            -0.526
                           (2.074)    (2.123)               (2.455)             (3.244)           (1.970)
Kindergarten Free Lunch     3.729*    3.513**               3.845*               2.899        Not included in
                           (1.991)    (1.736)               (2.124)             (2.740)        specification
                                                   Word Recognition
                                                      Grade 2
Unobserved Ability Ratio    1.013***    0.594***          βiT=1 is assumed   βiT=0 is assumed     1.029***
                            (0.0406)    (0.0200)                                                  (0.0443)
Current Class Size          -0.971**     -0.899*               -0.968*            -0.796          -1.053**
                             (0.452)     (0.513)               (0.557)           (0.604)           (0.444)
Female Student                -1.907       0.516                -1.831            3.950*            -2.068
                             (1.721)     (1.700)               (1.789)           (2.089)           (1.729)
Student is White/Asian        -0.381       0.675                -0.348            2.171            -0.0251
                             (4.122)     (3.606)               (3.764)           (4.589)           (4.114)
Current Free Lunch Status    -5.101*   -8.067***               -5.195*          -12.27***          -4.936*
                             (3.020)     (2.663)               (2.849)           (3.452)           (2.806)
Grade 1 Class Size          1.648***     0.976*               1.627***            0.0217          1.561***
                             (0.521)     (0.558)               (0.616)           (0.648)           (0.489)
Kindergarten Class Size       -0.265      -0.199                -0.263            -0.104        Not included in
                             (0.387)     (0.338)               (0.399)           (0.397)         specification
Grade 1 Free Lunch             2.158     -5.104*                1.930           -15.40***           -2.588
                             (3.229)     (2.978)               (3.204)           (3.826)           (2.960)
Kindergarten Free Lunch      -0.0380       0.541               -0.0198            1.362         Not included in
                             (3.210)     (2.794)               (3.029)           (3.420)         specification
                                                       Grade 3
Unobserved Ability          0.858***   0.546***           βiT=1 is assumed   βiT=0 is assumed     0.860***
Ratio                       (0.0275)   (0.0187)                                                   (0.0274)
Current Class Size            -0.591    -0.266                  -0.790            0.0412            -0.655
                             (0.418)    (0.440)                (0.504)           (0.513)           (0.439)
Female Student              5.171***   6.332***               4.670***          8.178***          5.342***
                             (1.662)    (1.497)                (1.785)           (1.921)           (1.646)
Student is White/Asian        7.174*    7.036*                  7.276             7.674*            6.120
                             (3.972)    (3.588)                (4.568)           (4.062)           (3.891)
Current Free Lunch            2.722     -0.765                  4.343            -6.797*            4.551
Status                       (3.016)    (2.772)                (3.008)           (3.473)           (2.906)
Grade 2 Class Size           1.189**     0.700                 1.508**            0.165            1.237**
                             (0.519)    (0.527)                (0.643)           (0.630)           (0.530)
Grade 1 Class Size            -0.493    -0.510                  -0.576            -0.654            -0.462
                             (0.505)    (0.528)                (0.638)           (0.611)           (0.518)
Kindergarten Class Size       -0.457    -0.494                  -0.408            -0.506        Not included in
                             (0.353)    (0.352)                (0.393)           (0.455)         specification
Grade 1 Free Lunch            -2.454    -4.661                  -1.302          -8.420**            -0.459
                             (3.244)    (3.055)                (3.446)           (3.828)           (0.356)
Grade 1 Free Lunch            2.867     -1.014                  4.610           -8.053**             0.128
                             (3.005)    (2.974)                (3.396)           (3.767)           (2.893)
Kindergarten Free Lunch       2.021      2.868                  1.802             4.412         Not included in
                             (3.136)    (2.954)                (3.570)           (3.380)         specification
                                                                               Listening Skills
                                                                                   Grade 2
Unobserved Ability Ratio             0.993***                0.667***                 βiT=1 is assumed                  βiT=0 is assumed                  0.982***
                                     (0.0435)                 (0.0222)                                                                                    (0.0365)
Current Class Size                     -0.132                   -0.300                    -0.128                             -0.645                         -0.142
                                      (0.286)                  (0.359)                    (0.386)                            (0.408)                       (0.280)
Female Student                         -0.262                   -0.627                    -0.254                             -1.374                         -0.260
                                      (1.111)                  (0.982)                    (1.072)                            (1.356)                       (1.101)
Student is White/Asian                 3.482                 6.642***                      3.415                            13.11***                        3.417
                                      (2.522)                  (2.530)                    (2.654)                            (3.251)                       (2.487)
Current Free Lunch Status             -3.516*                -4.913***                   -3.487*                           -7.774***                        -2.845
                                      (2.122)                  (1.695)                    (1.852)                            (2.255)                       (1.988)
Grade 1 Class Size                     0.404                    0.332                      0.405                              0.185                         0.391
                                      (0.328)                  (0.400)                    (0.435)                            (0.459)                       (0.301)
Kindergarten Class Size               -0.0380                 -0.0889                    -0.0369                             -0.193                    Not included in
                                      (0.243)                  (0.252)                    (0.270)                            (0.311)                    specification
Grade 1 Free Lunch                     0.500                    -2.742                     0.569                           -9.383***                        1.378
                                      (2.119)                  (1.989)                    (2.101)                            (2.633)                       (2.013)
Kindergarten Free Lunch                2.157                    1.235                      2.176                             -0.652                    Not included in
                                      (1.910)                  (1.843)                    (2.012)                            (2.288)                    specification
                                                                                  Grade 3
Unobserved Ability Ratio              0.889***               0.629***                  βiT=1 is assumed                  βiT=0 is assumed                 0.896***
                                      (0.0310)               (0.0202)                                                                                     (0.0300)
Current Class Size                     0.0129                 0.0224                       -0.0744                             -0.199                       -0.141
                                       (0.276)                (0.390)                      (0.383)                            (0.392)                      (0.281)
Female Student                          -1.217                 -1.502                       -1.121                            -2.322*                       -1.362
                                       (0.998)                (0.956)                      (0.954)                            (1.392)                      (0.984)
Student is White/Asian                  -1.506                  1.351                       -3.017                           8.850***                       -1.826
                                       (2.295)                (2.233)                      (2.332)                            (3.168)                      (2.238)
Current Free Lunch Status               -0.480                 -2.013                        0.180                          -6.042***                       -0.854
                                       (1.875)                (1.680)                      (1.877)                            (2.317)                      (1.777)
Grade 2 Class Size                       0.272                0.0842                         0.481                             -0.134                        0.523
                                       (0.345)                (0.456)                      (0.510)                            (0.448)                      (0.340)
Grade 1 Class Size                     -0.0958                -0.0218                       -0.224                             0.111                        -0.234
                                       (0.316)                (0.387)                      (0.471)                           (0.426)                       (0.315)
Kindergarten Class Size                 -0.118                 -0.162                       -0.106                            -0.273                    Not included in
                                       (0.236)                (0.243)                      (0.292)                           (0.287)                     specification
Grade 2 Free Lunch                      0.135                  -1.325                       0.907                            -4.275*                        -0.109
                                       (1.944)                (1.801)                      (1.937)                           (2.359)                       (0.233)
Grade 1 Free Lunch                      -0.671                 -2.803                       0.452                           -8.060***                       -0.392
                                       (1.902)                (1.860)                      (2.085)                            (2.653)                      (1.763)
Kindergarten Free Lunch                 -0.821                 -0.536                       -1.025                            0.167                     Not included in
                                       (1.740)                (1.507)                      (1.892)                           (2.067)                     specification

             Note: Corrected standard errors at the classroom level in parentheses. The inputs contained in the specification at each grade level is identical to that in Table 2
             and includes the teacher characteristics. The columns differ in the number of periods of lagged inputs that is listed in the first row and whether the impact of
             unobserved heterogeneity is fixed and is allowed to be correlated with the inputs. ***,**,* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
             respectively. The instruments for each column correspond to IV set 2 in Table 2. The sample size is 2047 and 1973 observations for grades 2 and 3.

                                                                                               40
 .
Figure 1: Instrument Variable and Quantile Regression Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Impacts of Unobserved Ability




Note: Specifications include the full history of inputs listed in Table 2 with IV Set 2 with robust standard errors. The sample size is 2047 and 1973 observations for grades 2 and 3.

                                                                                         41
  .
 The y-axis on each graph is the coefficient estimate on the unobserved ability term.

Appendix Table 1: Results from Model Specification Tests of the Education Production Function

  Outcome→                                    Grade 2 Mathematics               Grade 2 Reading       Grade 2 Word           Grade 2 Listening
                                                  Test Score                      Test Score      Recognition Test Score     Skills Test Score
  Alternative Model ↓
  Equation 7 where βiT=0 is                            566.94                              6.65           69.30                    482.82
  assumed                                              (1.000)                          (0.010)          (0.000)                   (1.000)
  Equation 7 where βiT=1 is                            841.60                            978.39          680.08                    713.64
  assumed                                              (0.000)                          (0.000)          (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Equation 8                                           883.69                           1022.50          710.61                    760.88
  Contemporaneous Model                                (0.000)                          (0.000)          (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Equation 9                                           784.98                            951.51          499.70                    898.77
  Value Added Model                                    (0.000)                          (0.000)          (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Equation 10                                          543.56                             36.80           32.05                    456.42
  Linear Growth Model                                  (0.000)                          (0.000)          (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Outcome→
                                              Grade 3 Mathematics               Grade 3 Reading       Grade 3 Word         Grade 3Listening Skills
  Alternative Model ↓                             Test Score                       Test Score     Recognition Test Score         Test Score
  Equation 7 where βiT=0 is                      21.81                    251.34                     754.29                    76.29
  assumed                                       (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Equation 7 where βiT=1 is                     918.99                   1153.62                    1044.22                   668.44
  assumed                                       (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Equation 8                                    964.50                   1193.61                    1075.71                   719.21
  Contemporaneous Model                         (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Equation 9                                    388.89                    294.29                     129.50                   567.82
  Value Added Model                             (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Equation 10                                    52.06                    303.61                     803.06                    51.19
  Linear Growth Model                           (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)                   (0.000)
  Note: Each entry contains the likelihood ratio test statistic and associated –value that compares the instrumental variables estimates of equation 7
  with IV set 2 against an alternative specification listed in the row variable for each grade subject area presented by columns. All of the entries are
  significantly different at the 1% level or lower.


                                                                                          42
  .
Appendix Table 2: How do the individuals in the estimation sample differ from the full Project STAR data on kindergarten tests and behavioral relationships?
                         VARIABLES                                      Mathematics    Reading      Word Recognition        Listening Skills
                         Kindergarten                                     -0.605**    -0.610***        -0.642***                  -0.142
                         Class Size                                        (0.269)      (0.182)          (0.218)                 (0.166)
                         Female Student                                  6.271***      4.999***        4.526***                2.802***
                                                                           (1.420)      (0.968)          (1.144)                 (0.948)
                         White or Asian Student                          17.09***      8.949***        7.921***                16.91***
                                                                           (2.518)      (1.616)          (1.870)                 (1.795)
                         Student is on Free Lunch status                 -18.95***    -13.00***        -14.13***               -15.46***
                                                                           (1.620)      (1.075)          (1.236)                 (1.162)
                         Non-White Teacher                                  -0.785        0.554           -1.113                  3.609
                                                                           (3.961)      (2.773)          (3.277)                 (2.662)
                         Teacher has a Master Degree                       -3.704*       -1.127           -0.256                  0.183
                                                                           (2.169)      (1.388)          (1.619)                 (1.316)
                         Years of Teaching Experience                      0.440**     0.321**           0.301*                   0.233
                                                                           (0.219)      (0.146)          (0.169)                 (0.154)
                         In Estimation sample                            32.13***      15.94***         14.38**                15.63***
                                                                           (7.551)      (4.978)          (6.111)                 (5.120)
                         In sample* Current Class Size                   -0.872***       -0.129           -0.114                -0.535**
                                                                           (0.333)      (0.212)          (0.268)                 (0.216)
                         In sample* Female Student                          0.837        -3.480           -2.486                  3.238
                                                                           (2.901)      (2.186)          (2.618)                 (2.121)
                         In sample* White or Asian Student                  -2.302       -0.371           -0.180                  -1.739
                                                                           (1.967)      (1.555)          (1.870)                 (1.466)
                         In sample* Student is on Free Lunch               5.768**        0.162          0.0552                5.152***
                         status                                            (2.553)      (1.595)          (1.892)                 (1.770)
                         In sample* Non-White Teacher                       0.511        -3.642           -1.660                  -1.446
                                                                           (4.028)      (2.601)          (3.242)                 (2.524)
                         In sample* Teacher has a Master Degree             2.930         0.130           0.342                   0.629
                                                                           (2.664)      (1.695)          (2.066)                 (1.814)
                         In sample* Years of Teaching Experience          -0.00908      -0.0361          0.0473                   0.0391
                                                                           (0.234)      (0.149)          (0.187)                 (0.144)
                         Constant                                        483.2***      440.6***        440.1***                529.0***
                                                                           (6.547)      (4.529)          (5.425)                 (4.376)
                         Test of if those in sample differ in initial    18.11***      10.25***          5.53**                  9.32***
                         performance                                       [0.000]     [0.0015]         [0.0192]                [0.0025]
                         Test of if those in sample differ in initial       2.19**         0.60            0.19                   2.61**
                         production function relationships                [0.0352]      [0.756]          [0.988]                 [0.123]
                         Test of if those in sample differ in initial    30.96***      19.88***        15.00***                16.75***
                         performance and relationships                     [0.000]      [0.000]          [0.000]                 [0.000]
                         Observations                                       5,809         5,728           5,790                   5,776
                         R-squared                                          0.295         0.284           0.248                   0.273
Note: Regressions include school indicators. Standard errors corrected at the classroom level are in ( ) parentheses. Probability > F are in [ ] parentheses. ***,**,*
indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.
                                                                                      43
  .
Appendix Table 3: Tests of Serial Correlation in the Residuals to Validate Using Lagged Test Scores as Instrumental Variables

  Outcome Equation →                     Grade 2 Mathematics             Grade 2 Reading                Grade 2 Word            Grade 2 Listening Skills
  Instrument in First Stage                  Test Score                    Test Score               Recognition Test Score            Test Score
  Equation ↓
  Kindergarten Mathematics                  Not included as                   2.092**                         1.280                      -0.186
                                             an instrument                     (0.036)                       (0.201)                     (0.852)
  Kindergarten Reading                            0.233                   Not included as                    -0.237                       0.820
                                                 (0.815)                   an instrument                     (0.813)                     (0.412)
  Kindergarten             Word                   0.216                        -0.904                   Not included as                   0.793
  Recognition                                    (0.829)                       (0.366)                   an instrument                   (0.428)
  Kindergarten Listening Skills                  -0.034                         1.422                       2.082**                 Not included as
                                                 (0.973)                       (0.154)                       (0.037)                 an instrument
  Outcome Equation →
  Instrument in First Stage              Grade 3Mathematics              Grade3 Reading                 Grade 3 Word            Grade 3 Listening Skills
  Equation ↓                                 Test Score                      Test Score             Recognition Test Score            Test Score
  Kindergarten Mathematics                 Not included as                     1.109                     1.347                          0.960
                                            an instrument                     (0.267)                   (0.178)                        (0.337)
  Kindergarten Reading                           0.606                   Not included as                 1.144                          0.098
                                                (0.544)                   an instrument                 (0.253)                        (0.922)
  Kindergarten               Word                1.277                        -0.015               Not included as                      0.701
  Recognition                                   (0.201)                       (0.988)               an instrument                      (0.483)
  Kindergarten Listening Skills                 -0.411                         1.526                    -0.400                    Not included as
                                                (0.681)                       (0.127)                   (0.689)                    an instrument
  Grade 1 Mathematics                      Not included as                     1.109                     1.347                          0.959
                                            an instrument                     (0.267)                   (0.178)                        (0.337)
  Grade 1 Reading                               -0.212                   Not included as                -1.333                         -0.438
                                                (0.832)                   an instrument                 (0.183)                        (0.663)
  Grade 1 Word Recognition                     7.158***                       -1.104               Not included as                    8.589***
                                                (0.000)                       (0.270)               an instrument                      (0.000)
  Grade 1 Listening Skills                      -0.411                         1.261                     0.400                    Not included as
                                                (0.681)                       (0.063)                   (0.689)                    an instrument
  Note: Each cell contains the test statistic that is distributed standard Normal and the p-value of the test that the residuals in the row column pair are
  uncorrelated. . ***,**,* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                                                                                 44
Appendix Table 4: Hausman Test Results Comparing OLS and IV Estimates of Equation 7

 Subject Area                      Mathematics                   Reading              Word Recognition                 Listening Skills
                                                            Full Specification
 Grade 2                       119.90***                   94.84***                  140.41***                      95.88***
                                    (0.00)                      (0.00)                     (0.00)                        (0.00)
 Grade 3                       191.11***                  197.08***                  237.19***                      120.38***
                                    (0.00)                      (0.00)                     (0.00)                        (0.00)
                                       Only the Coefficient on the Unobserved Ability Ratio Term
 Grade 2                             10.95***                9.73***                     11.85***                    9.789***
                                    (0.00)                       (0.00)                      (0.00)                      (0.00)
 Grade 3                        14.53***                    13.71***                     15.41***                   10.972***
                                    (0.00)                       (0.00)                      (0.00)                      (0.00)

 Note: Each cell contains the test statistic and the p-value of a Hausman test where under the Null, the OLS estimator is consistent and efficient.
 Estimates from columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 with are used to conduct the tests. ***,**,* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
 respectively.




                                                                          45
Appendix Table 5: Comparing Estimates of Education Inputs Estimates using Traditional Methods to Estimate Education Production Function Described in Appendix I

                                            Grade 1                                           Grade 2                                              Grade 3
Model                     Equation 8       Equation 9    Equation 10       Equation 8         Equation 9    Equation 10        Equation 8        Equation 9    Equation 10
                         Contemporaneous   Value Added   Linear Growth     Contemporaneous    Value Added   Linear Growth     Contemporaneous    Value Added    Linear Growth
                              Model           Model          Model              Model            Model          Model              Model            Model           Model
                                                                                Mathematics
Current Class Size         -1.420***         -0.649**         0.178           -0.828***          -0.0273         0.309             -0.454*           -0.134         0.0269
                             (0.287)          (0.271)        (0.322)            (0.289)          (0.266)        (0.292)            (0.237)          (0.210)         (0.249)
Female Student               -2.424         -4.669***      -7.077***             -0.545           1.226          1.969              1.327            1.449           1.510
                             (1.552)          (1.262)        (1.534)            (1.726)          (1.365)        (1.467)            (1.621)          (1.124)         (1.237)
Student is White/Asian      20.53***        11.56***          1.955            17.17***           2.870         -3.130             9.771**           -0.387        -5.498**
                             (3.370)          (3.141)        (3.992)            (3.413)          (2.778)        (3.013)            (4.011)          (2.793)         (2.715)
Current Free Lunch         -14.03***        -7.559***         -0.620          -15.46***        -7.147***       -3.657**          -15.04***        -4.710***          0.486
Status                       (1.942)          (1.559)        (1.979)            (2.139)          (1.652)        (1.666)            (1.985)          (1.364)         (1.494)
Current Teacher has a         3.552            2.887          2.173              -0.966           0.876          1.649              0.908            2.964           3.998
Master’s degree              (2.697)          (2.431)        (2.664)            (2.468)          (2.329)        (2.540)            (2.118)          (2.139)         (2.505)
Current Teacher Years        0.0280           0.0243         0.0202             -0.0100          0.0262         0.0414             -0.0214          0.0992           0.160
of Teaching experience       (0.145)          (0.150)        (0.175)            (0.131)          (0.137)        (0.155)            (0.122)          (0.111)         (0.125)
Lagged test score        Not included in    0.483***     Not included in    Not included in     0.704***    Not included in    Not included in    0.665***      Not included in
                          specification      (0.0184)     specification      specification      (0.0241)     specification      specification      (0.0174)      specification
Constant                    567.4***        316.2***        46.90***           604.6***         207.5***       40.83***           627.5***        229.6***         29.33***
                             (8.036)          (11.11)        (9.038)            (8.746)          (14.38)        (8.369)            (6.459)          (10.71)         (6.435)
R-squared                     0.306            0.518          0.282               0.276           0.573          0.200              0.235            0.619           0.251
                                                                                   Reading
Current Class Size         -1.369***         -0.730**       -0.653**           -0.680**          -0.0778         0.377           -0.578***         -0.290*          -0.129
                             (0.325)          (0.309)        (0.307)            (0.265)          (0.224)        (0.271)            (0.216)          (0.176)         (0.215)
Female Student              7.640***          3.420**        2.917*            7.721***         3.651***         0.576            7.476***         2.489**          -0.312
                             (1.937)          (1.585)        (1.592)            (1.690)          (1.272)        (1.498)            (1.565)          (1.101)         (1.266)
Student is White/Asian       7.902*            3.143          2.576            9.850***          4.546*          0.537            8.860***           3.639           0.706
                             (4.269)          (3.711)        (3.755)            (3.567)          (2.588)        (3.207)            (3.083)          (2.306)         (2.684)
Current Free Lunch         -24.15***        -12.03***      -10.58***          -18.42***        -5.142***       4.894***          -15.02***        -3.297***        3.290**
Status                       (2.707)          (2.226)        (2.160)            (1.969)          (1.413)        (1.756)            (1.778)          (1.246)         (1.413)
Current Teacher has a         0.227            -0.361         -0.431             0.449            -0.464        -1.154              -1.063           0.198           0.907
Master’s degree              (2.939)          (2.752)        (2.765)            (2.283)          (2.067)        (2.493)            (1.821)          (1.651)         (2.080)
Current Teacher Years       0.375**         0.427***        0.433***           0.376***         0.326***       0.289**              0.161           0.163*           0.163
of Teaching experience       (0.167)          (0.159)        (0.160)            (0.130)          (0.120)        (0.146)            (0.105)         (0.0930)         (0.118)
Lagged test score        Not included in    0.893***     Not included in    Not included in     0.570***    Not included in    Not included in    0.640***      Not included in
                          specification      (0.0344)     specification      specification      (0.0163)     specification      specification      (0.0148)      specification
Constant                    565.5***        156.8***        108.0***           599.8***         281.5***       40.91***           630.4***        242.3***         24.34***
                             (8.952)          (18.45)        (8.465)            (8.327)          (10.64)        (7.163)            (5.760)          (9.413)         (5.520)
R-squared                    0.303            0.513          0.299              0.286            0.620          0.181              0.199            0.614           0.177

                                                                                        46
                                               Grade 1                                               Grade 2                                                Grade 3
Model                     Equation 8         Equation 9      Equation 10        Equation 8          Equation 9     Equation 10        Equation 8          Equation 9     Equation 10
                         Contemporaneous      Value Added    Linear Growth     Contemporaneous      Value Added    Linear Growth     Contemporaneous      Value Added    Linear Growth
                              Model              Model           Model              Model              Model           Model              Model              Model           Model
                                                                                 Word Recognition
Current Class Size          -1.350***          -0.933***         -0.588*          -0.755***            -0.167            0.237           -0.514**            -0.302          -0.126
                              (0.307)            (0.301)         (0.313)            (0.288)            (0.251)         (0.277)            (0.255)           (0.212)          (0.252)
Female Student               5.967***           3.767**           1.951             3.697*              0.456           -1.773           7.849***          5.779***         4.070**
                              (1.864)            (1.651)         (1.808)            (2.032)            (1.649)         (1.742)            (1.865)           (1.500)          (1.725)
Student is White/Asian         3.135              0.646           -1.410             4.793              1.547           -0.686            8.388**           6.649*            5.213
                              (3.982)            (3.581)         (4.001)            (4.422)            (3.423)         (3.595)            (4.001)           (3.616)          (4.440)
Current Free Lunch          -20.87***          -12.42***        -5.437**          -21.44***          -10.91***         -3.673*          -14.56***            -2.752         6.997***
Status                        (2.540)            (2.294)         (2.285)            (2.267)            (1.892)         (2.164)            (2.281)           (2.013)          (2.182)
Current Teacher has a          1.652              1.070           0.590             0.0560              0.311            0.487             -2.575            -1.500          -0.612
Master’s degree               (2.673)            (2.601)         (2.737)            (2.351)            (2.217)         (2.560)            (2.254)           (1.986)          (2.426)
Current Teacher Years        0.435***          0.444***         0.452***           0.476***           0.436***        0.408***             0.211             0.169            0.135
of Teaching experience        (0.151)            (0.147)         (0.155)            (0.137)            (0.127)         (0.145)            (0.129)           (0.109)          (0.132)
Lagged test score         Not included in      0.548***      Not included in    Not included in       0.592***     Not included in    Not included in      0.548***      Not included in
                           specification        (0.0262)      specification      specification        (0.0191)      specification      specification       (0.0183)       specification
Constant                     556.4***          306.4***         99.82***           612.2***          284.2***         58.61***           627.6***          291.3***          13.55*
                              (8.353)           (14.93)          (8.615)            (8.536)           (12.38)          (7.406)            (6.779)           (12.92)          (6.889)
R-squared                      0.246             0.389            0.202              0.243             0.506            0.136              0.164             0.429            0.142
                                                                                   Listening Skills
Current Class Size       -0.842***          -0.549**        -0.343             -0.571**            -0.0689        0.178              -0.304             -0.0254         0.136
                         (0.246)            (0.229)         (0.242)            (0.224)             (0.209)        (0.233)            (0.188)            (0.176)         (0.210)
Female Student           -1.045             -1.794*         -2.321*            -1.325              -0.551         -0.171             -2.079             -1.654*         -1.407
                         (1.266)            (1.034)         (1.194)            (1.333)             (0.985)        (0.164)            (1.325)            (0.954)         (1.039)
Student is White/Asian   11.13***           -0.312          -8.363***          14.32***            6.548***       2.734              10.04***           2.267           -2.247
                         (2.887)            (2.325)         (2.493)            (3.218)             (2.490)        (2.567)            (3.090)            (2.021)         (2.127)
Current Free Lunch       -14.07***          -7.717***       -3.249**           -14.29***           -5.695***      -1.475             -14.08***          -5.008***       0.260
Status                   (1.616)            (1.289)         (1.488)            (1.648)             (1.231)        (1.322)            (1.520)            (1.063)         (1.237)
Current Teacher has a    2.349              1.685           1.218              2.924               3.517*         3.808*             0.116              -1.590          -2.581
Master’s degree          (2.087)            (1.979)         (2.175)            (2.110)             (1.985)        (2.118)            (1.707)            (1.552)         (1.828)
Current Teacher Years    0.252**            0.187*          0.142              0.246**             0.176*         0.141              -0.00591           0.0869          0.141
of Teaching experience   (0.117)            (0.101)         (0.106)            (0.102)             (0.100)        (0.113)            (0.100)            (0.0858)        (0.0941)
Lagged test score        Not included in    0.587***         Not included in     Not included in   0.671***        Not included in    Not included in   0.633***        Not included in
                         specification      (0.0228)           specification      specification    (0.0222)          specification      specification   (0.0195)        specification
Constant                 587.2***           269.6***        46.24***           609.9***            215.5***       21.85***           633.2***           247.7***        23.82***
                         (6.588)            (13.80)         (6.075)            (6.451)             (13.67)        (6.470)            (5.174)            (12.39)         (5.531)
R-squared                0.265              0.504           0.176              0.272               0.580          0.152              0.233              0.595           0.153
Note: Regressions include school indicators and teacher’s race. Standard errors corrected at the classroom level are in ( ) parentheses. The sample size is 2160, 2100
and 2116 observations for grades 1, 2 and 3 respectively. ***,**,* indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.
                                                                                   47
