NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEOUS PATHS THROUGH COLLEGE:
DETAILED PATTERNS AND RELATIONSHIPS WITH GRADUATION AND EARNINGS
Rodney Andrews
Jing Li
Michael F. Lovenheim
Working Paper 19935
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19935
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

We would like to thank Ron Ehrenberg and Josh Kinsler as well as participants at the American
Economic Association Annual Meetings for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank
Priyanka Singh for excellent research assistance. All errors, conclusions and omissions are our own,
and the conclusions of this research do not necessarily reflect the opinions or official position of the
Texas Education Agency, the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, or the State of Texas.
This research was funded by grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Smith
Richardson Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Rodney Andrews, Jing Li, and Michael F. Lovenheim. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneous Paths Through College: Detailed Patterns and Relationships with Graduation
and Earnings
Rodney Andrews, Jing Li, and Michael F. Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 19935
February 2014
JEL No. I21,I23,J31
ABSTRACT
A considerable fraction of college students and bachelor's degree recipients enroll in multiple
postsecondary institutions. Despite this fact, there is scant research that examines the nature of the
paths – both the number and types of institutions – that students take to obtain a bachelor's degree
or through the higher education system more generally. We also know little about enrollment in
multiple institutions of varying quality relates to postgraduate life outcomes. We use a unique panel
data set from Texas that allows us to both examine in detail the paths that students take towards a
bachelor's degree and estimate how multiple institution enrollment is related to degree completion
and subsequent earnings. We show that the paths to a bachelor's degree are diverse and that earnings
and BA receipt vary systematically with these paths. Our results call attention to the importance of
developing a more complete understanding of why students transfer and what causal role transferring
has on the returns to postsecondary educational investment.
Rodney Andrews
The University of Texas at Dallas
800 West Campbell Road
MS WT21
Richardson, TX 75080
and NBER
rodney.j.andrews@utdallas.edu
Jing Li
University of Tulsa
Department of Economics
Chapman Hall 201
Tulsa, OK 74104
163031@gmail.com

Michael F. Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu

The paths students take through the postsecondary sector are heterogeneous and have
become more so over time. For example, in the high school class of 1972, 59.5% of students
enrolled in one institution, and this proportion fell to 53.8% (a 9.6% decline) among the high
school class of 1992. The majority of multi-institutional contact is due to student transferring. 1
Despite the increasing prevalence of transferring behavior, the extent and character of transferring,
as well as the underlying reasons students change institutions, are poorly understood. A critical
constraint in developing a better understand of student transferring behavior is the lack of datasets
with sufficient detail and size to allow one to describe the myriad ways in which students transfer,
what types of students are making different types of transfer decisions, and how transferring is
related to long-run student outcomes such as BA completion and earnings. Ultimately of interest is
understanding the reasons students make different transfer decisions and identifying the causal
effect of transferring on student outcomes. Without a detailed description of these patterns, though,
it is difficult to even generate plausible hypotheses about transfer behavior that can be tested.
Given the need to more fully examine how students transfer and the correlates of this
decision with student characteristics and longer-run outcomes, this paper provides a
comprehensive descriptive analysis of transferring using a large administrative dataset with
detailed student information and earnings. Our analysis is split into two parts. First, using
administrative data from the University of Texas at Dallas's Education Research Center, we
provide a detailed description of the educational paths that students take through the postsecondary
educational system in Texas. Our data contain rich information about all in-state postsecondary
institutions attended by all students in Texas, which allows us to trace out the numerous ways in
which students move through the state's higher education system. Somewhat akin to Adelman
1

McCormick (2003) reports that about 2/3 of multi-institutional contact is due to student transferring, while the
remainder is driven by summer and dual enrollment.

(2004) and Jargowsky, McFarlin, Jr. and Holovchenko (2005), we show that transferring is
prevalent and that “traditional” transfer pathways – e.g., attending a two year school and then a
four-year college or transferring once between four-year colleges – are inadequate to capture the
multitude of ways that students progress through the system. Unlike these previous analyses,
however, we have a sufficiently large sample size to examine a complex and comprehensive set of
transferring patterns among postsecondary students. This descriptive analysis highlights the
importance of many different forms of multi-institutional contact in higher education and is
strongly suggestive that such issues deserve more consideration among education researchers.
The second goal of this paper is to offer descriptive evidence about the relationship
between a student's pathway through college and subsequent outcomes. Our analysis focuses on
the likelihood of graduating with a bachelor's (BA) degree and on subsequent earnings. There is
evidence that school quality impacts the ability of students to obtain a BA (Bound, Lovenheim and
Turner, 2010). There also is a sizable literature that seeks to estimate the labor market returns to
college quality (e.g, Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg, 1999; Dale and Krueger, 2002; Black and Smith,
2006; Hoekstra, 2009; Long, 2010; Andews, Li and Lovenheim, 2012). On the main, this literature
finds large returns, as measured by subsequent wages or earnings, to attending a college of higher
quality. Identification of the effect of higher education quality on BA receipt and future labor
market success typically characterizes quality as a function of the first school attended by a
student. However, a focus on the first institution attended ignores the fact that the first institution
may not be sufficient to encapsulate a student's educational experience because of transferring. We
show that a substantial portion of students have contact with multiple institutions, so it is not clear
what the simple metric of first college affiliation used in the previous work actually represents.

2

There are few published papers that examine how the returns to college vary with transfer
status. Hilmer (2000) finds that direct attendees (i.e., students who begin and graduate from the
same institution), students who transfer to four-year schools from community colleges, and
students who transfer from lower-quality universities to universities of high-quality (defined as a
university with an average age SAT score of at least 1200 points) experience large and statistically
significant wage gains from college. Students who transfer from high-quality universities to
institutions of lower quality, however, experience significant wage penalties relative to these other
groups. That students who “transfer down” perform worse in the labor market is notable and
suggests that transferring behavior does impact the returns to investing in a college degree. But,
because transfer students tend to have lower academic achievement and tend to be from lower
socioeconomic backgrounds, it is difficult to interpret such evidence as causal.
Light and Strayer (2004) analyze data from NLSY79 and show that transferring is
prevalent among BA and non-BA recipients as well as among eventual associates degree
recipients. They also find evidence that transferring increases earnings relative to observationallyequivalent non-transfer students. The mechanisms hypothesized are that transferring increases
match quality and also facilitates graduating. This analysis focuses on returns to different levels of
schooling by transfer status, but due to sample size limitations, they cannot examine the role of
institutional quality beyond the general two-year, four-year distinction. It also is not possible in the
NLSY79 to trace out transfer paths with a high degree of specificity. 2
Our analysis makes several contributions to the literature. First, with our large data set of
over 1.1 million college students in Texas, we are able to examine a richer set of educational paths
2

There is a literature as well on the effects of transferring from two-year to four-year schools. Long and Kurlaender
(2009) and Reynolds (2012) show that students who begin at a two-year college are less likely to complete a BA.
Kalogrides and Grodsky (2011) highlight the role of community colleges as “safety nets,” however, which help
mitigate against students dropping out of higher education. Agan (2013) shows lifecycle earnings differ substantially
based on the paths students take through college as measured broadly across the two- and four-year sectors.

3

than in previous work (e.g., Hilmer, (2000) observes only 794 male graduates and Adelman (2006)
uses the approximately 6,000 students with a postsecondary transcript file in the NELS:88). Our
larger sample size combined with our use of state administrative data allow us to trace out in a
detailed manner the heterogeneous ways in which students move through the postsecondary
system. 3 Our data include state unemployment insurance earnings records as well, which permits
us to link these pathways to differences in future earnings. Additionally, we are able to examine
these relationships for the overall sample and differently by race and ethnicity. Such an analysis is
novel in this literature.
Although we use a large and rich dataset, we only observe students in Texas. This is a more
geographically-limited sample than has been used in prior work. But, the higher education system
in Texas is very similar to those in most other states, with a large amount of heterogeneity in
quality ranging from elite flagship universities to less-selective four-year schools and community
colleges. This vertically-differentiated system is found in almost every state, and the high rates of
public school enrollment in Texas are common throughout the US as well. The similar structure of
the higher education market in Texas to the rest of the country suggests our estimates in Texas are
likely to be reflective of patterns more generally in the United States.
Our findings uncover a large amount of heterogeneity in the paths students take through
college that involve more than two-year to four-year transfers and single institution switches. In
line with previous work, we find that, among those who eventually obtain a four-year degree,
students who “transfer up” to more selective institutions, such as transferring from a non-flagship
four-year school to a state flagship, have lower measured academic achievement in high school
and are more likely to be black or Hispanic. Transfer students also tend to have slightly lower
3

A drawback of using these data is that we are unable to observe private school attendance. However, higher
education in Texas is dominated by the public institutions, so we do not miss many students due to the absence of
private schools from our data.

4

college GPAs, take about 0.4 more years to graduate, and are less likely to major in technical
subjects, such as engineering.
With respect to completion, we find that transfer students earn BAs at about the same rate
as direct attendees. Transfers into UT-Austin from a community college have a BA attainment rate
3% lower than UT-Austin direct attendees, but these rates are identical for Texas A&M students.
Among non-flagship students, transfers in from all other sectors are more likely to graduate than
direct attendees. These estimates are inconsistent with the hypothesis that transferring has a
deleterious effect on BA attainment. However, a caveat to these results is that we find large
differences in completion likelihoods among students who transfer in their second year (compared
to all second year students) versus those who transfer in their third year (compared to all third year
students), with the latter group being far less likely to graduate. This result is suggestive that the
timing of transferring is meaningfully related to college completion.
Despite its small and typically positive correlation with four-year graduation, we show
evidence that transfers earn substantially less than direct attendees. Among UT-Austin graduates,
transfer students from non-flagship four-year and community colleges who graduate earn between
11% and 14% less than direct attendee graduates, while among Texas A&M graduates this
difference is about 6%. Those who transfer to a non-flagship four-year school from universities
outside the flagship sector also earn between 2-4 percent less than direct attendees. Controlling for
college major and GPA, however, significantly reduces these differences, indicating that
differences in majors and college performance between transfer students and direct attendees can
explain some of the earnings gaps we identify. Finally, we document a significant amount of
heterogeneity in these patterns by race, ethnicity and gender.

5

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the data. Section 2
presents detailed tabulations of transfer behavior, and Section 3 describes the relationship between
the path to a BA, college completion and the earnings premium associated with graduating from
different types of schools. The 4th Section concludes.
Section 1. Data
The data used in this study are derived from three sources: Pre-K to 12th grade
administrative data from the Texas Education Agency (TEA), college administrative data from the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board (THECB), and quarterly earnings data from the
Texas Workforce Commission (TWC). The data are housed at the Texas Schools Project, a
University of Texas at Dallas Education Research Center (ERC). Individual social security
numbers allow us to link the data from these three sources. Thus, we can follow each Texas
student from Pre-K all the way through college until entering into the job market as long as this
student stays in Texas. 4
Section 1.1. Sample to Study Transfer Behavior
Using the ERC data, we first generate a sample to investigate the transfer behavior of the
college students enrolled in Texas public colleges or universities. Due to data availability, we
focus on students who graduate from Texas public high schools between 1992 and 2002 and who
start their college education in Texas public colleges or universities within two years after high
school graduation. 5 We have a total of 1,141,186 students in our sample.

4

This data set is the same one used in Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (2012). That paper shows detailed evidence that
graduates from each college sector we consider are not missing from the data differentially with respect to their precollegiate observable characteristics. Individuals can be missing from our postsecondary data because they attend a
private university or because they attend school out of state. They can be missing from our earnings sample because
they do not work or because they leave the state after college. Table 2 in Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (2012) shows
that there are no systematic differences in the characteristics of those excluded from our data across college sectors.
5
The time limit of college enrollment we impose allows us to focus on first-time, “traditional” college students.
Note that because we do not observe out of state attendance, if students begin college in another state and transfer to

6

To observe the possible different transfer behaviors for students starting from different
institutions, we group our sample into four subsamples: UT-Austin (UT), Texas A&M-College
Station (TAMU), other 4-year colleges or universities, and community colleges. 6 There are
57,881, 58,618, 341,541, and 683,149 students that started their college education at UT, TAMU,
other 4-year colleges or universities, and community colleges, respectively (See Table 1). These
sectors also represent the different quality levels of public institutions in Texas. 7
To observe the transfer behavior of the students in our sample, we use enrollment histories
collected by the THECB for each semester. We stack all enrollment records of a student in order to
sequence each student's enrollment history. Because college students take various lengths to finish
their college education, we limit our observation of transferring behavior in an eight-year window
by dropping any enrollments beyond eight years after high school graduation. 8 For the bachelor
degree recipients, we drop all the enrollment records after they received their first bachelor's
degree or from before high school graduation. Meanwhile, students often choose to take courses at
community colleges or universities close to their homes in summer semesters, with the intention of
returning to their full-time institution in the fall or spring. These types of enrollment changes are
not traditionally viewed as transfer behaviors, and so we drop all the enrollment records in summer
semesters and do not count such enrollment as part of our multiple institutional contact measure.

a Texas public university within two years of high school graduation, we will not observe this behavior as a transfer.
This will cause us to understate transferring prevalence to some degree.
6
Hereafter, we will use “UT” to stand for UT-Austin and “TAMU” to stand for Texas A&M-College Station. These
two flagship universities are distinguished from other UT campuses and other Texas A&M campuses, which are part
of the other four-year, or “non-flagship” sector.
7
College quality is very difficult to measure with a single variable or set of variables (Black and Smith, 2006). Our
use of broad sectors to differentiate schools of different quality follows much of the previous literature (e.g., Brewer,
Eide and Ehrenberg, 1999; Hoekstra, 2009; Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2010; Lovenheim and Reynolds, 2011,
2013).
8
Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010) show that most “traditional” students who graduate do so within eight years
of high school graduation.

7

We follow THECB's definition of a transfer. When a student's current enrolled institution is
different from the institution she enrolled in during the previous semester in which we observe her,
excluding summer semesters, we view that as a transfer. Sometimes, students enroll in multiple
institutions simultaneously. In such cases, we do not count this student as having transferred.
Combined with our exclusion of summer enrollment, this restriction on our definition of
transferring leads to a conservative measure of the number of transfers.
Our definition of a transfer is similar to what has been done previously. Like Goldrick-Rab
(2006), we exclude summer enrollment; however, the focus of that paper is on contact with
multiple institutions, and a count of the number of institutions on the transcript is used to measure
multi-institution contact. This measure thus conflates dual enrollment with transferring. GoldrickRab and Pfeffer (2009) first define one’s “primary institution” as the institution where a student
took the most credits for a given year. A transfer is defined as switching one’s primary institution
in the subsequent year. Overall, this definition is similar to our own; however, this definition could
over-count transfers to the extent that the identity of the primary institution may switch without an
actual transfer if there is dual enrollment and the proportion of credits is shifted across schools.
Light and Strayer (2004) define transferring in the NLSY79 as a student attending multiple
colleges within 12 months of each other. Our definition of transfer does not impose the time limit.
Therefore, our measure classifies changes in institution that occur more than a year apart as a
transfer while the definition used in Light and Strayer (2004) would not. Otherwise, the definitions
match closely with one another.
Section 1.2. Sample to Study Differences in BA Receipt and Earnings
In order to examine how transferring relates to completion likelihoods and post-collegiate
earnings, we use data on graduation timing, status, and institutions attended from the THECB and

8

first define a “direct attendee” as any student who begins and finishes at a given institution and
who does not transfer. In categorizing multiple institution enrollment while examining outcomes,
we only consider one's first postsecondary institution and one's graduating institution, which
means we ignore the transfer paths in between starting and graduating from colleges. We simplify
college paths in this manner in order to give us a tractable way to examine the heterogeneity in
completion and earnings based on students’ college paths. Examining these outcomes separately
for each of the different paths we consider in the first part of the analysis would generate a large
volume of estimates, many of which would be based on small sample sizes. Our simplification
dramatically reduces the number of potential estimates while still allowing us to examine
differences in earnings and BA receipt among students taking different core pathways to obtain a
degree at a given institution type.
We focus on students who graduate from Texas public high schools during the years 1996
– 2002, 9 and for our earnings analysis we restrict our sample to those who have earned bachelor
degrees from Texas' public colleges and universities. The sample includes all students in public
universities in Texas over this time period who meet the following restrictions: 1) No missing data
for any of the covariates, 2) The student must start college education within two years after high
school graduation and must graduate no later than eight years after high school, 3) The graduate's
earnings for a given year are included only if he or she worked for four consecutive quarters in the
year, with the exception of 2009 where the requirement for inclusion is three consecutive quarters
as we only have three quarters of available earnings data for 2009, and 4) The student must not be

9

Our earnings and completion analyses exclude students who graduated between 1992 and 1995 because the state
high school exams switched between the 1995 and 1996 cohorts. Given the importance of controlling for measured
high school academic ability, we focus on students who take the same exam. We include the 1992-1995 cohorts in
our tabulations of transfer paths due to the need to maximize sample size to identify the large number of different
paths students take. Results are similar using only the 1996-2002 cohorts and are available upon request.

9

currently enrolled in graduate school when the earnings are measured. 10 These restrictions are
meant to isolate the earnings of full-time workers, and they are similar to the sample restrictions
imposed by Hoekstra (2009) and Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (2012).
The sample includes 155,345 graduates. Among the 20,886 UT-Austin graduates, there are
17,583 direct attendees, 1,286 transfers from Texas's other four-year public colleges and
universities, and 2,017 transfers from Texas' community colleges. At Texas A&M, there are
27,036 graduates, with 20,153 direct attendees, 1,733 transfers from Texas' other four-year public
colleges and universities, and 5,150 transfers from Texas' community colleges. Among the nonflagship public universities in Texas, we observe 107,423 graduates, 61,274 of whom are direct
attendees, 9,524 are transfers from other non-flagship four-year public colleges and universities in
Texas, 2,023 are transfers from UT or TAMU, and 34,602 are transfers from Texas' community
colleges. There are 941 students who do not fall into any of the above groups. Because there are
very few UT graduates who transferred from TAMU as well as TAMU graduates who transferred
from UT, we do not include them in our earnings analysis.
We obtain records of each individual's quarterly earnings from the TWC and examine
earnings data for the years 2007 – 2009. In order to generate one earnings estimate per respondent,
we stack an individual's log quarterly earnings (subject to the inclusion criteria) and regress them
on year, quarter-of-year, and high school cohort indicators. We use the within-graduate average
residual from this regression as the earnings measure in our empirical models. This method isolates
the constant component of earnings for each individual over the period for which we observe his
earnings and allows us to control for time- and cohort-specific shocks as well as for seasonality.
10

Students who earn a graduate degree are included. The fourth restriction ignores earnings while students are
enrolled in graduate school because they are likely not reflective of the student's permanent earnings. Furthermore,
note that there are very few private universities in Texas with graduate schools, and those programs tend to be quite
small. Thus, there will be few earnings observations in our data that we include because we cannot observe private
graduate school enrollment in Texas.

10

A major strength of our data from TEA is that they include a rich set of individual
academic, demographic and high school information that allows us to control in a detailed manner
for selection of students into universities of different quality. Individual information consists of
fourth order polynomials in math, reading and writing TAAS scores, 11 within-high school relative
rank on each exam, student race/ethnicity, Title I status, English proficiency, free and reduced
price lunch status, enrollment in gifted/talented program, special education, and technology
courses, whether the student has a college plan, and whether he was at risk of dropping out. High
school campus variables include, for each year of graduation, the ethnic composition of the high
school, the percentage of students in each economic status group, the percentage of gifted students
and students at risk, the percentage of title I eligible students, and total school enrollment. These
individual covariates represent a more powerful set of controls for student academic backgrounds
that are correlated with college paths and with collegiate and post-collegiate outcomes than are
available in the data sets used in previous analyses on transfer behavior. However, we underscore
that even conditional on these student background measures transferring is likely to be endogenous
with respect to BA and earnings outcomes. The results we present below thus are descriptive,
rather than causal, in nature. But, any endogeneity between our outcomes of interest and
transferring must be residual to the large volume of student characteristics and college preparation
measures we observe, which highlights the value of our estimates in shaping hypotheses about
transferring and its effects on student outcomes that could be examined in future work.
Section 2. Description of Transfer Behavior
Table 1 presents the distribution of transfers for both college attendees and for those who
receive a BA degree within eight years of high school graduation. In the first two columns, we
11

The Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) are state standardized exams that were given to all students in
Texas and were used, in part, to determine graduation eligibility. Thus, students have an incentive to perform well
on these exams, and they provide important measures of student academic capabilities as of 11th grade.

11

show this distribution for all Texas public postsecondary students. Among all attendees, 31.4% of
students transfer at least once. For BA recipients, almost half of the students transfer at least once,
many from a community college. Thus, transferring is relatively common, particularly among
eventual BA recipients, and many students transfer more than once. Among BA recipients, 16%
transfer more than once, with 10% among attendees doing so. Thus, 1/6 of all college completers
who begin college soon after high school transfer at least twice. In fact, 6.1% transfer three or
more times. Overall, a large proportion of students have paths through the higher education system
that are characterized by enrollment in multiple institutions. This pattern is evident both among the
attendee sample as well as among the graduating sample.
In the remaining columns of Table 1, we examine transferring behavior by the first
institution attended. At the flagship state universities, transferring is much less prevalent: between
81% and 84% of attendees do not transfer and between 87% and 89% of BA recipients do not
transfer. However, between 10% and 12% of BA recipients at each school transfer once or twice,
which highlights that even at elite institutions transferring is not uncommon. Among those who
first attend a non-flagship four-year school, it is much more commonplace to switch institutions.
Almost 40% of attendees at such schools transfer, and 17% transfer more than once. Among
eventual BA recipients, over 19% transfer more than once and over 4% transfer more than twice.
For those who enter the postsecondary system at community colleges, transferring among
the attendee sample is prevalent, and the transfer distribution is similar to the non-flagship transfer
distribution. 12 Among eventual BA recipients, all community college students must transfer, but
over 17% do so more than once and 11.5% do so more than twice. These paths through the higher
education system point to considerable heterogeneity that makes it difficult to classify simply the
types of schools students attend.
12

We do not count transferring across community colleges as a transfer.

12

Table 1 suggests that it is not easy to characterize how students move through the postsecondary system as well as the quality of the institution to which they are exposed during college.
However, Table 1 masks a considerable portion of students' heterogeneous experiences because it
is not clear what types of schools students are transferring into and out of. We now show the full
distribution of transfers by institution type for students who transfer once (Table 2) and twice
(Table 3). We do not examine these distributions for those who go to more than 3 schools because
of the complexity of the possible paths students can take does not allow for a parsimonious
description. Furthermore, with 4% of the attendee sample and 6% of the BA sample transferring
more than twice, our analysis captures the majority of students in Texas.
Table 2 shows the distribution of school types among those who transfer once. In the table,
each column sums to one and shows, conditional on first institution attended, the distribution of
attendance at other institution types. For example, among those who first attend UT and transfer,
51.3% transfer to a non-flagship four-year school and 44.7% transfer to a community college. A
similar pattern holds for TAMU students, although community college transferring is slightly
larger. While there is some movement between flagship universities, the predominant pattern is
movement downward in quality, with a relatively large amount of transferring into the two-year
sector. Among eventual BA recipients, the transferring to non-flagship schools is more dramatic,
although there are much fewer of such students. As Table 1 shows, there are not a lot of BA
recipients who transfer once and who start at UT-Austin or Texas A&M. The proportion of
attendees at these schools who transfer once is larger, although it still is below 10%. Thus, at the
flagship universities, there is a sizable group of students who transfer to a non-flagship school or a
community college, and a majority of these students do not obtain a BA.

13

Among students who begin college at non-flagship schools, the 20.7% of attendees who
transfer once do so predominantly to community colleges as well as to other non-flagship fouryear universities in Texas. Among the 11% of eventual graduates who transfer once, however, over
26% transfer to a flagship university. Thus, for over a quarter of these students, transferring is
associated with an increase in college quality, while the rest of these students transfer laterally. 13
As in Table 1, this pattern suggests that some transferring may be positively correlated with the
likelihood of graduating and with subsequent earnings, while other transfers may be negatively
correlated with such outcomes. We examine these relationships more formally below.
Most community college students who transfer switch to a non-flagship university.
However, 11% of attendees and 14% of BA recipients transfer to a flagship university. For many
students, the community college is a viable gateway to a BA degree, but the quality of schools to
which students transfer varies considerably.
In Table 3, we examine the distribution of transfers among students who transfer twice.
The percents in each block refer to the first institution attended, and they sum to 100. 14 The first
line of schools shows the first institution attended, the second line of schools shows the second
institution attended, and the schools listed in the second column show the third institution attended.
For example, 8.17% of UT attendees transfer to a non-flagship four-year school and then back to
UT. Focusing on UT, the most common paths are to transfer to a community college and then
either back to UT or to a non-flagship four-year school. A similar pattern holds for TAMU
students, with many students transferring to a community college and then back to Texas A&M. In
general, it is quite common among those who transfer twice and who start at a flagship university

13

Of course, students may view their transfer as a change in quality, especially if they are switching institutions for
match-specific reasons.
14
The ** marks in the table indicate means drawn from fewer than 5 observations. Our data use agreement with the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board specifies that we cannot show any means with cell sizes less than 5.

14

to transfer back to the original flagship school. 15 This pattern is even more prevalent among BA
recipients (Panel B). Thus, to the extent that transferring has an effect on postsecondary outcomes
as well as on future earnings, it is important to pay attention to the fact that even those who enter
or graduate from a flagship university may have significant contact with another institution. 16
The pattern of transferring back to one's original institution is prevalent among those who
first attend a non-flagship university as well. Over 57% of these students in Panel A and 55% in
Panel B transfer away from their original university only to return later in their postsecondary
career. Much of the remainder of the students transfer to a community college and then to a
different non-flagship school or to two different non-flagship, four-year universities. A very small
proportion of students transfers to a flagship university and then transfers away.
Among community college students, the most common path is to transfer to two nonflagship universities for eventual graduates. For all attendees, students typically either transfer to a
non-flagship and then transfer back to a community college or transfer to another non-flagship
university. Interestingly, among both attendees and BA recipients, some students transfer to a
flagship university and then transfer to a non-flagship university. For BA recipients, 11.7% of the
community college sample and 4.9% of the non-flagship sample follow this path. Such transfers
could be due to a lack of academic training for the higher rigor at flagship universities; this finding
is suggestive that flagship universities do not provide a good match for many students who transfer
in from community colleges.

15

Some of these transfers could be caused by students taking “time off” from college and taking classes at other
institutions while not formally enrolled at their original school. As long as these courses were taken during the
normal academic year, we count this behavior as transferring. We believe that it is appropriate to include these
students as transfers because they are changing the school in which they are taking courses towards a degree. As
discussed in Section 1.1, prior work on student transfers also would count such institutional switches as transfers
(Goldrick-Rab, 2006; Goldrick-Rab and Pfeffer, 2009; Light and Strayer, 2004).
16
As discussed above, we have taken care not to count dual enrollment or summer enrollment as transferring. Thus,
student transferring back to a flagship does not simply reflect taking courses over the summer at a local college or
enrolling in a course at a community college while enrolled in one of the flagship universities.

15

Tables 1-3 show multi-institution enrollment is highly prevalent in Texas. Given this
heterogeneity in college paths, it is of interest to know how these paths relate to subsequent student
outcomes. Next, we examine how transferring correlates with four-year college completion and
with post-collegiate earnings in order to shed some light on these relationships.
Section 3. The Relationship Between College Path, College Graduation and Future Earnings
Section 3.1. Conceptual Model and Empirical Methods
The goal of the analysis in this section is to estimate the differences in postsecondary
completion rates and in subsequent earnings for students who take different paths through college.
Most previous studies that examine the effect of institutional quality on educational attainment and
earnings measure the quality either of the first college or university one attended or of the college
or university from which one graduated. 17 Both of these measures impose the assumption that
students accomplish their college education at one institution, which the estimates in the previous
section show is problematic. Thus, it is necessary to explore how transfer behavior correlates with
the education earnings premiums as well as with the likelihood of obtaining a four-year degree.
In order to highlight the difficulty in identifying the causal relationship between
transferring and student outcomes, it is instructive to consider a conceptual model of a student’s
decision to transfer. A straightforward model of the transfer decision would lead to a rule that a
student will transfer if her expected net present value of the transfer is higher than the expected
cost. This framework suggests that transferring behavior will be a function of students’ perceived
returns to attending different school types, which themselves depend on observed and unobserved
attributes of students, as well as (typically unobserved) preferences for different majors and social
environments correlated with student attributes that lead to different earnings later in life. For
17

For example, see Black and Smith (2004, 2006), Dale and Krueger (2002), Hoekstra (2009), Bound, Lovenheim
and Turner (2010), Kane and Rouse (1999), Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (2012), and Kinsler and Pavan (2011).

16

example, the best students at lower-quality schools may “transfer up” because they have the
academic skills or the motivation to be able to take advantage of a higher quality academic
environment. However, if the most academically capable or most motivated students transfer up,
then these students may be more academically capable or motivated than direct attendees at the
school from which they came but less academically able or motivated than the students at schools
into which they transfer. It also could be the case that incoming students who transfer up are more
highly motived than direct attendees at the higher quality school, since transferring itself requires a
lot of work on the student’s part. Selection based on academic ability or motivation makes it very
difficult to identify causal impacts of transferring on academic and labor market outcomes,
because accurate counterfactuals for the transferring students cannot be estimated.
Furthermore, transferring could be driven by shocks to the match-specific quality between
students and institutions. Students gain information about their own academic interests and about
the school in which they are enrolled over time. If students gain information that suggests their
own school is a poor match for them, either academically or socially, then they may transfer.
Students also can experience changes in their personal lives, such as sickness and family troubles,
that may change their locational preferences. Such shocks are likely related to the ability of
students to finish college and to their subsequent earnings.
Given the fact that the transfer decision is based on several variables that we cannot
observe, and since we lack an instrument that would affect the decision to change schools but not
BA receipt or earnings, we focus on providing a descriptive analysis of how earnings and BA
attainment correlate with various paths through school. Such correlations have received little
attention in previous work, which lacks the large samples and detailed earnings information

17

contained in our data, so our descriptive analysis reveals much new and important information
about how transferring behavior relates to important academic and labor market outcomes.
As Tables 1-3 demonstrate, transfer behavior is not easy to characterize succinctly —
students take many different paths through the postsecondary sectors that vary significantly from
person to person. In order to make our analysis tractable, we only examine where one starts and
where one ends his college education. Therefore, in our earnings equations, we allow the returns to
college quality to differ by the quality of the higher education institution in which a student first
enrolls and the quality of institution from which the same student graduates. When examining
completion, we allow the likelihood of BA attainment to vary by where students first entered the
postsecondary system and where they left, where leaving includes BA receipt or dropping out.
Though a simplification, Tables 1-3 show that this characterization of transferring captures a large
amount of the variation in transferring behavior across students. One notable shortcoming of this
method is that we are not able to examine separately the returns of students who begin and end at
the same place but who transfer in between. We ignore the relationship between this set of paths
and subsequent earnings because of the small proportion of our sample who take such paths, even
though they represent a sizable fraction of those who transfer three times.
We first examine the relationship between transferring and the likelihood of obtaining a
four-year degree. To assess whether the likelihood of degree attainment varies by transfer path, we
estimate linear regressions of the following form:
Cis = α + φTi + βX is + γ s + ε is ,

(1)

where C is is an indicator variable equal to 1 if student i from high school s graduates by the age of
25, T i is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the student transfers, and X is is a vector of individual
and high school-by-graduation year socioeconomic and academic background characteristics
18

discussed in Section 1. The model also includes high school fixed effects ( γ s ). We estimate
equation (1) separately using pairings of final and original institution attended. For example, to test
whether UT-Austin students who transferred from a non-flagship university were less likely to
finish than direct attendees, we estimate equation (1) using the sample of students who transfer in
this manner and the direct UT-Austin attendees. The coefficient φ then yields the correlation of
interest. We estimate such regressions for all pairings of direct attendees and transfers who leave
higher education at that same institution but who begin in another institution type. Note that this
method nests a specification in which we use all students and include a set of indicators for transfer
paths for non-direct attendees as well as indicators for final institution attended. Estimating
equation (1) separately by sector provides a more flexible specification that allows the coefficients
on the X variables and the school fixed effects to vary across sectors.
To study the relationship between transferring and earnings, we begin with an earnings
function for BA recipients that specifies the relationship between entering or graduating from a
specific Texas college sector and earnings:
Yis = α + ϑ1QiF + ϑ2QiG + βX is + γ i + ε i ,

(2)

where Y is is the log quarterly earnings residual of student i from high school s that was discussed
in Section 1, QiF is the sector of the higher education institution in which student i first enrolls, QiG
is the sector of institution from which the student graduates, and all other variables are as
previously defined. We specify QiF as a set of fixed effects for an individual's sector of first
attendance, with the non-flagship public sector as the omitted category. The variable QiG is
similarly defined for the sector of graduation. This earnings function differs from previous work on
the returns to education quality in allowing for earnings to differ by the quality of the first and

19

graduating institution, which permits estimation of differences in earnings between groups of
students taking different paths.
We first investigate whether, conditional on graduating from a given sector, there are
earnings difference between direct attendees and students who transferred in from another type of
university or colleges. The differences in earnings among graduates between direct attendees and
transfer students is important from a policy perspective because many students who are
academically capable of attending a four-year or flagship university choose not to do so, perhaps
due to cost considerations. If the earnings are the same for those who transfer in and graduate as
compared to direct attendees, then beginning college at a two-year or less selective four-year
school may be sensible for many students. However, if there are earnings penalties associated with
such paths, it could point to a value for policies that induce academically capable students to enroll
directly in four-year schools.
To identify the differences between earnings among transfer students as compared to direct
attendees who graduate from the same sector, we first condition on graduating from a given sector.
Then, we estimate the following regression for these graduates:
Yis = α + σTi + βX is + γ s + ε is ,

(3)

where T i is a set of indicator variables that is equal to 1 if the graduate transferred in from a given
sector and is equal to zero otherwise. The coefficients of interest in equation (3) are σ , which
show the average difference in earnings between transfer students from a given sector and direct
attendees. We estimate this model separately for each of the three four-year sectors in our data,
which allows us to compare how the relationship between earnings and transferring differ by the
quality of the postsecondary sector from which one earns a degree. Thus, our estimates show not
only how transferring per se is related to earnings but how this relationship differs by the specific
20

path the transfer takes. For the non-flagship estimates, we include fixed effects for each university
from which a student graduates and cluster standard errors by this institution.
In order to interpret σ as causal, the extensive controls for student background
characteristics in our data must be sufficient to control for the selection of students with different
underlying earnings potentials into different paths through the higher education system. Our
administrative data contain rich controls for such selection, including quartics in math, reading and
English state exams, relative rank within each high school on these exams, high school fixed
effects and detailed information regarding one's track through high school. These controls are more
extensive than have been used in most previous “selection on observables” studies of the returns to
college quality (e.g., Black and Smith, 2004, 2006; Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg, 1999) and
transferring studies, but as discussed above we believe it unlikely that they will be able to control
fully for the endogeneity of the transfer decision. While our control variables will give us some
insight into the character of the selection that is occurring, we do not seek to make strong causal
claims about the effect of transferring on earnings in this analysis. Rather, we describe how the
returns to college are correlated with the path one takes, after accounting for a detailed series of
covariates designed to measure students' academic achievement prior to college and their
socioeconomic status. Because little previous work has been done in this area, and because our
observable background characteristics and the transfer patterns we consider are more detailed than
those used previously, 18 such correlational evidence is informative.
In addition to estimating how earnings relate to transferring behavior among graduates of
schools in the same sector, we also wish to know how earnings differ among those who begin
college at the same type of institution and who take different paths through the higher education
18

Both Light and Strayer (2004) and Agan (2013) examine the correlation between transferring and earnings. These
analyses use NLSY79 data, which while rich in covariates, only contains one measure of precollegiate academic
ability – AFQT scores – and contains samples that are too small to examine the types of transfers we analyze.

21

system. This part of the analysis will show whether, for example, two observationally equivalent
students who begin at a community college but who transfer to different school types have
different subsequent earnings. To explore this question, we estimate a model akin to equation (3)
but condition on first sector attended rather than on the last sector attended. The coefficients on the
transfer indicators represent the differences in earnings between any two groups of students who
start their college education at the same institution but who graduate at different institutions.
As discussed above, the educational “paths” that we consider are a coarse presentation of
some of the paths described in the previous section. Still, we offer a more diverse set of paths than
is contained in the two existing papers most similar to this one: Hilmer (2000) and Light and
Strayer (2004). Because we are not forced to treat all transfers similarly, we can examine whether
certain types of transfer paths correlate with higher or lower earnings, which previous research has
not been able to study.
Section 3.2. Descriptive Characteristics of Transfers and Direct Attendees
Table 4 presents summary statistics of observable individual characteristics for our analysis
sample, separately by college paths to bachelor degrees. For both UT graduates and Texas A&M
graduates, the direct attendees have higher high school test scores in every subject than transfer
students. The direct attendees are much more likely to be in the top 10th percentile of their school
in each of these tests. They also are more likely to be gifted and less likely to be at risk of drop-out
in high school than transfer students. These estimates are in-line with previous work showing that
transfer students have lower academic achievement than their peers at the institutions to which
they transfer (McCormick, 2003; Adelman, 2006; Goldrick-Rab, 2006; Goldrick-Rab and Pfeffer,
2009). Interestingly, the background characteristics of transfers into UT look very similar with
respect to average TAAS scores and the percentage who are economically disadvantaged across

22

those who begin at a non-flagship university and those who begin at a community college.
However, the transfers in from community colleges are more likely to be white. Similar patterns
are evident for those transferring into Texas A&M, and those transferring into the flagships are
comparable on observables across the two schools. Finally, among non-flagship graduates, the
direct attendees and those who transfer across non-flagship institutions look very similar with
respect to high school test scores, but those who transfer in from a community college appear less
academically qualified than those who start at a four-year school. The students who “transfer
down” from a flagship have higher high school achievement scores, and they also are more likely
to be white and are less likely to be economically disadvantaged than direct attendees at nonflagship, four-year institutions.
Unsurprisingly, direct attendees at UT and Texas A&M earn more than transfer students.
Among the non-flagship graduates, it is those who transfer in from a flagship who earn the most,
followed by direct attendees and then by transfers from other four-year and community colleges.
These raw differences in log earnings residuals are driven, at least in part, by the fact that these
groups all differ on observable characteristics that are correlated with future earnings. Our
empirical analysis below seeks to understand what part of this difference remains once we control
for our extensive set of background characteristics.
That transfers and direct attendees differ with respect to academic and socioeconomic
backgrounds suggest these groups also may have systematically different preferences over courses
of study and may perform differently in college. To the extent that different majors and/or college
performance are valued more or less by the labor market, any differences along these margins may
translate into differences in the returns to graduating from a given university sector. Table 5 shows
the distribution of majors, mean college grade point averages (GPAs), and time to BA by sector of

23

graduation and by broad transfer path. Several patterns are evident in the table. First, at UT and
Texas A&M, the GPAs of transfers are lower than those of direct attendees, although the
differences are not large. 19 For non-flagship graduates, GPAs among all groups are ostensibly the
same, with the exception of those who transfer in from flagships. These students have higher
GPAs, which are higher on average than GPAs among direct attendees at flagship schools. This
result suggests those who transfer out of the flagship sectors may not be doing so because of
academic struggles.
Transferring also is correlated with time to degree. Across all institution types, transfers
who earn a BA take about 0.3 to 0.4 more years than direct attendees to do so. These estimates are
consistent with transferring elongating the length of time it takes one to obtain a degree, and the
large amount of transferring we document could contribute to rising degree times in the US
(Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2012). 20 In addition, the longer time it takes transfers to obtain a
degree means they will have slightly less experience, on average, than direct attendee graduates. 21
Transfers and direct attendees differ in their majors as well. At UT-Austin and Texas
A&M, transfers are less likely to major in engineering and business and more likely to be in liberal
arts, communications, agriculture and social sciences. At non-flagship schools, the distribution of
majors differs little between direct attendees and transfers.
The choice of college major, and the GPA one attains while in college, may be endogenous
to the transfer decision. If a student transferring has a causal effect on her GPA, perhaps due to the
disruption of switching institutions or if students transfer because of preferences for a degree
19

These grade point averages are calculated for all schools attended in Texas, not just one's graduating institution.
The increased time to degree could be coming about due to students “stopping out” between institutions or due to
a reduced pace of credit accumulation while enrolled. Decomposing the increased degree time into these constituent
parts is beyond the scope of our analysis, but we view this as an important question for future research.
21
While differences in experience could drive some of the earnings differences we document, we show in Appendix
Tables A-2 and A-3 that the estimates for oldest two cohorts in our sample are very similar. Since the effects of the
differences in experience should decline over time, these estimates suggest that differential experience is not a
primary driver of any earnings effects we find.
20

24

program that is stronger at another school, majors and GPAs may themselves be an outcome of
transferring behavior. As such, it would be improper to include them as controls. Nonetheless, we
control for major choice and GPA in some specifications below in order to give a descriptive
accounting of how these variables impact the estimated earnings differences across groups.
Although we view them as informative about the role of college major and college performance in
driving differences in earnings by transfer type, we urge some caution in interpreting these
estimates due to the potential endogeneity of college majors and GPAs to transferring decisions.
Further descriptive information about the composition of transfer students is shown in
Table 6, where we present estimates from OLS models that estimate the probability of transferring
as a function of student pre-collegiate observables. We also examine the likelihood of transferring
as a function of the distance between one’s high school and the first college attended. In the first
column, we present results using all attendees from the 1996-2002 high school cohorts, and in the
subsequent columns we show estimates for all BA recipients and for graduates by sector.
Several patterns emerge from Table 6. First, student transferring is not very sensitive to
how far away from home their first school is located. 22 Although the estimates often are
statistically significant and typically are positive, they are small in magnitude. Second, across all
columns of Table 6, there is a strong negative correlation between the likelihood of transferring
and high school test scores; more academically capable students transfer less frequently. Third,
except among Texas A&M graduates, black students are much less likely to transfer than white
students and across all sectors Hispanic students are far more likely to transfer. In addition,
economically-disadvantaged attendees are more likely to transfer, but this relationship does not
hold among graduates. This finding could reflect a higher dropout likelihood among economically22

We also note that when students transfer, they do not tend to move to institutions that much close to home: the
mean distance between a student’s high school and first university is 101 miles, while the mean distance with
respect to the second institution is 86 miles.

25

disadvantaged students who transfer. Finally, LEP and special education students are, on the
whole, less likely to transfer and males are slightly more likely to transfer than females. Overall,
these descriptive patterns are consistent with those shown in Table 4 as well as those from prior
work (e.g., Goldrick-Rab, 2006; Goldrick-Rab and Pfeffer, 2009).
Section 3.3. Transferring and the Likelihood of BA Attainment
Table 7 presents estimates of equation (1) by last institution attended. Panel A shows
estimates using the full sample, and each cell is from a separate regression that compares
completion rates among direct attendees and transfers in from another school. Results in the first
row include high school fixed effects only and those in the second row add observable student and
high school characteristics. There are two important findings shown in Table 7. First, without
exception the differences in graduation rates between transfer students and direct attendees are
small: they are at most 3% when all high school and demographic controls are added. These
findings suggest that transferring is not strongly correlated with BA completion. Second, the
estimates suggest much heterogeneity in any such correlations. Those who transfer from a
community college are 3% less likely to graduate at UT-Austin than direct attendees, and they are
3% more likely to graduate than direct attendees at non-flagship schools. Those who transfer from
a non-flagship university, however, are more likely to graduate than either UT-Austin direct
attendees or other four year direct attendees. For TAMU students, there is no relationship between
transfer status and BA attainment. Students who begin at a flagship university and transfer to a
non-flagship four-year school are about 1% more likely to graduate than non-flagship direct
attendees at the same school. Thus, for all but community college students transferring to UTAustin, transferring is positively associated with BA completion, although these relationships are
not strong.

26

The estimates in Panel A are potentially misleading because they compare transfers to all
direct attendees, some of whom will drop out in their first couple years while the transfer students
are less likely to drop out in this time frame. In Panel B, we compare transfer students who transfer
in their second year to direct attendees who are present in their second year, and in Panel C we
provide the same comparisons for third year transfers and students. Though less precise, the
estimates in Panel B are very similar to those in Panel A, with the notable exception that the
estimate for community college students transferring to UT-Austin now is ostensibly zero. For all
other groups, the estimates are the same or somewhat larger in magnitude, indicating that
transferring in one’s second year of college is positively correlated with BA receipt relative to
direct attendees who persist to their second year.
In contrast, in Panel C we see consistent evidence that transfers in their third year are
significantly less likely to graduate than are direct attendees who have persisted until their third
year. Interestingly, community college students who transfer after they obtain an Associate’s
Degree are most likely to be in this group, and they fare far worse in terms of degree completion
across the different college sectors than direct attendees. That the estimates in Panel A are much
closer to those in Panel B highlights the fact that student who transfer in their second year are
much more prevalent, but the results in Panel C underscore the large amount of heterogeneity in
student outcomes associated with when in the college career a student transfers.
Section 3.4. Earnings Estimates
Table 8 contains the estimates of equation (3), which shows the differences in earnings
between bachelor degree recipients who are direct attendees and bachelor degree recipients who
graduate from the same college type but who started college in a different sector. Estimates are
shown separately by graduating sector, and each set of two to three estimates in a row are from the

27

same regression. For all estimates in Table 8, the reference group is the direct attendees from the
given college sector. For example, in the first row of Table 8, those who transfer into UT-Austin
from a non-flagship university earn 14.8% less than direct UT graduates. Community college
transfers earn 18.9% less. The first row includes only high school fixed effects, the second row
adds in individual and high school-by-cohort controls, and in the third row we add in controls for
college major and GPA.
The results show that transfer students earn less than direct attendees, even among
graduates. This is the case for all sectors except for flagship students who transfer into a nonselective four-year school. Focusing on the estimates in the second row, which are our preferred
estimates, the coefficients are fairly consistent within sectors. For UT-Austin graduates, transfer
students earn between 11 and 14 percent less than direct attendees, and for TAMU graduates the
earnings penalty is about 6%. There is little variation across those who enter from a non-flagship
school or a community college. Among graduates from non-flagship universities, the earnings
difference between transfer students and direct attendees is much smaller, at -2 to -4%, which
suggests at least some of the flagship estimates may be due to unobserved skill differences that are
likely to be larger at more elite schools.
One method for further controlling for unobserved characteristics that are valued by the
labor market is to include measures of college GPA and major into the regression. For example,
one reason why the UT-Austin earnings differences are so much larger than those at Texas A&M
is that Texas A&M is more focused on engineering and technical areas, which could have higher
average returns (See Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (2012) for evidence on earnings in Texas by
college major). The third row of Table 8 adds controls for college GPA and college major to
provide some evidence on this question. Because of the potential endogeneity of major and GPA

28

with respect to transferring, however, we stress that these estimates are merely suggestive. The
results are consistent with a large role for college major and performance in explaining earnings
differences by transfer status. At UT, the earnings differences drop considerably in absolute value,
to between 7 and 9 percent, but they remain both sizable and statistically significant. At Texas
A&M, all earnings differences between direct attendees and transfers disappear, as do all
differences in the non-flagship sector except for a small earnings penalty among those transferring
in from a community college. Thus, GPA and major differences, from an accounting standpoint,
explain much of the residual differences in earnings between direct and transfer students in all
sectors. These results are due to some combination of transfer students selecting majors with lower
returns and performing worse than their direct attendee counterparts. The earnings estimates show
the importance of examining earnings rather than just BA completion in developing an
understanding of how transferring behavior affects long-run student outcomes.
It also is instructive to compare earnings among graduates based on their initial institution
rather than on their graduating institution. Such comparisons are informative because to the extent
that students who start at the same type of school but who graduate at different places earn
different amounts, it highlights the value of assessing not only whether students transfer, but to
where they transfer. Table 9 contains these estimates. In the first two columns, we compare
earnings of direct attendees among our three postsecondary four-year sectors. Once one controls
for background characteristics, UT graduates earn 9% more than non-flagship graduates, and
Texas A&M graduates earn 15% more. When we control for college major and GPA, these
estimates change to 10% and 12%, respectively. Despite the potential endogeneity of major and
GPA, these results again underscore the importance of courses of study and college performance in
driving subsequent earnings of graduates, particularly for Texas A&M graduates.

29

In the next set of columns, we compare students who begin at a non-flagship school and
transfer to one of the flagships to direct non-flagship graduates. Here, there are large differences by
whether one transfers to UT or to TAMU, with TAMU graduates earning 9.6% more than nonflagship direct attendees and UT transfers earning 2.2% less. These estimates suggest that those
who transfer into UT-Austin earn considerably less than their counterparts who transfer into Texas
A&M, even though the transfer students are similar to each other on observables. In the third row,
once we control for college GPA and major, the UT-Austin coefficient flips signs and the Texas
A&M estimate becomes larger. These results are consistent with those in Table 8 in suggesting
that UT-Austin transfer students in particular might be majoring in “low return” subjects and/or are
performing worse in ways that reduce their future earnings. Unconditional on college major and
GPA, non-flagship four-year students who transfer into UT-Austin are not better off in terms of
earnings than their counterparts who did not transfer.
These patterns are similar when we compare those who begin at non-flagship schools and
transfer to a flagship to those who begin at a non-flagship and transfer to another non-flagship or to
students who start at a community college and transfer to a non-flagship. Relative to both
comparison groups, UT-Austin transfers earn about the same and Texas A&M transfers earn 12-15
percent more. Controlling for GPA and college majors makes the UT transfer estimates positive
and significant at the 5% level, with coefficients that range from 3-6 percent, and the Texas A&M
estimates become slightly smaller. Thus, even relative to other transfer students, those who transfer
into UT-Austin from the non-flagship or community college sectors appear to select less lucrative
majors and perform worse in college (as Table 5 indicates).
Taken together, Table 8 and Table 9 demonstrate that there is significant heterogeneity in
relationship between earnings and transferring behavior that is not simple to characterize with the

30

quality of the starting or finishing institution. In effect, movement towards institutions of higher
quality are not universally positive. These estimates show that any decision rule that attempts to
ascertain whether a particular inter-college move is optimal depends greatly on the point of
reference, the course of study a student selects and his performance in that course of study.
Understanding more fully how institutional quality and college major map to earnings is a ripe area
for future research given these findings.
Section 3.5. Earnings Estimates by Race/Ethnicity and Gender
Finally, we explore heterogeneity by race/ethnicity and gender in the earnings estimates in
Tables 10 and 11. In Table 10, we show results similar to Table 8 across different groups that
exclude college GPA and major. Estimates that include college controls are shown in Appendix
Table A-1. Given that white students constitute the majority of the sample, it is unsurprising that
the estimates we observe closely mirror the estimates we see in Table 8. The only notable
difference is a coefficient of -0.022 for flagship transfers into non-flagship schools. Though the
estimate is imprecise, it suggests white students who transfer in this way earn less than direct nonflagship attendees.
The estimates for Hispanic students are largely similar to those for white students, except
community college transfers into UT and other four year schools earn the same as direct attendees.
Hispanic students who begin at a flagship university and transfer also earn about 2.6% more than
non-flagship direct attendees. Even though most of the estimates are statistically insignificant for
black students, the estimates for these students are substantively very different than for Hispanics
and whites. The earnings premiums associated with transferring into UT from either the nonflagship or community college sectors are positive and large, at 14 and 6 percent, respectively.
Conversely, African American transfers into Texas A&M earn substantially less than direct

31

attendees of the same race. Among those transferring to non-flagship schools, there is a small
negative earnings difference associated with those who transfer in from another four year school or
from a community college, but there is a sizable (though not significant) positive difference
between flagship transfers and non-flagship direct attendees. These results are suggestive of a large
amount of heterogeneity in returns to college across sectors and transfer type among African
American students, but the lack of sufficient sample sizes precludes us from drawing more
definitive conclusions.
The estimates for Asian students typically indicate a negative relationship between
transferring and earnings compared to direct attendees, with the estimates for those who transfer
into a non-flagship school from another non-flagship school or a community college being the only
estimates that are statistically significantly different from zero at even the 10% level.
We also show estimates by gender in Table 10, which are particularly of interest because
we cannot disentangle unemployment from non-labor force participation in our data. As women
are much more likely to not be in the labor force, and since women are an increasingly large
proportion of college graduates, understanding the extent of heterogeneity in our results by gender
is important. The estimates in Table 10 do not point to large differences between men and women.
For UT-Austin graduates, the coefficients for men are larger in absolute value, with the opposite
pattern among Texas A&M graduates. Aside from the 11% lower earnings experienced by women
who transfer into Texas A&M from the non-flagship sector, these estimates are qualitatively very
similar across genders. Among the non-flagship graduates, the estimates also are similar across
genders, with the estimates for men being slightly larger in absolute value.

32

Table 11 shows results akin to those in Table 9 for men and women separately. 23 On the
whole, earnings differences are smaller in magnitude for women than for men. This is particularly
true comparing earnings among direct attendees as well as for the estimates examining earnings
among those who transfer into Texas A&M. Males who transfer to Texas A&M earn significantly
more than other transfer students, while the earnings differences for women either are zero or are
much smaller (as is the case for the community college to TAMU transfers). That these differences
persist after college GPA and major are included in the regressions suggest this difference cannot
be explained by these college outcome measures.
Section 4. Conclusion
With student transferring becoming more prevalent and multiple institutional contact
becoming more the norm in higher education, it is critically important to understand the different
paths students take through the postsecondary system and how these paths relate to college
outcomes and earnings. We use detailed administrative data in Texas to examine these questions.
Our data contain sample sizes that are sufficient to detect very complex paths that students take,
and our ability to link these paths to subsequent earnings is rather unique in the literature.
We first show that transferring is prevalent in Texas and that looking only at where
students begin or exit college is not sufficient to characterize their college experiences. There are
many students who transfer more than once and have complex transfer patterns.
We next show that transferring is correlated with both BA completion rates and future
earnings in interesting ways. In particular, aside from transfers to UT-Austin from community
college, transfer students graduate at the same rate or higher than direct attendees. However, these
positive correlations are reversed when examining students who transfer after their second year.
These estimates highlight the significant heterogeneity that exists with respect to when students
23

Similar results by race/ethnicity are available from the authors upon request.

33

transfer and their likelihood of completion. That transfer students are more likely to graduate than
observationally equivalent direct attendees suggests a role for match quality as well.
When we examine earnings, the broad finding is that direct attendee graduates earn more
than transfers into their institutions, but for the non-flagship sector, this difference is small. We
provide suggestive evidence that some of the differences across institutions are due to the different
major choices of transfers relative to direct attendees.
Overall, this paper describes the heterogeneous paths students take through college and
demonstrates that these paths relate in interesting ways to both college completion and to
subsequent earnings. The goal of this paper is to describe these patterns and how they relate to
student outcomes, but an important limitation of this work is that we are unable to examine why
these patterns look the way they do; that is, we are unable to identify a causal relationship between
transferring and college completion or earnings. That we are able to control for detailed student
background and pre-collegiate academic characteristics indicates that the graduation and earnings
effects we find must be driven by other factors, such as match quality, adverse life outcomes
affecting both transfer and graduation/earnings, or a signaling model in which transferring itself is
treated as a signal of lower productivity. Given the increasing prevalence of multiple institutional
enrollment and the importance of understanding the economic returns to college quality and the
process by which students decide to complete college or drop out, investigating the relevance of
such mechanisms in future research would be of high value.

34

References
Agan, Amanda. 2013. “Disaggregating the Returns to College.” Working Paper.
Andrews, Rodney, Jing Li and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2012. “Quantile Treatment Effects of
College Quality on Earnings: Evidence from Administrative Data in Texas.” NBER Working
Paper No. 18068.
Adelman, Clifford. 2005. “Moving into Town and Moving On: The Community College in the
Lives of Traditional Age Students.” Technical Report, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education.
Adelman, Clifford. 2006. “The Toolbox Revisited: Paths to Degree Completion from High School
Through College.” Technical Report, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2004. How Robust is the Evidence on the Eﬀects of
College Quality? Evidence from Matching.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 99-124.
Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2006. Estimating the Returns to College Quality With
Multiple Proxies for Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 701-728.
Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim and Sarah Turner. 2010. “Why Have College Completion Rates
Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 129-157.
Bound, John, Michael Lovenheim and Sarah Turner. 2012. “Increasing Time to Baccalaureate
Degree in the United States.” Education Finance and Policy 7(4): 375-424.
Brewer, Dominic J., Eric R. Eide and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. 1999. “Does it Pay to Attend an Elite
Private College? Cross-cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earnings.” Journal
of Human Resources 34(1): 104-123.
Dale, Stacy and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective
College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117(4): 1491-1527.
Goldrick-Rab, Sara. 2006. “Following their Every Move: An Investigation of Social-Class
Differences in College Pathways.” Sociology of Education 79: 61-79.
Goldrick-Rab, Sara and Fabian T. Pfeffer. 2009. “Beyond Access: Explaining Socioeconomic
Differences in College Transfer.” Sociology of Education 82(2): 101-125.
Hilmer, Michael J. 2000. “Does the Return to University Quality Differ for Transfer Students and
Direct Attendees?” Economics of Education Review 19(1): 47-61.

35

Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. “The Effect of Attending the Flagship University on Earnings: A
Discontinuity-based Approach.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 717-724.
Jargowsky, Paul A., Isaac McFarlin, Jr. and Vera Holovchenko. 2005. “Community College: Help
or Hindrance to Senior College Graduation.” Mimeo.
Kalogrides, Demetra and Eric Grodsky. 2011. “Something to Fall Back On: Community Colleges
as a Safety Net.” Social Forces 89(3): 853-877.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia E. Rouse. 1995. “Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year
Colleges.” American Economic Review 85(3): 600-614.
Kinsler, Joshua and Ronni Pavan. 2011. “Family Income and Higher Education Choices: The
Importance of Accounting for College Quality.” Journal of Human Capital 5(4): 453-477.
Light, Audrey and Wayne Strayer. 2004. “Who Receives the College Wage Premium? Assessing
the Labor Market Return to Degrees and to College Transferring Patterns.” Journal of Human
Resources 39(3): 746-773.
Long, Bridget Terry and Michal Kurlaender. 2009. “Do Community Colleges Provide a Viable
Pathway to a Baccalaureate Degree?” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 31(1): 3053.
Long, Mark. 2010. “Changes in the Returns to Education and College Quality” Economics of
Education Review 29(3): 338-347.
Lovenheim, Michael F. and C. Lockwood Reynolds. 2011. “Changes in Postsecondary Choices by
Ability and Income: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth.” Journal of
Human Capital 5(1): 70-109.
Lovenheim, Michael F. and C. Lockwood Reynolds. 2013. “The Effect of Housing Wealth on
College Choice: Evidence from the Housing Boom.” Journal of Human Resources 48(1): 3-37.
McCormick, Alexander. 2003. “Swirling and Double-Dipping: New Patterns of Student
Attendance and their Implications for Higher Education.” New Directions in Higher Education
121: 13-24.
Reynolds, C. Lockwood. 2012. “Where to Attend? Estimating the Effects of Beginning College at
a Two-year School.” Economics of Education Review 31(4): 345-362.

36

Table 1. Distribution of the Number of Transfers among All Attendees and for BA Recipients
First Institution Attended:
Number of
Full Sample
UT
TAMU
Other Four-Year
Transfers
Attendee
BA
Attendee
BA
Attendee
BA
Attendee
BA
0
68.61
51.1
80.57
86.56
83.54
88.57
61.93
69.68
1
21.07
32.66
8.52
3.71
7.26
3.69
20.67
10.99
2
6.62
10.15
8.65
8.03
6.93
6.18
12.79
14.91
3
2.56
4.17
1.24
0.83
1.23
0.72
2.48
1.96
4
0.80
1.31
0.84
0.74
0.87
0.70
1.64
1.92
5
0.25
0.45
0.10
0.08
0.12
0.08
0.28
0.30
6
0.07
0.13
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.17
0.21
7
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
8
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
—
—
0.01
0.02
9
0.00
0.00
—
—
—
—
0.00
0.00
Observations
1,141,186 429,992
57,881
50,083
58,615
49,014
341,541 190,813
1

2

Community College
Attendee
BA
69.66
—
23.52
82.67
3.33
5.80
2.82
9.57
0.36
0.89
0.26
0.91
0.03
0.09
0.02
0.06
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
683,149 140,082

The “Attendee” sample consists of all students who attend college within two years of high school graduation. The “BA” sample consists of all BA recipients
who obtain a degree within 8 years of high school graduation. First institution attended is the first post-secondary institution at which a student enrolls after
high school graduation. Transfers are the number of times a student changes the post-secondary school at which he enrolls in non-summer semesters.
The value 0.00 stands for a value that is too small to be shown and “—“ stands for no observations.

Table 2. Distribution of Transfers among Students Who Transfer Once
Second
First Institution Attended:
Institution
UT
TAMU
Other Four-Year
Attended
Attendee
BA
Attendee
BA
Attendee
BA
UT
—
—
6.11
14.89
4.44
13.33
TAMU
3.97
9.07
—
—
4.16
13.11
Other Four
51.34
90.93
42.52
85.11
31.03
73.56
CC
44.69
—
51.37
—
60.37
—
Observations
4,256
1,809
4,929
1,860
70,613
20,973

Community College
Attendee
BA
4.35
5.08
6.92
8.90
88.73
86.02
—
—
160,705 115,803

The “Attendee” sample consists of all students who attend college within two years of high school graduation. The “BA” sample consists of all BA recipients
who obtain a degree within 8 years of high school graduation. First institution attended is the first post-secondary institution at which a student enrolls after high
school graduation. The second institution attended is the subsequent institution in which the student enrolls in a non-summer semester. “—“ stands for no
observations.

37

Table 3. Distribution of Transfers among Students Who Transfer Twice
Second
Institution
Attended:
Third
Institution
Attended:

UT
TAMU
Different 4-Yr.
Original 4-Yr.
CC

TAMU
0.27
—
**
—
**

Observations
Second
Institution
Attended:
Third
Institution
Attended:

1

UT
TAMU
Different 4-Yr.
Original 4-Yr.
CC

Observations

UT
4-Year

CC

8.17
0.27
3.47

50.33
1.92
33.87

—
1.48

—
—

4,063

TAMU

UT
4-Year

CC

0.30
—
**
—
—

9.54
0.30
3.63
—
—

49.04
2.34
34.84
—
—

2,620

Panel A: Full Sample:
First Institution Attended:
TAMU
Other Four-Year
UT 4-Year
CC
UT
TAMU 4-Year

—
0.24
**
—
**

0.28
5.77
3.17
—
1.72

1.74
44.26
42.70
—
—

—
**
0.20
0.62
**

0.03
—
0.14
0.48
0.13

0.30
0.31
3.10
6.50
3.35

5,009
43,683
Panel B: BA Recipient Sample
First Institution Attended:
TAMU
Other Four-Year
UT 4-Year
CC
UT
TAMU 4-Year

—
**
**
—
—

0.35
6.67
3.01
—
—
4,021

1.96
48.25
39.39
—
—

—
**
**
0.90
—

0.03
—
0.16
0.66
—

0.42
0.48
3.27
7.45
—

28,492

CC

1.62
2.94
31.54
49.28
—

Community College
UT
TAMU 4-Year

—
0.10
2.01
—
1.39

0.10
—
2.85
—
1.65

1.97
1.59
40.92
—
47.41

22,747

CC

2.42
4.42
33.93
45.65
—

Community College
UT
TAMU 4-Year

—
0.28
5.06
—
—

0.23
—
6.60
—
—
8,130

4.04
5.16
78.64
—
—

Source: Authors' calculations from the University of Texas at Dallas Education Research Center data as described in the text. The "Attendee" sample consists of
all students who attend college within two years of high school graduation. The “BA” sample consists of all BA recipients who obtain a degree within 8 years of
high school graduation. First institution attended is the first post-secondary institution at which a student enrolls after high school graduation. The second
institution attended is the subsequent institution in which the student enrolls in a non-summer semester. The third institution attended is similarly defined. Dual
enrollment does not count as transferring nor does switching across community colleges.
2
** refers to the cell being too small to report without violating confidentiality: we are unable to report any tabulations that include less than 5 people. Each 3x5
block in Panel A and 3x4 block in Panel B would sum to 1 if the ** percentages were included in the table. “—“ stands for no observations.

38

Table 4. Means of Selected Earnings and Background Characteristics for Earnings Sample
Variable
Log Quarterly Earnings
TAAS Math Score
TAAS Reading Score
TAAS Writing Score
Math Rank
Top 10%
70th-90th %
Below 70th %
Reading Rank
Top 10%
70th-90th %
Below 70th %
Writing Rank
Top 10%
70th-90th %
Below 70th %
Race/Ethnicity
White
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Male
Gifted
At Risk
Not Econ. Disadvantaged
Observations

UT Graduates
Direct
Other 4 CC →
Attendee → UT
UT
0.132
-0.025
-0.068
56.339
54.218 53.251
45.479
44.726 44.181
37.727
36.841 36.315

TAMU Graduates
Direct
Other 4 → CC →
Attendee
TAMU
TAMU
0.175
0.092
0.086
56.045
54.034
53.313
45.350
44.274
43.811
37.453
36.160
35.835

Direct
Attendee
-0.040
53.079
43.696
36.043

Other Four-Year Graduates
Other 4 → Flagship
Other 4
→ Other 4
-0.066
0.004
52.519
55.559
43.462
45.008
35.844
37.266

CC →
Other 4
-0.091
51.597
42.710
35.178

0.495
0.330
0.176

0.302
0.320
0.378

0.268
0.313
0.419

0.474
0.343
0.183

0.293
0.344
0.363

0.254
0.319
0.427

0.271
0.325
0.403

0.224
0.319
0.457

0.417
0.377
0.206

0.182
0.301
0.517

0.466
0.319
0.215

0.324
0.348
0.328

0.315
0.31
0.375

0.455
0.335
0.210

0.297
0.353
0.350

0.260
0.316
0.425

0.291
0.323
0.386

0.250
0.325
0.425

0.427
0.342
0.232

0.206
0.302
0.492

0.483
0.321
0.197

0.321
0.353
0.326

0.304
0.316
0.379

0.456
0.330
0.214

0.259
0.346
0.395

0.25
0.316
0.434

0.302
0.320
0.378

0.265
0.321
0.415

0.446
0.329
0.225

0.222
0.298
0.480

0.684
0.120
0.036
0.158
0.440
0.439
0.040
0.936
17,583

0.696
0.173
0.024
0.107
0.439
0.259
0.064
0.935
1,286

0.763
0.148
0.022
0.065
0.252
0.252
0.089
0.941
2,017

0.875
0.074
0.023
0.027
0.449
0.393
0.033
0.965
20,153

0.887
0.082
0.009
0.019
0.504
0.208
0.079
0.968
1,733

0.932
0.047
0.007
0.012
0.493
0.168
0.087
0.975
5,150

0.624
0.203
0.126
0.045
0.377
0.228
0.131
0.850
61,274

0.688
0.172
0.104
0.035
0.347
0.191
0.122
0.893
9,524

0.748
0.136
0.029
0.086
0.415
0.394
0.049
0.931
2,023

0.694
0.209
0.057
0.038
0.364
0.135
0.183
0.860
34,602

The Earnings sample consists of graduates from a public Texas college or university who attend college within two years of high school graduation and who
graduate within eight years. All earnings are measured from 2007-2009 and are restricted to those not concurrently enrolled in graduate school and for whom we
observe at least three consecutive quarters of earnings. The Log Quarterly Earnings measure is the residual from a regression of quarterly earnings that fit our
sample criteria on year, quarter, and birth cohort indicators.

39

Table 5. GPA, Time to Degree, and College Major Distribution for Earnings Sample
Variable
GPA
Time To Degree
Agriculture
Liberal Arts
Interdisciplinary Studies
Communications
Computer Science
Engineering
Biology
Math and Statistics
Physical Sciences
Social Sciences
Business & Support Serv.

UT Graduate
Direct
Other 4
Attendee → UT
3.12
3.07
4.472
4.784
0.00
0.00
13.13
14.21
5.12
4.74
13.26
14.35
2.93
1.32
12.31
6.61
5.15
6.74
1.62
1.40
1.30
1.56
21.65
32.50
23.17
17.18

CC →
UT
3.03
4.892
0.00
16.16
7.19
15.07
1.24
6.35
3.62
1.49
1.14
30.90
16.86

TAMU Graduates
Direct
Other 4 → CC →
Attendee
TAMU
TAMU
3.07
2.95
2.94
4.574
4.971
4.956
11.65
20.08
24.97
6.54
7.97
7.93
8.96
11.66
13.46
2.16
2.25
1.94
1.30
0.92
0.49
19.10
14.65
11.17
4.57
5.71
4.17
2.95
1.90
1.42
1.15
1.10
0.74
12.80
16.39
15.38
28.53
17.37
18.35

Direct
Attendee
2.99
4.729
2.81
11.74
9.97
6.31
1.82
6.32
4.88
0.99
0.77
13.20
41.18

Other Four-Year Graduates
Other 4 → Flagship
CC →
Other 4
→ Other 4 Other 4
3.01
3.18
3.02
5.123
5.141
5.134
2.24
1.94
3.09
11.65
11.40
11.39
11.05
8.26
15.55
5.66
5.57
4.60
0.99
3.11
1.13
4.02
7.17
3.31
3.73
4.60
2.92
0.68
1.24
0.88
0.58
1.04
0.37
14.61
11.92
13.57
44.78
43.77
43.18

Source: Authors' calculations from the University of Texas at Dallas Education Research Center data as described in the text. The sample consists of graduates
from a public Texas college or university who attend college within two years of high school graduation and who graduate within eight years. Major refers to
major at graduation, and the GPA measure is calculated using grades from all institutions attended. Time to degree is measured relative to first enrollment in
college in Texas.

40

Table 6. The Relationship Between Student Observable Characteristics and the Likelihood
of Transferring
Variable
Distance to First School
(100 Miles)
TAAS Math Score
TAAS Reading Score
TAAS Writing Score
Native American
Asian
African American
Hispanic
Male
At Risk
Economically
Disadvantaged
Gifted
LEP
Special Education
Vocational Education
1

Full
Sample
Attendees
0.007**
(0.001)
-0.004**
(0.0002)
-0.003**
(0.0003)
-0.004**
(0.0003)
-0.025
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.004)
-0.029**
(0.003)
0.036**
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
0.0003
(0.003)
-0.029**
(0.003)
-0.032**
(0.002)
-0.035**
(0.012)
-0.042**
(0.008)
0.017**
(0.002)

Full
Sample
Graduates
-0.002**
(0.0001)
-0.006**
(0.0002)
-0.006**
(0.0004)
-0.006**
(0.0004)
-0.012
(0.021)
-0.025**
(0.004)
-0.053**
(0.004)
0.033**
(0.003)
0.006**
(0.002)
0.013**
(0.003)
0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.033**
(0.002)
-0.064**
(0.016)
-0.021**
(0.011)
0.010**
(0.001)

Graduating School Sector:
UT
Texas
Other 4
Austin
A&M
Year
0.009**
0.007**
0.005**
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
-0.005**
-0.003**
-0.004
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.003)
-0.006**
-0.005**
-0.004**
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
-0.002**
-0.005**
-0.004**
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.058
-0.056*
-0.018
(0.043)
(0.033)
(0.029)
0.016
-0.004
-0.004
(0.010)
(0.004)
(0.006)
0.028**
-0.026**
-0.085**
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.004)
0.053**
0.033**
0.007**
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.003)
0.013**
0.016**
0.007**
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.027**
0.019**
0.002
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.004)
0.001**
0.0004
0.0000
(0.0004)
(0.0003)
(0.0002)
0.002
-0.009**
-0.027**
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
-0.130*
-0.035
-0.059**
(0.079)
(0.038)
(0.018)
0.026
-0.004
-0.034**
(0.031)
(0.031)
(0.013)
0.005**
0.007**
0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.013)

Each column is a separate regression, using data from 1996-2002. Estimates are from linear probability
models with an indicator for whether a student ever transfers as the dependent variable. The first
column includes all attendees, while the subsequent columns include only those students who obtain a
BA within 8 years.
2
Robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and *
indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

41

Table 7. Differences in BA Attainment Rates by First and Last Institution Attended

Controls
HS Fixed Effects
Demographic & HS
Observations

Controls
HS Fixed Effects
Demographic & HS
Observations

Controls
HS Fixed Effects
Demographic & HS
1

Observations

Panel A: Full Sample
Last Institution Attended:
UT
TAMU
Other Four-year
Other Four
CC
Other Four
CC
Other Four Flagship
0.006
-0.048**
-0.002
-0.013**
0.035**
0.069**
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.007)
0.018**
-0.030**
0.004
-0.006
0.032**
0.013**
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.006)
35,842
37,671
34,520
39,563
178,749
157,510
Panel B: Second Year Students
Last Institution Attended:
UT
TAMU
Other Four-year
Other Four
CC
Other Four
CC
Other Four Flagship
0.008
-0.017
0.002
-0.007
0.047**
0.067**
(0.014)
(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.013)
0.018
0.001
0.008
0.002
0.045**
0.013
(0.014)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.013)
33,512
34,187
32,084
33,476
146,269
142,526
Panel C: Third Year Students
Last Institution Attended:
UT
TAMU
Other Four-year
Other Four
CC
Other Four
CC
Other Four Flagship
-0.113** -0.177**
-0.011
-0.059**
-0.110**
-0.106**
(0.047)
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.012)
(0.031)
-0.106**
-0.158**
-0.004
-0.050**
-0.106**
-0.125**
(0.047)
(0.029)
(0.025)
(0.016)
(0.011)
(0.023)
31,396
31,561
30,120
30,403
116,506
115,245

CC
0.005*
(0.003)
0.030**
(0.003)
261,275

CC
0.036**
(0.004)
0.059**
(0.004)
166,535

CC
-0.133**
(0.005)
-0.107**
(0.005)
129,280

Demographic and High School (HS) variables are as described in Section 1. Each cell is a separate regression, and in each column the sample is the set of direct
attendees in the given sector and the set of students who begin at the given sector and whose last sector or sector of BA completion is the same as the direct
attendees. Completers are those who complete college within 8 years of high school graduation.
2
Robust standard errors in the first four columns and clustered at the last institution level in the final three columns are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical
significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

42

Table 8. Differences in Earnings Between Direct Attendees and Transfers, Conditional on Graduation
Controls
HS Fixed Effects

1

UT Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.148** -0.189**
(0.018)
(0.015)

TAMU Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.092** -0.100**
(0.013)
(0.009)

Other Four-year Graduates
Other Four Flagship
CC
-0.029**
0.024
-0.055**
(0.007)
(0.014)
(0.005)

Demographic & HS

-0.105**
(0.018)

-0.138**
(0.015)

-0.064**
(0.013)

-0.060**
(0.010)

-0.024**
(0.007)

-0.004
(0.014)

-0.039**
(0.005)

Demographic, HS &
College

-0.067**
(0.018)

-0.092**
(0.014)

-0.014
(0.013)

0.005
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.001)

0.004
(0.013)

-0.017**
(0.004)

Observations

18,869

19,600

21,886

25,303

70,793

63,292

95,873

Demographic controls and High School (HS) variables are as described Section 1. The college controls are college GPA at graduation and college major
indicators. Each cell presents results from a separate regression. Definitions of “Direct Attendee” and “Transfer Students” follow the description in Section 1.
2
Robust standard errors in the first four columns and clustered at the last institution level in the final three columns are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical
significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

Table 9. Differences in Earnings between Direct Attendees and Transfer Students Using Varying Reference Groups
Controls
HS Fixed Effects

1

Other 4 Direct Attendees
UT Direct TAMU Direct
Attendee
Attendee
0.147**
0.200**
(0.006)
(0.005)

Reference Group:
Other 4 Direct Attendees
Other 4 → Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
→ UT
→ TAMU
→ UT
→ TAMU
-0.001
0.116**
0.044**
0.141**
(0.018)
(0.013)
(0.020)
(0.015)

CC → Other 4
CC →
CC →
UT
TAMU
0.026*
0.171**
(0.014)
(0.009)

Demographics & HS

0.092**
(0.007)

0.153**
(0.005)

-0.022
(0.018)

0.096**
(0.013)

0.027
(0.021)

0.122**
(0.015)

0.005
(0.014)

0.149**
(0.009)

Demographics, HS &
College

0.105**
(0.007)

0.118**
(0.005)

0.038**
(0.017)

0.108**
(0.012)

0.058**
(0.022)

0.097**
(0.016)

0.033**
(0.013)

0.125**
(0.009)

Observations

78,885

81,425

62,558

63,005

10,807

11,254

36,618

39,751

Demographic controls and High School (HS) variables are as described Section 1. The HS Controls include HS fixed effects. The college controls are college
GPA at graduation and college major indicators. Each cell presents results from a separate regression. Definitions of “Direct Attendee” and “Transfer Students”
follow the description in Section 1.
2
Robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

43

Table 10: Differences in Earnings between Direct Attendees and Transfer Students
Conditional on Graduation Using HS and Demographic Controls, By Race/Ethnicity
and Gender
Group
White
Observations
Hispanic
Observations
Black
Observations
Asian
Observations
Males
Observations
Females
1

Observations

UT Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.116** -0.160**
(0.023)
(0.017)
12,920
13,564

TAMU Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.076**
-0.071**
(0.016)
(0.010)
19,164
22,428

Other Four-year Graduates
Other Four Flagship
CC
-0.015
-0.022
-0.050**
(0.009)
(0.016)
(0.006)
44,794
39,755
62,273

-0.163**
(0.053)
2,326

-0.007
(0.051)
2,402

-0.075
(0.064)
1,629

-0.054
(0.042)
1,727

-0.020
(0.018)
14,056

0.026
(0.036)
12,696

-0.005
(0.010)
19,640

0.138
(0.138)
664

0.058
(0.126)
678

-0.319
(0.234)
480

-0.138
(0.103)
501

-0.018
(0.022)
8,723

0.058
(0.072)
7,788

-0.035*
(0.018)
9,708

-0.035
(0.057)
2,916

-0.108
(0.059)
2,910

0.038
(0.134)
577

-0.111
(0.112)
606

-0.058
(0.050)
3,103

0.017
(0.071)
2,947

-0.103**
(0.030)
4,083

-0.147**
(0.026)
8.306

-0.166**
(0.025)
8,565

-0.033
(0.020)
9,913

-0.066**
(0.015)
11,580

-0.034**
(0.010)
26,419

-0.004
(0.019)
23,953

-0.059**
(0.007)
7,120

-0.080**
(0.024)
10,563

-0.123**
(0.021)
11,035

-0.111**
(0.018)
11,973

-0.073**
(0.013)
13,723

-0.012
(0.008)
44,379

-0.009
(0.016)
39,344

-0.035**
(0.005)
60,155

All estimates include demographic controls and High School (HS) variables that are as described Section 1. The HS Controls
include HS fixed effects. Each cell presents results from a separate regression. Definitions of “Direct Attendee” and “Transfer
Students” follow the description in Section 1.
2
Robust standard errors in the first four columns and standard errors clustered at the last institution attended level in the final three
columns are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10%
level.

44

Table 11. Differences in Earnings between Direct Attendees and Transfer Students Using Varying Reference Groups and
Including HS and Demographic Controls, by Gender
Controls
Males:
Demographic & HS
Demographic, HS &
College
Observations
Females:
Demographic & HS

1

Demographic, HS &
College
Observations

Other 4 Direct Attendees
UT Direct TAMU Direct
Attendee
Attendee

Reference Group:
Other 4 Direct Attendees
Other 4 → Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
→ UT
→ TAMU
→ UT
→ TAMU

CC → Other 4
CC →
CC →
UT
TAMU

0.119**
(0.010)
0.134**
(0.080)
30,855

0.191**
(0.080)
0.136**
(0.008)
32,153

-0.034
(0.027)
0.047
(0.026)
23,677

0.163**
(0.019)
0.152**
(0.018)
23,986

0.046
(0.032)
0.112**
(0.034)
3,870

0.200**
(0.023)
0.142**
(0.024)
4,179

0.023
(0.023)
0.051**
(0.023)
13,431

0.193**
(0.012)
0.162**
(0.014)
15,148

0.065**
(0.009)
0.079**
(0.009)
48,002

0.111**
(0.006)
0.106**
(0.006)
49,274

-0.023
(0.023)
0.022
(0.023)
38,883

0.001
(0.008)
0.055**
(0.018)
39,021

0.014
(0.028)
0.030
(0.029)
6,940

0.018
(0.022)
0.051*
(0.023)
7,078

-0.011
(0.019)
0.013
(0.018)
23,188

0.072**
(0.011)
0.085**
(0.012)
24,604

Demographic controls and High School (HS) variables are as described Section 1. The HS Controls include HS fixed effects. The college controls are college
GPA at graduation and college major indicators. Each cell presents results from a separate regression. Definitions of “Direct Attendee” and “Transfer Students”
follow the description in Section 1.
2
Robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

45

Table A-1: Differences in Earnings between Direct Attendees and Transfer Students
Conditional on Graduation Controlling for All Observables, By Race/Ethnicity and
Gender
Group
White
Observations
Hispanic
Observations
Black
Observations
Asian
Observations
Males
Observations
Females
1

Observations

UT Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.077** -0.102**
(0.022)
(0.017)
12,920
13,564

TAMU Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.014
0.001
(0.013)
(0.010)
19,164
22,428

Other Four-year Graduates
Other Four Flagship
CC
0.007
-0.011
-0.024**
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.005)
44,794
39,755
62,273

-0.110**
(0.049)
2,326

-0.047
(0.049)
2,402

-0.044
(0.058)
1,629

-0.029
(0.042)
1,727

0.002
(0.017)
14,056

0.048
(0.033)
12,696

0.003
(0.010)
19,640

0.141
(0.134)
664

0.088
(0.124)
678

-0.258
(0.190)
480

-0.057
(0.120)
501

0.005
(0.022)
8,723

0.080
(0.072)
7,788

-0.011
(0.017)
9,708

0.026
(0.052)
2,916

-0.087
(0.052)
2,910

-0.004
(0.130)
577

-0.057
(0.095)
606

0.028
(0.045)
3,103

0.054
(0.060)
2,947

-0.059**
(0.028)
4,083

-0.094**
(0.026)
8.306

-0.111**
(0.022)
8,565

0.023
(0.018)
9,913

0.012
(0.014)
11,580

0.011
(0.012)
26,419

0.037
(0.021)
23,953

-0.024**
(0.007)
7,120

-0.054**
(0.024)
10,563

-0.082**
(0.021)
11,035

-0.047**
(0.019)
11,973

-0.008
(0.013)
13,723

-0.002
(0.009)
44,379

-0.010
(0.018)
39,344

-0.018**
(0.006)
60,155

Demographic controls and High School (HS) variables are as described Section 1. The college controls are college GPA at
graduation and college major indicators. Definitions of “Direct Attendee” and “Transfer Students” follow the description in Section
1.
2
Robust standard errors in the first four columns and standard errors clustered at the last institution attended level in the final three
columns are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10%
level.

46

Table A-2. Differences in Earnings Between Direct Attendees and Transfers, Conditional on Graduation, 1996 & 1997 Cohorts
Controls
HS Fixed Effects

1

UT Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.112** -0.178**
(0.039)
(0.031)

TAMU Graduates
Other Four
CC
-0.072**
-0.077**
(0.029)
(0.021)

Other Four-year Graduates
Other Four Flagship
CC
-0.016
0.063** -0.045**
(0.015)
(0.029)
(0.010)

Demographic & HS

-0.058
(0.040)

-0.116**
(0.033)

-0.024
(0.030)

-0.022
(0.020)

-0.013
(0.015)

0.043
(0.029)

-0.029**
(0.010)

Demographic, HS &
College

-0.045
(0.038)

-0.065**
(0.032)

0.024
(0.038)

0.049**
(0.022)

-0.002
(0.015)

0.039
(0.027)

-0.015
(0.010)

4,530

4,811

5,599

6,512

16,613

14,836

22,392

Observations

Demographic controls and High School (HS) variables are as described Section 1. The college controls are college GPA at graduation and college major
indicators. Each cell presents results from a separate regression. Definitions of “Direct Attendee” and “Transfer Students” follow the description in Section 1.
2
Robust standard errors are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

Table A-3. Differences in Earnings between Direct Attendees and Transfer Students Using Varying Reference Groups, 1996 &
1997 Cohorts
Controls
HS Fixed Effects

1

Other 4 Direct Attendees
UT Direct TAMU Direct
Attendee
Attendee
0.158**
0.203**
(0.013)
(0.011)

Reference Group:
Other 4 Direct Attendees
Other 4 → Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
Other 4
→ UT
→ TAMU
→ UT
→ TAMU
0.010
0.142**
0.056
0.169**
(0.036)
(0.046)
(0.042)
(0.030)

CC → Other 4
CC →
CC →
UT
TAMU
0.037
0.201**
(0.028)
(0.018)

Demographics & HS

0.101**
(0.014)

0.154**
(0.011)

-0.006
(0.036)

0.126**
(0.026)

0.034
(0.043)

0.158**
(0.031)

0.001
(0.028)

0.173**
(0.019)

Demographics, HS &
College

0.112**
(0.014)

0.106**
(0.011)

0.032
(0.035)

0.122**
(0.026)

0.054
(0.045)

0.129**
(0.035)

0.042
(0.028)

0.164**
(0.019)

Observations

18,547

19,438

14,647

14,825

8,656

9,466

2,596

2,774

Demographic controls and High School (HS) variables are as described Section 1. The HS Controls include HS fixed effects. The college controls are college
GPA at graduation and college major indicators. Each cell presents results from a separate regression. Definitions of “Direct Attendee” and “Transfer Students”
follow the description in Section 1.

47

