                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE CASH FLOW CORPORATE INCOME TAX




                         Mervyn A. King




                     Working Paper No. 1993




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 1986




Paper prepared for the NBER Conference on The Effects of Taxation
on Capital Formation, Palm Beach, February 13-16, 1986. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            Working Paper #1993
                                            August 1986




                  The Cash Flow Corporate Income Tax




                               ABSTRACT




The current debate on tax reform has raised again the question of how the
corporate tax system should be altered.     The cumulative effect of piece
meal changes to the tax system has been to produce major distortions in the
pattern of savings and investment and falling revenue in real terms.     To
overcome these problems, reform, both in the US and UK, has focussed on
ways to tax the real economic income of companies. The main problems with
this approach are the difficulties of (a) indexing the tax treatment of
income from capital in a comprehensive manner and (b) defining economic
depreciation.   This paper discusses and alternative way to obtain the
objective of fiscal neutrality without a significant erosion of the tax
base.   The implications of such a cash flow corporate income tax for
financial and investment decisions are discussed both theoretically and in
terms of potential and administrative and practical problems of
implementation.




                                            Professor Mervyn A. King
                                            Department of Economics
                                            London School of Economics
                                            Houghton Street
                                            London WC2A 2AE
                                             ENGLAND
                    THE CASH FLOW CORPORATE INCOME TAX

                                     by
                               Mervyn A. King
1. INTRODUCTION



    Two themes have dominated the debate on corporate tax reform in recent

years. First, there is a widespread perception that the cumulative effect

of piecemeal changes to the tax system has been to           produce major
distortions in the pattern of savings and investment.     The magnitude of

these distortions has recently been documented in King and Fullerton

(1984). As a result the goal of "fiscal neutrality" has attracted a good

deal of support. Secondly, there has been growing concern over the steady

erosion of revenues accruing to the government from the corporate sector.

    The practical expression of these perceptions has been the elimination

of many concessions to investment and savings particularly at the corporate

level.   This can be seen most clearly in the major overhaul of the

corporate tax system that occurred in the UK in 1984, (the transition to

which was completed in April 1986) and in the US Treasury proposals in both

their original November 1984 and subsequent May 1985 versions (henceforth

Treasury I and Treasury II respectively). Throughout the post-war period

governments of various persuasions have attempted to stimulate capital

formation by offering investment incentives of increasing generosity.

These have taken the form of cash grants, credits against tax liabilities,

or straightforward tax allowances. But the concessions were introduced in

an ad hoc fashion and by the late 1970's the resulting pattern of

incentives was difficult to justify in terms of any rational view of the

optimal taxation of savings.    Effective tax rates on investment projects

varied enormously from one type of project to another (King and Fullerton,

1984). In response to these problems both the US and UK proposals were an

attempt to move toward fiscal neutrality by adopting a tax base that could
                                 -2-
more accurately be described as a measure of economic income. Many of the

concessions to investment were eliminated in return for a cut in the

corporate tax rate.

    The recent debate on tax reform in the US and UK shows that the attempt

to return to a comprehensive income tax raises at least as many questions

as it answers. The calculation of economic depreciation of an asset, and

the measures that are required to index the corporate tax system for

inflation, are very difficult to implement in practice. It is appropriate,

therefore, to ask whether there is an alternative way to attain the

objective of fiscal neutrality without a significant erosion of the tax

base.

    In this paper we discuss such an alternative. It is called the cash

flow corporate income tax.    The basic principle behind the idea is that

the company is taxed on the net cash flow received from its real business

activities. No distinction is made between capital and income in the

calculation of a company's tax base. By basing the tax on cash flow the

measurement of economic income is removed from the concern of the tax

authorities.     Such a system achieves fiscal neutrality by harmonising

investment incentives on a common basis, namely immediate expensing of all

investment expenditure. The incentive to invest with such a tax is greater

than would be the case under either Treasury I or Treasury II plans, and

also under the new UK corporate tax system.    The motivation for the cash

flow tax is to apply the principles of a consumption or expenditure tax to

the corporate sector. The idea is not new and can be traced back at least

as far as Brown (1948) and its practical implementation was discussed in

King (1975), Kay and King (1978), Meade Committee (1978), and Aaron and

Galper (1985).
                                     - 3-
    There are three parts to the paper.        First, Section 2 describes the

principles of a cash flow corporate income tax and explains how it would

work. The second part analyses the effects of the corporate cash flow tax

on the firm's choice of financial policy and its debt-equity mix, and also

upon the cost of capital facing the company when making investment

decisions. Financial policy is analysed in section 3 and section 4

discusses the impact of the tax on the cost of capital to a firm and the

effective tax rate on an investment project. Attention will be focussed on

three issues that have received rather little attention in previous

discussions. First, the nature of any problems that arise from the

interaction between a cash flow tax at the corporate level and an income

tax at the personal level. Secondly, the incidence of the corporate cash

flow tax depends upon the marginal source of finance to the representative

company, and the identification of the marginal source of funds requires a

general equilibrium model of the corporate sector's capital structure.

Thirdly, the corporate cash flow tax illustrates vividly the potential for

dynamic inconsistency in government fiscal policy.

    The final part of the paper, Section 5, discusses some of the more

practical problems that would arise if the cash flow corporate income tax

were to be implemented. These include (i) transitional arrangements, (ii)

international considerations, and (iii) the likely revenue consequences of

a change in the tax base.



2. A CASH FLOW CORPORATE INCOME TAX

         Recent   research   has shown that the corporate income tax introduces

a  number of distortions into savings and investment decisions.             To

eliminate these one might either move to a more neutral tax base            or

eliminate the separate tax cn corporations altogether. The latter
                                 -4-
course would have many attractions were it not for the following two

considerations.   First, a corporate income tax exists already, and to

abolish it would be to yield windfall capital gains to the current owners

of corporate equity. There is truth in the well-known adage that "an old

tax is a good tax". Secondly, in the absence of a tax on corporate income

it may be difficult to tax the capital income received by foreign investors

in domestic companies or domestic subsidiaries of foreign corporations.

    The cash flow corporate income tax represents an attempt to design a

tax that is neutral with respect to both financial and investment

decisions, and at the same time continues to yield the government positive

revenue from past investments, from profits in excess of the normal rate of

return, and also from activities financed by overseas investors.       It is

attractive for a further reason, namely that the base of the tax requires

no adjustment for inflation, and hence that the complicated indexation

provisions for depreciation, for example, required under alternative

corporate tax systems are unnecessary with a cash flow tax.        This is

because the tax is based on the sources and uses of funds statement and not

the profit and loss account.       The tax eliminates the necessity of

calculating "economic profit". Hence there is no need to construct a true

measure of depreciation nor to make any adjustment for the effects of

inflation.

    The basic principle of the tax is to levy a charge on the net cash flow

to the company resulting from its real economic activities.   The tax base

can be measured as the difference between the receipts from sales of goods

and services and the purchases of all real goods and services required in

the production process, including purchases of capital goods. At the same

time the tax base would disallow any deduction for the financing of the

investment.   Hence there would be no deductibility of either interest

payments nor dividends. The major departures from the present system
                                   -5-
would be the granting of immediate expensing (100 per cent first year

depreciation allowances) to all forms of investment (but given this there

would be no need for an investment tax credit),        and interest payments

would no longer qualify as a deduction for the purposes of the corporate

income tax.    Moreover, there would be no room for dividend deduction

schemes of the type proposed in the recent Treasury plans.       In practice,

there would need to be transitional arrangements to prevent both undue

hardship and also tax avoidance during the transition from the current

system to a new cash flow tax base. These, and other practical questions to

which satisfactory answers must be provided before the tax could be
implemented, are discussed further in Section 5 below.

    The nature of double entry book-keeping means that the total sources of

funds to a company are identical to its total uses of funds. An important

implication of this identity is that the base of the cash flow tax can be

described in either of two ways. The first is the difference between sales

and purchases; the net cash flow from real economic activity. The second

is the diffference between dividends paid to shareholders and issues of new

shares.

    The former may be described as the corporate cash flow base and the

latter as the net equity distributions base.       To see the relationship

between the two examine the corporate sources and uses of funds shown in

Table 1.   In terms of the notation of Table 1 the two tax bases, denoted by

TB1 and TB2 respectively, are given by the equations



              TB1=R -     I                              (2.1)




              TB2   D -   S                              (2.2)
                                       -6-


From the flow of funds identity it follows that




              TB2 + T   TB1 + (B   -
                                       P)              (2.3)



    The two   differences between the corporate cash flow and net equity

distributions bases can be seen to be the following. First, because taxes

paid enter into the sources and uses of funds statement, the corporate cash

flow basis is a measure of the tax base on a tax-inclusive basis, whereas

the definition in terms of net equity distributions is measured on a

tax-exclusive basis. If the tax rate on the corporate cash flow base were

fifty per cent, then this would be equivalent to a tax rate of 100 per cent

on the net equity distributions base.        Secondly, to the extent that a

cornpany earns real profits from transactions in financial assets (other

than equities), then the corporate cash flow base would not include those

profits. Only if the net equity distributions base were used would such

profits be taxed.       This is a major consideration for financial
institutions, such as banks, which derive their earnings primarily from the

provision of financial services for which no direct charge is levied but

which are reflected in differences between borrowing and lending rates.

The same phenomenon can be observed in the national accounts in which the

real economic profits of the financial sector are recorded as negative.

This is because the national accounts use real transactions to measure

profits and ignore profits on financial transactions. If no profit is made

on such financial transactions then the present value of interest payments

equals the present value of net borrowing, and over time, and given a

constant tax rate, the corporate cash flow base and the net equity
                                   -7-


 distributions base are identical. This is likely to be approximately true

for major industrial corporations, and as far as nonfinancial activity is

concerned the two bases have identical economic effects.     It will prove

convenient to analyse these effects in terms of the corporate cash flow

base because this may more readily be compared with the existing base and

with reforms that have been proposed.       The two bases could be made

identically equal by modifying the corporate cash flow base to include the

difference between net new borrowing and net interest payments.    In other

words, interest deductibility would continue but new borrowing would

constitute a taxable receipt. It is clear from equation (2.3) that the

amended corporate cash flow base must in all circumstances be identical to

the net equity distributions base except for the fact that the former is

tax-inclusive and the latter tax-exclusive. The tax-exclusive rate, t2, is

related to the tax-inclusive rate, t1, by the equation




                              tl
                                                           (2.4)



   Apart from the treatment of profits on financial transactions, there is

a difference between the corporate cash flow base and the net equity

distributions base in terms of the transitional problems that might arise

in attempting to move from the present system toward a cash flow tax. Some

of these practical issues are taken up in Section 5. But we turn first to

an analysis of the long-run effects of the cash flow corporate income tax

on the optimal financial and investment policy of a company once the tax is

in place, and we contrast these effects with those that would follow from
                                    -8-


the adoption of alternative tax bases such as those proposed in the recent

Treasury plans.



3. FINANCIAL POLICY AND ThE DEBT - EQUITY MIX



    It is well known that the current US corporate income tax affords a tax

advantage to debt rather than equity, because of the deductibility of

interest payments, and discriminates in favour of internal equity finance

(retained earnings) and against the issue of new shares. The rationale for

this pattern of incentives is unclear.          A thriving equity market,
particularly for new risk capital, provides one of the main routes by which

household savings are channelled into corporate investment. It is perhaps

not surprising, therefore, that there have been frequent proposals to

relieve the double taxation of dividends inherent in the present system.

The most recent were the Treasury I and Treasury II plans, both of which

advocated a partial dividend deduction.    In this section we contrast the

incentives to use debt and equity that are implied by a cash flow tax on

the one hand, and alternative reforms, such as the Treasury dividend

deduction proposal, on the other.

    To do this we first analyse the effects of different taxes on a

company's choice of financial policy in general, and then apply the results

to particular systems of company taxation.      Both personal and corporate

taxes are relevant to the choice of debt-equity mix.      Two personal tax

rates are distinguished here, the marginal income tax of investors, denoted

by m, and the effective tax rate on accrued capital gains, denoted by z.
                                    -9-


Differences in tax rates among investors will be discussed below.   Because

capital gains tax is charged on gains only when they are realised, the

effective tax rate on accrued gains is significantly lower than the nominal

statutory rate.      In addition, it has been argued that the ability to
exploit the short term - long term gains distinction further erodes the

effective rate and may possibly lead to a negative effective tax rate. For

our purposes we note solely that the value of z is bounded above by the

statutory rate.

    Three corporate tax variables are relevant to the analysis. These are

the rate of tax on taxable profits that would be paid if no profits were

distributed, denoted by r, the opportunity cost of retained earnings in

terms of gross (i.e. pre-income tax) dividends, foregone, denoted by 0, and

the fraction of interest payments that are tax-deductible, denoted by 3.

The value of      measures the rate at which cash in the company's hands may

be transformed into cash in the hands of the stockholders (Feldstein 1970,

King 1971, 1977). Under the current US tax system a transfer of a dollar

from the company to the shareholders produces a gross dividend of one

dollar. Hence       equals unity.   With alternative tax systems, such as a

dividend deduction scheme or the imputation system employed in most EEC

countries, the value of       generally exceeds unity to reflect the credit

given to the shareholders, explicitly or implicitly, for taxes already paid

at the corporate level.     To evaluate 0 under different tax regimes it is

helpful to define the total tax liability of the company, denoted by T, as

the total taxes paid by the company and stockholders together less the

income tax on dividends and capital gains tax paid by the stockholders.

From this definition
                                            - 10   -



                         (l-')
           T=rY+                 .0                                  (3.1)
                           0




where Y is taxable corporate income and G is total gross dividends. From

the definition of 0 the extra taxes (minus the credits) that result from a

distribution are (l-)/ per unit of gross dividends.

    We may now contrast (3.1) with the formulae that describe the operation

of various tax regimes.               Under the current US system the corporate tax

liability is simply

              T = cY                                                         (3.2)

where c is the rate of corporate income tax.

    Equating coefficients in (3.1) and (3.2) confirms that r = c and

   =   1.0.
    Under the imputation system used widely in Europe part of the corporate

tax liability is credited against the shareholders' income tax liability on

dividends.         In effect, the company is deemed to have paid income tax on

behalf of the shareholders at some rate which is described as the rate of

imputation (denoted by s). Hence



              T=cY- sO                                                       (3.3)




This implies that

              r   =c
                                                                             (3.4)
                    1
              0=—
                   1-s


       The gross dividend received by the stockholder is equal to the cash

dividend payment made by the company grossed up by the rate of imputation.
                                        - 11   -




    The Treasury plans proposed that a fraction of dividends be deductible

for the purposes of the corporate income tax.               Denote the fraction of

dividends that are deductible by X.                In Treasury I X was 0.5 and in
Treasury II X was 0.1.             With a dividend deduction the corporate tax

liability becomes

         T =   c(Y     -
                           XC)                                             (3.5)

Hence

         T   =C
                                                                           (3.6)
                  1
         0=—
               1- cX



    From this it can be seen that in terms of economic effects the dividend

deduction proposed is equivalent to an imputation system with a rate of

imputation equal to the product of the corporate tax rate and the fraction

of dividends that is deductible. There are two points to note about this.

First, a change in the corporate tax rate will automatically change the

effective rate of imputation unless a compensating change in X is made.

Secondly, the effective rate of imputation is very sensitive to the value

of X.   For example, in the Treasury I plan, with a corporate tax rate of

33% and X = 0.5,            the effective imputation rate is 16.5%.      Under the

Treasury II proposals, with the same corporate tax rate but X =           0.1,   the

effective imputation rate is only 3.3%. Moreover, both values are low when

compared with imputation rates in Europe. In the UK, for example, the rate

of imputation is 30% (from April 1986, 29%).

    The cash flow tax is a variant of the classical system of corporate

income taxation which is that currently used in the US. The value of 0 in

both cases is unity. The major difference between the cash flow tax and
                                         - 12   -




the present system lies in the treatment of debt finance. With a cash flow
tax interest payments are not deductible for corporate income tax purposes

(or, equivalently, borrowing is a taxable receipt). Debt finance would be

less attractive than at present.

    The incentive to use different sources of finance can be seen from the

following pairwise comparisons between debt finance, retained earnings and

new share issues. In each case we compare the net of tax income that could

be distributed out of one unit of corporate profits corresponding to the

differing methods of remunerating investors implied by the different
sources of finance.         The results are simply stated below; derivations may

be found in King (1977, 1986). At this stage we ignore indexation of the

tax system.

    (i) debt finance is preferred to retained earnings if



         (1-rn)     (l-z)(1-3r)                                            (3.7)


    (ii) debt finance is preferred to new share issues if



         1        (l-f3r)                                                  (3.8)


    (iii) retained earnings are preferred to new share issues if



         (l-z) >    (1-m)'                                                 (3.9)



    From these equations it is clear that with a cash flow corporate income

tax there would be fiscal neutrality between debt finance and new equity

issues (from 3.8) .         Retained earnings would be the most attractive source
                                    - 13   -



of   finance for taxable investors, and financial policy would be a matter of

complete indifference for tax-exempt investors such as pension funds.

Neutrality could be achieved for all investors by either taxing capital

gains at income tax rates or adopting a consumption tax treatment of

household capital income.     Under the current US tax code debt finance

dominates new share issues, and for almost all investors debt finance also

dominates retained earnings. With the dividend deduction proposal of the

Treasury plans the condition for debt finance to be more attractive than

new equity issues is (from 3.8)



           !3 >   X
                                                                   (3.10)



     Only if the rate at which dividends may be deducted exceeds the

proportion of interest payments that is deductible will new share issues

dominate debt finance.       The Treasury plan envisaged retaining full
deductibility of interest (3l) and values for X of 0.5 and 0.1 for

Treasury I and Treasury II respectively.        Under these proposals debt

finance would retain its tax advantage. Moreover, the effective imputation

rate would be independent of the tax rate of the investor and so neutrality

between internal and external equity finance would be impossible to

achieve.

     It has long been argued in the US that partial integration of the

corporate and personal income taxes, as far as dividends are concerned,

would alleviate much of the discrimination against equity inherent in the

current system. But partial measures of this type do not deal adequately

with the substantial spread among marginal investor tax rates. Indeed, the

imputation system in Britain has been criticised by the employers'

federation (CBI, 1985, p.69) on precisely these grounds.
                                  - 14   -



   "It   is clear that the 1986 system ..       will    for a majority of

shareholders, provide either a strong bias in favour of distribution or

indifference as between distribution and retention ..   the   1986 system will

in time produce broadly two types of company:

   a)    Typical quoted companies with mainly institutional or basic rate

         taxpayer shareholders, which will make very full dividend payments



    b)   Companies with largely top rate taxpayer shareholders, making

         minimal distributions.

    The Exchequer will of course lose substantially as a result of this".

    The conclusion reached by the CBI's Tax Reform Working Party was that

Britain should adopt a cash flow corporation tax.



SECTION 4 THE COST OF CAPITAL



    The principle aim of the cash flow corporate income tax is to avoid

distortion of investment decisions by ensuring that the cost of capital is

independent of the particular investment project under consideration.       By

the cost of capital is meant here the pre-tax rate of return net of

decpreciation that is rquired on a project in order to call forth the funds

needed to finance it. It is the financial rather than the user cost of

capital (the latter includes also the return necessary to finance

depreciation of the asset).

    To illustrate the effect of the cash flow tax, and of other possible

reforms, on the cost of capital we consider the simple case in which true

 economic depreciation occurs at the nonstochastic exponential rate &.    With
 this assumption a firm's cost of capital, denoted by c, is given by the

 foi1oing expression:
                                        -15 -




                                   (1-fA-f2'r-f3g)
                             c —                     p+ó-   -
                                                                  (4.1)
                                       (l-r)




where f1 —   proportion    of investment expenditure that qualifies for ordinary

             depreciation allowances.

             proportion of investment expenditure that receives cash flow tax

             treatment (i.e. immediate expensing)

        — proportion of investment expenditure that qualifies for a cash

             grant or investment tax credit.

      AD —   present   value of tax savings from ordinary depreciation

             allowances.

      g — rate      of cash grant or equivalent rate of investment tax credit

      p — rate      at which company discounts net of corporate tax cash flows

      6 — exponential       rate of true economic depreciation

         —   rate   of increase of price of investment goods.



    Equation (4.1) states that the required pre-tax real rate of return on

a project, adjusted for depreciation, is equal to the real rate of return

that must be offered to the suppliers of finance grossed up by the

corporate tax rate and multipled by the effective price of a new asset.

The latter is the market price less the present value of the tax allowances

for depreciation and other investment incentives.                Indexation of

depreciation allowances lowers the effective price of capital goods.         For

simplicity of exposition (4.1) omits corporate wealth taxes and the

taxation of the inflationary component of inventory profits. A treatment

of these issues may be found in King and Fullerton (1984) and King (1986).
                                               - 16     -


      The value of the rate at which the company discounts net of corporate

tax cash flows, denoted by p, depends upon the source of finance used for

the project and upon the identity of the marginal investor. It depends also

upon the indexation provisions of the tax code.                           In a partial equilibrium

model in which all investors have identical tax rates the following are the

relevant expressions for the corporate discount rate for each source of

finance (see appendix for the derivations). The nominal interest rate in

economy is denoted by i.



(i)     debt finance            p    i(l-r) + 3T1rI                             (4.2)




                                     ."
                                                ml. -
                                                    1
                                                            zI Z
(ii) new share issues p =            i/O +                  ,.                   (4.3)
                                                 (1-m)O



                                        1-rn            ml. -
                                                          1
                                                                   zI Z
(iii) retained earnings p            i —        +                                (44)
                                        l-z                 l-z




where I and I are dummy variables that take the value unity when interest

payments and capital gains, respectively, are fully indexed for tax
purposes, and are zero in the absence of indexation.

      Partial equilibrium expressions for the cost of capital corresponding

to the different sources of finance can be derived by substituting the

appropriate values for the corporate discount rate into equation (4.1). In

a general equilibrium model, however, we would expect that the discount

rates would be equal for all sources of finance employed by the firm, and
                                   - 17    -



the   difficulty in constructing convincing general equilibrium models is to

imagine plausible mechanisms by which the marginal discount rates are

brought into equality. One such model is the Miller equilibrium (Miller

1977) in which investors face constraints on short sales of all assets. In

this equilibrium the constraints are binding on all investors except those

who are indifferent between equity and debt finance as far as taxes are

concerned.    The marginal investor is the unconstrained investor, and the

company, which itself faces no constraints on its financial policy, is

indifferent at the margin between debt and equity finance.          For the

marginal investor the cost of equity finance is equal to that of debt

finance and the income tax rate of the marginal investor is such that the

discount rate given by equations (4.2) and (4.4) are equal. Hence from the

tax point of view this is equivalent to calculating the cost of capital as

if the firm financed marginal projects by debt finance.         In such an
equilibrium it is easy to evaluate the effects of different tax regimes on

the cost of capital and hence the optimal level of investment. In the case

of the cash flow corporate income tax, interest payments are not deductible

for tax purposes (f3 — 0) and there are no indexation provisions.       The

corporate discount rate is from (4.2) simply the nominal interest rate. In

addition, all investment expenditure can be immediately expensed (f2l,

f1—f3—O) and hence from equation (4.1) the cost of capital is given by the

following expression



                                   c      i -   r           (4.5)



In other words, the cost of capital is equal to the real interest rate.

The rates of tax, both at the personal and corporate level, have no effect

on the relationship between the market interest rate and the required rate
                                      - 18   -




of   return on investment projects.     The decision rule that a firm uses in

the presence of taxes is identical to the rule that it would use in the

absence of taxes. The existence of a cash flow corporate income tax does

not distort the investment decision.

      The reason for this result is clear.       With immediate expensing the

government is effectively subsidising investment at exactly the same rate

as it taxes profits.      The cost of any project is reduced by the same

fraction as the future benefits will be reduced when taxes are levied

(assuming a constant tax rate). Given that both the benefits and costs of

the project are reduced in the same proportion, then provided the discount

rate is unaffected by the tax rate any project that was accepted in the

absence of a tax would be accepted with the tax. This result assumed that

there are always sufficient taxable profits for the tax allowances to be

used to offset current tax liabilities. Alternatively the tax system must

provide for complete loss offset by allowing tax losses to be carried

for-.ard marked up by the nominal interest rate. With this tax system the

government becomes a partner in the firm, albeit a sleeping partner (see

also King, 1975).     It makes a contribution on new investment at the same

rate as it shares in the profits of the enterprise.           On new marginal

investment projects the system is effectively a zero tax.              But on

intra-marginal projects and on investment made prior to the introduction of

the cash flow corporate income tax, the tax acts as a capital levy on the

owners of corporate assets.

      One of the great advantages of the cash flow tax is that the cost of

capital can be seen to be independent of the inflation rate without any

need to introduce complicated indexation provisions.       The same cannot be

 said of any tax that attempts to measure "economic profits". The only long

 run problem with the cash flow tax is that there is a possible time
                                       - 19   -



inconsistency   involved in government policy.          Given that the tax has no

disincentive effects on investment but yields revenue from                    the

intra-marginal projects, the government would have an apparent incentive to

announce that the tax rate would remain at its present level but yet in the

future to go back on its word and to raise the rate of tax. In this way it

would appear to be able to raise additional revenue from lump sum taxes.

If this increase in the tax rate were anticipated then of course the tax

would no longer be a lump sum tax and investment decisions would be

affected. In practice, the UK had a very similar tax system in force from

1973 until 1984, and no attempt was in fact made to raise the rate of tax.

Moreover, this was a period in which the administration alternated between

the two main political parties.        It is possible that concern about their

reputation led governments        to     forego   the     short-run benefits of
retrospective taxation.

    If we maintain the assumption of a Miller equilibrium, and turn to the

effects of other possible tax systems then, with interest deductibility,

the only system that is neutral is one which offers no accelerated

depreciation but grants ordinary depreciation allowances at rates
corresponding to true economic depreciation.        These must be fully indexed

for inflation.      Such was the aim of Treasury I.                Since economic

depreciation is notoriously difficult to measure, such a system could only

be expected to approximate the requirements for neutrality.           Morever, in

the discussions that followed the publication of Treasury I, indexation

found much less favour with Congress than with the authors of the Treasury

plans. This experience appears to support the view of the Meade Committee

(1978) which recommended a cash flow corporate income tax over a tax based

on comprehensive income partly on the grounds that the calculations

required for a measure of "economic profit" were complex and difficult to
                                 - 20   -



administer.
    If we relax the assumption of a Miller equilibirum, then the discount

rate for the company will reflect the tax treatment of dividends and

personal tax rates on both dividends and capital gains. There is no really

satisfactory general equilibrium model of corporate financial behaviour

outside of the simple Miller equilibrium, but if one were constructed the

marginal cost of capital would be a weighted average of the costs of

capital for the different sources of finance.       The difficulty is to

identify the weights that would be used.      Fewer distortions would be

expected from a tax system that discriminated less between the different

sources of finance, and as we saw in Section 3 the cash flow corporate

income tax scored well on this point.

    The problem with the simple Miller equilibrium is that it contains a

clearly counterfactual prediction, namely that except for the marginal

investor all other investors would be completely specialised in either debt

or equity securities. One simple alternative is to calculate a weighted

average cost of capital using as weights the average proportion of
investment financed from different sources. Such calculations were-made for

the then existing tax system in the comparative study of King and Fullerton

(1984). To constrast the effect of a cash flow tax on the cost of capital

with that of the Treasury plans, and to compare both possible reforms with

the present system, we present below updated estimates of the effective

marginal tax rate on capital income as calculated in the King and Fullerton

study.   To do this, the post-tax real rate of return to the investor

corresponding to the pre-tax rate of return on a project (the cost of

capital as defined here) is computed for each investor.        Denote this

post-tax rate of return by s.     The effective marginal tax rate is now

defined as
                                 - 21   -




                       c-s
                   t——                                     (4.6)
                        C



    Table 2 shows effective marginal tax rates for the UK and US under

several alternative tax regimes. For the UK the figures are shown for the

pre-1984 position, the new 1986 regime, and the situation that would result

if the 1986 system were converted into a cash flow corporation tax. In the

case of the US, the rates are shown for the 1984 starting point, the two

Treasury plans (I and II), and the hypothetical case of Treasury I amended

to include a pure cash flow corporate income tax but with all the personal

tax changes intact. The inflation rate assumed in the calculations is 5%

per annum.

    It is clear that even without adopting a consumption tax at the

personal level, the cash flow corporate income tax eliminates many of the

more extreme distortions that are evident in the current system.



5. PROBLEMS OF IMPLEMENTATION



5.1 Transitional Arrangements



    Two sets of issues arise when designing a suitable transition to the

new tax base.   The first consists of the problems that arise from the

application of the new tax base. The second is the question of how far the

expected consequences of the old base are continued after the introduction

of the new tax. The second is the easier to deal with and so is considered

first.
                                 - 22   -




   On the date when the new base comes into force companies have a stock

of depreciation allowances that they expect to be able to carry forward and

deduct (in a predetermined time profile) against future taxable profits.

There seems no good reason to deny companies the right to continue to

deduct depreciation allowances on past investment. To abolish the existing

stock of depreciation allowances would be akin to a windfall profits tax in

proportion to past investment; not a happy precedent to set. Nevertheless,

the Rall-Rabushka (1983) plan did imply such an effect. Moreover, unless

the date on which the tax becomes effective can be made retrospective

anticipation of the change would lead to a collapse in investment in the

period between announcement and the date when the enabling legislation was

passed.   In the UK it is possible for the government to announce that,

conditional upon the proposed legislation receiving Parliamentary approval

within a certain period, the new tax would be effective from the date of

announcement. But in the US context this seems less plausible.

    Similar arguments apply to other forms of "losses" that companies had

expected to be able to carry forward to offset against future profits.

Continuation of such loss carry forwards is straightforward under the real

basis, but with the net dividends basis the simplicity of the tax would be

reduced because net distributions constitute a tax-exclusive base whereas

loss carry forwards are inherited from a tax-inclusive regime. To retain

simplicity the loss carry forwards could be converted into a stock of tax

credits (or, more generally, a flow of tax credits over time) on the

transition date.
                                    - 23   -


      The other set of problems results from the implications of the new base

although their nature differs as between the real and net distributions

bases. With the former, the main problem is that debt interest payments

are no longer tax-deductible. For new debt finance this raises no problems,

but for borrowing incurred before the announcement of the new base there is

a retrospective charge on the cost of servicing the debt which in some,

perhaps many, cases could cause acute financial distress for highly geared

companies. One solution is simply to phase out interest deductibility by

reducing the proportion of interest payments that are deductible (the value

of 3 in section 3) gradually over a period of, say five to ten, years from

unity to zero. As far as the net distributions basis is concerned there is

a more serious transitional problem. Unless the new basis became effective

on the date of announcement, companies would have a strong incentive to

raise their debt-equity ratios by borrowing and paying high dividends

before the transition date, and then to issue new equity in order to repay

the loans and reduce dividends after the transition date in order to repay

the loans and restore their debt-equity ratios to normal levels.      Similar

incentives existed in the UK during the major corporate tax reforms of 1965

and 1973, and although revenue losses occurred the problem was regarded as

manageable.     Nevetheless, anti-avoidance provisions would be necessary

because the scope for avoidance using purely financial transactions is

large.



5.2   Long-run Administrative Problems


      In this section we describe some of the administrative problems that

the tax would present on a permanent basis.          The first concerns the

treatment of borrowing.      Under the corporate cash flow basis only real

transactions are taken into account and profits made on financial
                                   - 24   -


trasactions   are exempt from tax. This does not appear to be a satisfactory

method of taxing financial institutions. If the cash flow base were adopted

then a separate tax would be required for such                     institutions.

Alternatively, under the net equity distributions basis, which does tax the

profits on financial transactions, rules would be required to prevent

companies from issuing debt at artificially high interest rates.            Such

payments would be exempt from corporate tax and would be a method of

returning profits to the shareholders free of tax. Of course, this problem

exists under the current tax with interest deductibility.          Current rules

would need to be carried over. Some of the other problems that exist with

the current corporate tax system would remain with the new tax.            There

would still need to be a distinction between corporate and personal

expenditure in order to levy the appropriate amounts of personal income tax

on benefits provided by the company.          Under the net equity distributions

basis new rules would be required to determine the amount of dividends that

enter the tax base when some part of the dividend was paid in kind.

Shareholder benefits of all types (for example, reductions in the price of

the company's products when sold to its shareholders) come under this

heading.

    A second area of potential problems concerns the phenomenon of tax

exhaustion.     This is the situation in which the company has no current

taxable income and is accumulating tax losses that will be carried forward.

A question that arises is how far it is thought to be acceptable for

companies to trade such tax losses among themselves. Under the existing

tax systems in both the US and UK trading of tax losses takes place with

leasing.      The US authorities have taken a much harder line on this than

their UK counterparts, although it is not easy to see why companies should

 be prevented from offsetting the unintended effects of an asymmetric tax
                                    - 25   -




system.      The limiting case would be to create a market in corporate tax
losses.   Failing that, companies could be allowed to carry forward losses

marked up by the market interest rate which would leave the incentive to

invest unaffected by the asymmetric treatment of positive and negative

taxable profits. In the absence of such a provision, leasing would be the

market solution under the corporate cash flow basis. Under the net equity

distributions basis a rather different set of companies would be tax

exhausted.     These would be firms that had made substantial issues of new

shares. Such a company could reduce its tax loss by borrowing in order to

purchase shares in other resident companies, and in the absence of loss

carry forward with interest would have an incentive so to do.

    Although these problems are rather different under the two alternative

bases, they do not seem to be more serious under one than the other. The

cash flow basis perhaps has a cosmetic advantage in appearing more

familiar. But the net equity distributions basis would enable the revenue

authorities to adopt a common fiscal year for all companies without the

need for companies to change their own accounting periods.

    The treatment of overseas investment and profits remitted from abroad

also raises some important questions.          With a cash flow corporation tax

there is no obvious reason to grant credit for foreign taxes paid. This is

because the government, as has been argued above, is a partner in the

firm's equity. If the foreign corporate tax rate is at least as great as

the domestic tax rate, then the government would receive no return on its

investment in the firm's activities overseas. But if foreign tax credit is

denied then the firm receives a return on its own share of the investment

equal to the net of foreign tax rate return on the investment, i.e. the
                                   - 26   -



return   to society on this investment overseas. One problem with the denial

of foreign tax credit is that it would be difficult to impute that part of

foreign taxes attributable to investment made after the introduction of the

cash flow tax and that part attributable to investment made before the

change in the system.      Hence an alternative means of achieving the same

objective would be to deny investment relief for overseas investment.

Under the cash flow base this would be straightforward in that the

investment made overseas would not qualify for immediate expensing. With

the net equity distributions base, an additional tax would be levied on

overseas investment at the appropriate tax-inclusive rate.        Where the

foreign tax rate was below the domestic corporate tax rate then the

additional charge (or reduction in allowances for investment) would be

scaled down in proportion to the ratio of the two tax rates.          It is

interesting to note that for 12 years (1972-84) the UK government did allow

companies both to receive 100% first year allowances on overseas investment

made by branches and also to receive credit for foreign taxes paid. This

was effectively a subsidy to overseas investment. Nevertheless, it seems

unlikely that this position could be maintained if there were a permanent

shift to a cash flow corporation tax.



5.3 Revenue Implications of the Cash Flow Tax



    At first sight it might appear that a tax which offers such generous

investment incentives would require a higher tax rate to raise the same

amounts    of   revenue as under the current corporate tax system. A little

reflection, however, demonstrates that this is not the case. The new tax

base would imply the abolition of investment tax credits and grants, and
                                     - 27   -


also   of deductions for interest payments on new loans and for dividends. A

full-scale calculation of the tax rate that would be required to raise the

same amount of revenue would involve a general equilibrium analysis of the

incentive effects of the new tax. This beyond our scope here. Instead we

report some partial equilibrium estimates of the rate that will be required

assuming no behavioural responses.

    In the UK the Meade Committee (1978) found that over the period 1964-74

the required tax rate would have been 35% under the cash flow base and 34%

under the net equity distributions base.        These figures compare with the

actual tax rate of between 40 and 45% over this period. Subsequently, the

1982 Green Paper on Corporation Tax claimed that the revenue-neutral rate

of tax for the net equity distributions basis for the period 1973-81 would

have been about 200% on a tax-exclusive basis. But Edwards (1982) showed

that this calcualtion incorrectly attributed Advance Corporation Tax

payments to the total corporate tax liability, when it is in fact more

appropriately seen as a deduction at source of income tax at the basic rate

on dividends.    Making this correction he found that the revenue-neutral

rate assuming unchanged behaviour was 47% for the net equity distributions

base which compared with the actual rate of 52% that prevailed throughout

this period. Using individual company data Mayer (1982) found that for the

period 1965-76 the average rate required for revenue neutrality would have

been 52% under the cash flow base and 42% under the net equity
distributions base. All of these calculations show that there is no reason

to suppose that the tax rate would have to rise if the base were switched

to a corporate cash flow base.
                                   - 28   -



   Similar   calculations for the United States by Aaron and Galper (1985)

found that for the net equity distributions base a tax rate of 33% would

have raised the same revenue as was in fact raised during the period

1981-83 with a tax rate of 46%.     Again there seems to reason to suppose

that a switch to a cash flow base would lead to problems of revenue loss

provided adequate transitional arrangements were made.



6. Conclusions



    Recent proposals for tax reform have raised the question of how easy it

is to measure economic depreciation for the corporate sector. The effects

of any proposed reform on investment will depend upon their impact on the

cost of capital which in turn depends upon how the allowances for

depreciation built into the tax code relate to underlying true economic

depreciation. The proposals for economic depreciation embodied in Treasury

I entailed complete indexation of the corporate tax. It appears that these

proposals are unlikely to be implemented.        It is worth considering,

therefore, whether there is any alternative tax base for which the cost of

capital is independent of the inflation rate and which eliminates some of

the existing distortions between different types of investment.         One

possible candidate is the cash flow corporation tax. Two versions of this

tax were analysed in this paper;    the cash flow base on real transactions

and the net equity distributions base. From the analysis of their effects

on investment incentives, and the administrative arrangements that would be

required for their implementation, it seems that the cash flow base is

worthy of serious consideration in the current debate on reform of

corporate taxation.
                                  - 29   -


REFERENCES




Aaron, H J and H Galper (1985), Assessing Tax Reform Brookings Instjtutjon,

    Washington, DC.



Brown, E C (1948), "Business-income Taxation and Investment Incentives", in

    Income, Employment and Public Policy, Essays in Honor of

    Alvin H. Hansen, W W Norton, New York.



CBI (1985), Tax-Time for Change, Confederation of British Industry, London.



Edwards, J (1982), "The Green Paper on Corporation Tax : A Review Article",

    Fiscal Studies 3, 102-113.



Feldstein, M 5 (1970), "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behaviour",

   Review of Economic Studies 37, 57-72.



Kay, J A and M A King (1978), The British Tax System Oxford Unviersity

    Press (4th edition 1986)



King, M A (1971), "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behaviour - A Comment",

   Review of Economic Studies 38, 377-380



King, M A (1975), "Current Policy Problems in Business Taxation", in

    Bedrifts Beskatning, Norwegian School of Economics, Bergen.



King, M A (1977), Public Policy and the Corporation, Chapman and Hall,

    London.
                                     - 30   -



King,    M A (1986), "Business Taxation, Finance and Investment" mimeo,

    London School of Economics.



King, M A and D Fullerton (1984), The Taxation of Income from Capital,

    Chicago University Press



Mayer, C. (1982), "The Structure of Corporation Tax in the UK" Fiscal

    Studies 3, 121-141.



Meade Committee (1978), The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation,

    Allen-Unwin, London.



Miller, M H (1977), "Debt and Taxes", Journal of Finance, 32, 261-275



US Treasury (1984), Tax Reform for Fairness, Growth and Simplicity US

        Government Printing Office, Washington DC.



United States (1985), The President's Tax Proposals for Fairness, Growth

        and Simplicity, US Government Printing Office, Washington DC
                                   - 31   -


                TABLE 1 CORPORATE SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS




                   SOURCES                                 USES


R   Receipts from sales of goods and    I I       Investment expenditure (gross
    services less purchases of labour, I          investment less receipts from
    raw materials and services                    sales of assets).

B   Borrowing (new issues of debt less        P   Interest payments (net of
    repayments of old debt).                      interest received)

S   New share issues (less share          i D     Dividends paid (less dividends
    repurchases), including net sales     I       received)
    of shares in other companies.
                                          I T     Taxes paid.




Accounting Identity

                        R+3+SEI÷P+D+T
                                       - 32    -



TABLE 2 EFFECTIVE MARGINAL TAX RATES ON CORPORATE INVESTMENT, UK AND US (%)



                                  UK                                  US


                                       Cash-                                    Cash-
                  pre-1984      1986   Flow        1984   Treasury   Treasury   Flow
                                       Tax                   I          II      Tax




Asset:




  Machinery         -35.6       19.8   12.3         8.0     37.7       24.8     19.5

  Buildings              24.2   53.8   47.8        31.0     40.3       34.7     22.6
  Inventories            41.7   51.2   12.3        48.2     38.8       36.0     18.9




Finance method:



  Debt               -61.1      20.8   46.5 -19.1           29.2       14.0     27.3

  New shares         -    0.8   22.6   39.4        79.5     46.4       62.5     40.5

  Retained

    earnings             15.2   42.4   17.5        52.8     44.3       41.8     16.1



Overall:                 -0.1   37.4   24.1        29.9     39.3       31.0     21.1




Assumptions: (a) all projects earn 10% p.a. pre-tax return.

                (b) inflation is 5% p.a.
                                         - 33   -



APPENDIX




    In this appendix we derive expressions for the nominal discount rate

that companies will use to compare net of corporate income tax cash flows

in different periods.        The novel feature is the explicit modelling of

indexation of the tax system. The discount rate depends upon the source of

finance that the firm uses, and can be thought of as the required net of

tax return that the company must earn in order to be able to persuade

investors to supply finance to the company. The corporate discount rate is

denoted by p.



(i) debt finance




    This is the simplest case in which the nominal discount rate is simply

the effective net of tax interest rate at which the company can borrow.

This is the market interest rate, i, less the tax savings for interest

payments granted at the corporate level. A fraction 3 of interest payments

are deductible against the corporate tax rate, and if such payments are

indexed for tax purposes then the deduction applies only to real interest

payments. Hence




                   p —   i   -
                                 f3r(i-rIi)

                     —   i(l-j3r)    +                       (A.l)




where I is an indexation dummy variable that takes the value unity when

interest payments are indexed for tax purposes and zero otherwise.
                                          - 34   -



(ii)   new share issues



       Where new share issues are the optimal source of finance, the company

will distribute all of its profits as dividends and finance investment by

the sale of new equity. The return that the company earns net of corporate

tax (the value of p) must be such that the net of tax dividend that it can

finance is equal to the investor's opportunity cost of funds, which in turn

is equal to the net of tax interest rate that the investor can earn on

alternative investments. For an investor whose marginal income tax rate is

m this condition implies that




                      i-m(i-irI)      (l-m)'ôp +     zrI    (A.2)




where I is a dummy variable that takes the value unity when capital gains

are indexed for tax purposes and is zero otherwise.

       The RHS of (A2) is the net of tax dividend plus the reduction in

capital gains tax resulting from the real capital loss that arises when all

profits are distributed as dividends and capital gains tax is indexed for

inflation.      This tax benefit disappears if either inflation is zero or

capital gains tax is unindexed.

       Rearranging (A2) yields

                                 (mIt -   zlz)ir
                      p——+                                   (A.3)
                          0        (l-m)0
                                        - 35   -


(iii)   retained earnings



    In the case of retained earnings the nominal return earned by the

company, net of the investor's additional capital gains tax liability

generated by the return, must equal the investor's opportunity cost of

funds. Hence




                       -
                            m(i-I) — pz(pi1z)         (A.4)




Rearranging terms gives


                            .[l-m) +                  (A.5)
                                       [mli-zlz]
