                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ELECTION FAIRNESS AND GOVERNMENT LEGITIMACY IN AFGHANISTAN

                                            Eli Berman
                                          Michael Callen
                                           Clark Gibson
                                          James D. Long

                                       Working Paper 19949
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19949


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2014




We are grateful to Glenn Cowan, Jed Ober, Eric Bjornlund, Evan Smith, and Jon Gatto at Democracy
International (DI) and Nader Nadery, Jandad Spinghar, and Una Moore at the Free and Fair Elections
Foundation of Afghanistan (FEFA). We acknowledge the support of USAID Development Innovation
Ventures (DIV), DI, and grant #FA9550-09-1-0314 from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research,
under the Minerva Research Initiative. We are indebted to Aila Matanock, Arman Rezaee and Jacob
Shapiro for comments on a previous draft. This project would not have been possible without the
dedicatedresearch assistance of Randy Edwards, Mohammad Isaqzadeh, and Shahim Kabuli, or the
project managementskills of Katherine Levy of the UC Institute on Global Conflct and Cooperation.
Our conclusions do not necessarily reflect the opinions of our funders. Mistakes remain with the
authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Eli Berman, Michael Callen, Clark Gibson, and James D. Long. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Election Fairness and Government Legitimacy in Afghanistan
Eli Berman, Michael Callen, Clark Gibson, and James D. Long
NBER Working Paper No. 19949
March 2014
JEL No. H41,O10,O17,O53,P16

                                            ABSTRACT

International development agencies invest heavily in institution building in fragile states, including
expensive interventions to support democratic elections. Yet little evidence exists on whether elections
enhance the domestic legitimacy of governments. Using the random assignment of an innovative election
fraud-reducing intervention in Afghanistan, we find that decreasing electoral misconduct improves
multiple survey measures of attitudes toward government, including: (1) whether Afghanistan is a
democracy; (2) whether the police should resolve disputes; (3) whether members of parliament provide
services; and (4) willingness to report insurgent behavior to security forces.


Eli Berman                                         Clark Gibson
Department of Economics, 508                       Department of Political Science, UC San Diego
University of California, San Diego                9500 Gilman Drive, #0521
9500 Gilman Drive                                  La Jolla, CA 92093-0521
La Jolla, CA 92093                                 ccgibson@ucsd.edu
and NBER
elib@ucsd.edu                                      James D. Long
                                                   University of Washington
Michael Callen                                     jdlong@uw.edu
Department of Political Science
University of California, Los Angeles
4289 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA, 90095
mcallen719@gmail.com.
                                  Introduction

Can fair elections enhance the legitimacy of governments in fragile states?

International development agencies invest heavily in building democratic

institutions in states engaged in or emerging from conflict, often supporting

expensive and even dangerous electoral processes (Bjornlund 2004). In part, such

efforts rest on the assumption that democratic elections enhance the domestic

legitimacy of governments by increasing citizens’ willingness to be governed.

This willingness may derive from an individual’s perception of procedural

legitimacy, where people consider a government more legitimate when it follows

procedures that the population considers fair (Levi, Sacks and Tyler 2009; Tyler

1990, 2006; Paternoster, Brame, Bachman, and Sherman 1997; Sunshine and

Tyler 2003; Tyler and Huo 2002), and/or outcome legitimacy, where people view

a government as more legitimate if it competently produces public goods

(Bernstein and Lü 2003; Fjeldstad and Semboja 2000; Guyer 1992; O’Brien 2002;

Levi 2006). Greater legitimacy, in turn, makes governing easier and carries with it

the increased likelihood of a stable polity, holding important implications for

domestic and global security.


       In this paper we explore the role of election fairness in building

government legitimacy by combining data from a randomized controlled trial

designed to improve electoral quality in Afghanistan’s 2010 Wolesi Jirga

elections with data from a post-election survey of citizens affected by the



                                        2
intervention. We find that respondents in areas that held fairer elections due to our

treatment were more likely to consider their government legitimate as measured

by proxies of perceived procedural fairness and performance, including (1)

whether Afghanistan is a democracy; (2) whether the police should resolve

disputes (3) whether members of parliament provide services; and (4) the

willingness to report insurgent behavior to security forces. Moreover, these effects

are strongest within the subsample of respondents who were not aware of the

fairness-enhancing treatment, leading us to conclude that legitimacy was

increased by perceptions of electoral fairness and efficacy. The fairness

intervention seems to affect attitudes by decreasing visible signs of electoral

fraud at respondents’ local polling stations.


       We believe that these findings linking electoral fairness to perceptions of

government legitimacy are particularly compelling given the setting: an election

in a country fraught with vote-rigging with what is by all accounts one of the most

corrupt and dysfunctional governments in the world. Our study also challenges

the view that Afghan politics is solely predetermined by pre-existing allegiances

along ethnic, class, religious, or ideological lines. These results indicate that

democratic reforms could have real political effects, even in a country with such

strong extant loyalties.




                                          3
Theoretical approaches

A central problem of political inquiry for millennia has involved the legitimacy of

the state (Alagappa 1995; Beetham 1991). The causes and consequences of

legitimate government are central issues of political economy and were a focus of

enlightenment era political philosophy, which was concerned with nascent

democracies.1 In this paper, we seek to build on more recent efforts to examine the

empirical aspects of political legitimacy; specifically, we focus on its relationship

to democratic elections.


       Definitions of legitimacy vary. For our purposes we adopt a minimalist

stance, considering legitimacy to be an attribute of political authority that captures

residents’ acceptance that state institutions have “the right to issue certain

commands, and that they, in turn, have an obligation or duty to comply” (Lake,

2010). This definition, which appears in the context of the state-building

literature, is especially appropriate for Afghanistan, where state institutions are

weak, and multiple actors compete for political authority (Lyall, Blair and Imai,

2013). When this acceptance translates into actual compliance with an authority’s

rules, it constitutes “behavioral” legitimacy (Hurd 1999; Kelman and Hamilton

1989; Levi, Sacks, and Tyler 2009; Tyler 2006). Compliance reduces governance




1
  The second Treatise of Government by John Locke provides a classical example of
enlightenment era inquiry into the causes of legitimate government.




                                          4
costs on the part of state authority, since no government can enforce all of its laws

with direct observation and punishment.


       Individuals grant legitimacy by evaluating prior behavior of political

authorities (or proto-authorities if a formal polity has not yet been constituted) and

then decide whether or not to accept their rule. Scholars discuss several factors

influencing that evaluation, but most are related to an authority’s procedural and

distributive actions. Authorities can enhance their legitimacy when individuals

perceive them to have made and followed rules impartially (Grimes 2006;

Prud’homme 1992; Rothstein 2009; Rothstein and Teorell 2008; Taliercio 2004),

or can lose legitimacy when citizens judge authorities to have violated procedural

fairness, as in cases of corruption (Rothstein 2009, Seligson 2002). Authorities

can maintain legitimacy even when individuals perceive an outcome to be unfair,

as long as they consider the procedure generating it to be fair. Tyler (2006), for

example, finds a strong empirical relationship between individuals’ evaluations of

procedural justice and legitimacy in both public and private sector settings.

       Individuals may also confer more or less legitimacy on an authority based

on their assessment of competence, often measured by outcomes such as public

service delivery and overall economic and political performance (Cook, Hardin,

and Levi 2005; Gilley 2009; Levi 1988, 1997; Levi, Sacks and Tyler 2009;

Rothstein 2005; Sarsfield and Echegaray 2006; van De Walle and Scott 2009). To

build outcome legitimacy, foreign governments, policymakers, and international



                                          5
organizations concerned with state-building in post conflict areas have

demonstrated a strong interest in helping nascent governments establish the

competent delivery of basic services to their citizens (Bately and McLoughlin

2010; Beath et al. 2013; Carment et al. 2010; Paris and Sisk 2009; Cole and Hsu

2009). If an authority cannot provide goods and services, individuals may turn to

other groups that can, including insurgents, international military forces

(especially to provide security), and/or non-governmental organizations (Berman

2009; Brinkerhoff et al. 2009; OECD 2010; Vaux and Visman 2005).

       Policymakers and scholars consider the selection of leaders through fair

elections to be a key part of establishing a legitimate state (Brancati and Snyder

2011; Diamond 2006; Goodwin-Gill 2006; Lindberg 2003; Ottoway 2003; Paris

2004; Rothstein 2009). Proponents of early elections argue that establishing

elected authorities allows for a more peaceful way for parties to compete for

office, thus increasing the possibility that a country will consolidate as a

democracy (Diamond 2006). Even if poorly run or beset with violence, elections

may allow leaders and voters to begin the practice of democratic choice and

ultimately lead to better future elections (Berman 2007; Carothers 2007; Lindberg

2003). The promise of elections may also induce the international community to

commit peacekeeping forces and development assistance necessary to help

legitimize a fragile post conflict government (Doyle and Sambanis 2006; Fortna

2008a; Lyons 2002).




                                        6
       Despite the important role that elections may serve in establishing

legitimacy, the evidence is mixed. Recent research identifies many problems

associated with holding elections in post-conflict environments. Brancati and

Snyder (2009) find that calling for an election too soon is associated with an

increased likelihood of renewed fighting. A quick election may increase the

probability that one side or the other will ignore a loss at the ballot box and return

to war, or may result in an elected government which pursues policies that impede

further reform and instead rekindle conflict (Brancati and Snyder 2011; de Zeeuw

2008; Mansfield and Snyder 2007; Paris 2004). Further, early elections are often

fraudulent for a number of reasons, including the interests of those staging the

elections, a lack of trustworthy electoral institutions, and the disorganization of

the opposition (Bjornlund 2004; Hyde 2011; Kelley 2011). Elections in societies

divided along racial, ethnic, or other social lines are also more likely to produce

immoderate campaigns, violence, and breakdown (Snyder 2000; Horowitz 1985;

Rabushka and Shepsle 1972). Indeed, Collier, Hoeffler, and Söderbom (2008)

find no evidence that elections in post conflict environments reduce the risk of

further war, and instead should be “promoted as intrinsically desirable rather than

as mechanisms for increasing the durability of the post-conflict peace” (471).

       We seek to contribute to prior studies by exploring whether the fairness of

elections enhances legitimacy of government in a conflict setting. To construct

testable hypotheses, we revisit for a moment the sources of legitimacy. Holding




                                          7
elections in post conflict settings can enhance legitimacy through both procedural

and outcome pathways. Elections allow individuals to choose their leaders

through a procedure that hews to clear and impartial rules. A well-organized and

implemented election – which is inherently public – might also signal that the

government is more likely to capably produce public services. Both of these

arguments also imply that voters would not confer more legitimacy on their

government if they believed that a non-governmental actor, such as foreign

election monitors or foreign donors, contributed to fair and competent

administration of the election, since external interventions are less likely to be

sustained in the future. Moreover, they might also turn to government less for

services should they perceive that it was a non-governmental actor that facilitated

fair and competently administered elections, since that would provide a weaker

signal that government services are likely to be administered impartially and

competently.

       Following those who argue that governments gain legitimacy by following

fair procedures and by producing valued public services competently, we

construct four hypotheses:



       H1: Enhancing the fairness of elections should increase the likelihood that

       individuals perceive procedures related to government authority to be

       legitimate.




                                        8
       H2: Enhancing the fairness of elections should increase the likelihood that

       individuals turn to government authorities for the provision of services,

       such as law and order.



       H3: Perceptions of procedural legitimacy should not improve if

       respondents are aware that a fairness-enhancing intervention was carried

       out by non-governmental actors.



       H4: The willingness of residents to turn to government authorities for

       services should not increase if respondents are aware that a fairness-

       enhancing intervention was carried out by non-governmental actors.



Background to Afghanistan’s 2010 Wolesi Jirga election

Promoting elections has been a core component of the United States’ policy in

Afghanistan. After the US invasion and the fall of the Taliban in 2001, Coalition

forces immediately began developing democratic institutions, hoping to promote

stability by establishing a functioning central government that had been

undermined by two previous decades of internecine conflict, civil war, and

Taliban rule. Soon after the invasion, Coalition forces empanelled a Loya Jirga to

create a new constitution. In 2005, Afghans voted in the first elections for the




                                         9
lower house of parliament (Wolesi Jirga). In 2009, Hamid Karzai won re-election

as president amid claims of rampant election fraud (Callen and Weidmann, 2013).

General Stanley McChrystal, in an official communication to President Obama

requesting troops to support a “surge,” expressed his belief that the failure of the

2009 elections created a “crisis of confidence” in the government, which would

ultimately undermine the war effort without more troops (McChrystal, 2009).


       We study the effects of a fraud-reducing intervention implemented during

the 2010 Wolesi Jirga elections, which occurred amid a growing insurgency and a

U.S. commitment to begin withdrawing troops in July 2011. The international

community viewed these elections as a critical benchmark in the consolidation of

democratic institutions given doubts about the Karzai government's ability to

exercise control in much of the country and the growing influence of the Taliban.

Despite a direct threat of violence, roughly five million voters (about 37 percent

of those registered) cast ballots on election day.


       Afghanistan's 34 provinces serve as multi-member districts that elect

members of the Wolesi Jirga. Each province is a single electoral district. The

number of seats allocated to a province is proportional to its estimated population.

Candidates run “at large” within the province, without respect to any smaller

constituency boundaries. Voters cast a Single Non-Transferable Vote (SNTV) for




                                          10
individual candidates, nearly all of whom run as independents 2 Winning

candidates are those who receive the most votes relative to each province's seat

share. For example, Kabul province elects the most members to Parliament (33)

and Panjsher province the fewest (2). The candidates who rank one through 33 in

Kabul and one through two in Panjsher win seats to the Wolesi Jirga.


         SNTV rules create strong incentives for fraud. SNTV with large district

magnitudes and a lack of political parties creates a wide dispersion of votes across

candidates. The vote margins separating the lowest winning candidate from the

highest losing candidate are thus often small. This creates a high expected return

for even small manipulation for many candidates. (In contrast, electoral systems

with dominant parties guarantee victory with large vote margins, and so non-

viable candidates are less likely to rig results.) These strong incentives to

manipulate voting were compounded by a weak election commission, which had

failed to prevent widespread fraud during the 2009 presidential election. We

(Callen and Long, 2013) document clear evidence of election fraud in the

experimental sample studied in this paper during the 2010 parliamentary contest.




2
 SNTV systems provide voters with one ballot that they cast for one candidate or party when
multiple candidates run for multiple seats. If a voter's ballot goes towards a losing candidate, the
vote is not re-apportioned.




                                                11
Research design and data

The results in this paper use data from a randomized evaluation of an original

anti-fraud monitoring package that we conducted during Afghanistan’s 2010

Wolesi Jirga election (Callen and Long, 2013), and which we recount here. In this

section we revisit that anti-fraud monitoring experiment as a prelude to our

investigation of the effect of that fraud reduction on measures of legitimacy.


        On election day and the day after, a team of Afghan researchers traveled to

an experimental sample of 471 polling centers. 3 Because Afghanistan was an

active war zone during this period, we selected polling centers that met three

criteria to ensure the safety of our staff: (i) achieving the highest security rating

given by the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Afghan

National Police (ANP); (ii) being located in provincial centers, which are much

safer than rural areas4; and (iii) being scheduled to operate on election day by the

Independent Electoral Commission (IEC). Figure 1 maps our experimental

sample.




3
  We stratified treatment on province and, in the 450 polling centers for which we had baseline
data (we added an additional 21 to the experimental sample after baseline on obtaining additional
funding), we also stratified treatment on the share of respondents from the baseline survey
reporting at least occasional access to electricity and on respondents reporting that the district
governor carries the most responsibility for keeping elections fair.
4
  Given budget and security issues, we could only deploy researchers in 19 of 34 provincial
centers. Thus the sample is not nationally representative but biased towards safer areas. Our
sample does however cover each of Afghanistan’s regions, including those with a heavy Taliban
presence. See Figure 1.




                                               12
                                       [Figure 1 about here]


           In a randomly chosen 238 of those polling centers, researchers delivered a

letter to Polling Center Managers (PCMs) between 10AM and 4PM, during

voting. Researchers then visited all 471 polling centers the following day to

photograph the publicly posted election returns forms. 5 The letter delivery

constituted the experimental treatment. The letter announced to PCMs that

researchers would photograph election returns forms the following day

(September 19) and that these photographs would be compared to results certified

by the IEC. Neither treatment nor control sites would be affected by measurement

the day after the election, as polling staff were absent. Figure 2 provides a copy of

the letter in English (an original in Dari is attached as Figure 3). PCMs were

asked to acknowledge receipt by signing the letter. PCMs at seventeen polling

centers (seven percent of centers receiving letters) refused to sign. A polling

center was designated as treated if the PCM received a letter (Letter Delivered =

1).6


           To measure the fairness of the election, researchers also investigated

whether election materials were stolen or damaged the day after the election. Our

staff were careful to investigate irregularities by interviewing local community



5
    Of 471 polling centers, six did not open on election day. We drop these from our analysis.
6
    Results below are robust to redefining treatment as both receiving and signing a letter.




                                                  13
members while not engaging IEC staff, so as not to create an additional treatment.

We received reports of candidate agents stealing or damaging materials at 62 (13

percent) of the 465 operating polling centers, a clear violation of the law. We

define Election Returns Form Removed as an indicator equal to one if materials

were reported stolen or damaged by a candidate agent at a given polling center.


       We have several reasons to think that stealing or damaging tallies reflects

an intention to manipulate the ballot aggregation process. Many of the Electoral

Complaints Commission (ECC) complaints reported in Callen and Long (2013)

speculated that the purpose of stealing materials was to take them to a separate

location, alter them, and then reinsert them into the counting process.

Alternatively, candidates might seek to destroy all evidence of the polling center

count, and then manufacture an entirely new returns form at the Provincial

Aggregation Center.


       The treatment (i.e., delivery of a notification letter) induced dramatic

reductions in three separate measures of fraud: the removal or defacement of a

required provisional vote tally return form (Election Returns Form Removed);

votes for candidates likely to be engaged in fraud based on their political




                                       14
connections 7 (see Callen and Long, 2013) (Votes); and that same candidate

gaining enough votes to rank among the winning candidates in that polling station

(Enough Votes to Win Station). Table 1 reports estimates of the effect of treatment

on these three measures, reproducing results first reported in Callen and Long,

2013. Treatment reduced the damaging and theft of forms by about 11 percentage

points (columns 1 - 3), votes for candidates likely to be engaged in fraud

(Provincial Aggregator Connection = 1) by about 20 (columns 4 – 6) and the

likelihood that those candidates would rank among winning candidates by about

10 percentage points (columns 7 – 9). These results represent unusually large

treatment effects of the intervention on measures of fraud. They suggest that other

types of highly visible electoral malfeasance (deviations from the counting

protocol, early closings of polling centers, etc.) may similarly have been reduced.


                                    [Table 1 about here]


The Post-Election Survey


To measure the effect of election fairness on legitimacy, the focus of this paper,

we combine the results of the letter intervention with data from a post-election

survey which we conducted in December 2010, roughly three months after the

election and only shortly after the Independent Election Commission certified

7
 The political connections of candidates were carefully coded in advance. We surmised that a
connection to a provincial polling aggregator was a predictor of engagement in fraud. See Callen
and Long (2103) for details.




                                               15
final results. Respondents came from households living in the immediate vicinity

of 450 of the 471 polling centers in our experimental sample, for a total of 2,904

respondents. To obtain a representative sample of respondents living near polling

centers - generally neighborhood landmarks such as mosques, schools or markets

- enumerators employed a random walk pattern starting at the polling center, with

random selection of every fourth house or structure until either six or eight

subjects had been surveyed. In keeping with Afghan custom, men and women

were interviewed by field staff of their own gender. Respondents within

households were randomly selected using Kish grid. The survey had 50 percent

female respondents. Enumerators conducted the survey in either Dari or Pashto.


       We measure perceptions of government using individuals’ responses to

four questions. The first two questions (1 and 2 below) probe attitudes that might

contribute to procedural legitimacy; the second two questions (3 and 4 below)

measure attitudes related to outcome legitimacy, i.e. competence in service

provision. We use all four questions since any single question is unlikely to

capture fully a citizen’s conception of legitimacy. While we sought to distinguish

between legitimacy related to procedure and competence, our specific questions

may straddle the concepts. The survey asks other questions about attitudes to




                                       16
government as well, which we discuss below. We focus first on these four, as they

have a stronger a-priori tie to concepts of legitimacy.8


1. In your opinion, is Afghanistan a democracy or not a democracy?


Afghanistan is a Democracy is an indicator equal to 1 for individuals responding

“is a democracy” to this question. While citizens’ beliefs about regime type do not

directly measure legitimacy, perceptions of a democratic government should

cause citizens to believe that they have a say in the procedures leading to the

election of leaders. For these reasons we believe that perceptions of Afghanistan’s

status as a democracy should indicate beliefs about a government’s procedural

legitimacy.


2. If you had a dispute with a neighbor, who would you trust to settle it

(RANDOMIZE ORDERING): head of family, police, courts, religious leaders,

shura, elders, ISAF, or other?


Police Should Resolve Disputes is an indicator equal to 1 for individuals

responding “police” to this question. This question reflects basic trustworthiness

in the procedures of government responsible for the maintenance of law and



8
 We did not specify these four outcomes in a pre-analysis plan. To demonstrate that our results do
not reflect a selective reporting of results, we report below estimated treatment effects using all
survey outcomes that might measure legitimacy. The timing of the survey (immediately after
election outcomes were certified) and its’ content (principally questions on attitudes toward
government) should also provide an indication that our intent was to measure legitimacy.




                                                17
order, a core component of legitimacy found in the literature (Levi, Sacks, and

Tyler 2009). Courts are in principle another relevant institution, but less so in

Afghanistan, where they are absent in much of the country. We report below

additional results using an indicator for the answer “courts” and other alternative

outcome measures.


3. Who is mainly responsible for delivering services in your neighborhood

(RANDOMIZE ORDERING): the central government, your Member of

Parliament, religious or ethnic leaders, the provincial government, or the

community development council?


The variable MP Provides Services is equal to one if individuals responding

“Member of Parliament” to this question. This question is intended to capture

whether or not an individual links service provision to an elected government

official, since that provision is important to establishing legitimacy related to

competence. This question allows us to measure the concept against the specific

institution, the parliament, voted on in this particular election. The alternative

answer “central government” is more tangentially related to the election, since

parts of it are not elected. We report results below using that measure as well.


4. In your opinion, how important is it for you to share information about

insurgents to the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) (for example, pending




                                         18
IED attacks or the location of weapons caches): is it very important, somewhat

important, or not at all important?


Important to Report IED to ANSF is an indicator equal to one for individuals

responding “Very Important” or “Somewhat Important” to this question. The

question is intended to measure whether or not citizens view the ANSF as a

competent provider of security, an important service to a highly vulnerable and

war-torn population.


                               [Table 2 about here]


       Table 2 reports summary statistics for these variables from the post-

election survey. The data depict a country with uneven support for government.

About 68 percent of respondents view Afghanistan as a democracy, while only 18

percent prefer the police as their primary means of dispute adjudication. 20

percent of respondents believe that the Member of Parliament is responsible for

providing services, while 94 percent respond that reporting an impending attack to

the ANSF is important.


       In Table 2 we also find a high incidence of electoral malpractice at the

polling stations linked to survey respondents. At 13.4 percent of polling stations

our staff recorded a report of candidate agents removing tallies (Form Removed).

A similar picture emerges from the baseline interviews, collected in August 2010,




                                       19
which we return to below.9 Our data also include two important descriptors of the

environment that the elections were held in: the number of local military events

tracked as by International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) (from their

Combined Information Data Network Exchange (CIDNE) database), with a mean

of 2.6; and whether or not the polling station was visited by an international

monitor on election day, which occurred in 16.5 percent of the sample (from

Democracy International).


                                    [Table 3 about here]


        Table 3 reports summary statistics and verifies balanced randomization of

our anti-fraud intervention between treatment and control polling stations, using

our baseline survey of August 2010. Treatment status is balanced across baseline

measures for all four key outcomes used in the study, which we expect given

randomization.10 We find no evidence of imbalance on other measures that might




9
  Similar to the endline survey, we sampled respondents for the baseline, enumerators were told to
begin at the polling center and survey either 6 or 8 subjects. Surveys were conducted in
individuals’ homes. Enumerators adhered to the right hand rule random selection method and
respondents within houses were selected according to a Kish grid (Kish, 1949).

10
   For reasons of safety, we did not collect identifying information from our subjects and so the
respondents in our post-election (December 2010) survey are likely to not be the same respondents
as in our pre-election (August 2010) survey. The same sampling protocol was maintained across
both waves. We therefore view baseline balance on our key outcome measures as an additional
indication that the measured treatment effect is not due to pre-existing differences between the
treatment and control samples.




                                               20
be relevant to attitudes, including military events in the vicinity and visits by

international monitors.



Estimation Strategy and Results

Assignment to treatment is random. So the following equation consistently

estimates the effect of delivering the letter (which alerts the polling station

manager of monitoring) on our measures of legitimacy:

                                                   v
 Legitimacy
          ic   1   2 LetterDelivered c  
                                                3 ic   ic
                                                X

All specifications reflect our assignment strategy, by including stratum dummies

as suggested by Bruhn and McKenzie (2009).


                                [Table 4 about here]


       Table 4 reports our main results, testing hypotheses H1 and H2, which

imply that the notification letter should improve attitudes that enhance procedural

and outcome legitimacy. Since assignment of the fraud-reducing treatment is

randomized, we need not be concerned with selection bias or other omitted

variable biases. In Panel A, we report the effect of fraud reduction on citizens’

beliefs about procedural legitimacy. Columns 1 – 3 suggest that treatment causes

an increase in respondents’ beliefs that Afghanistan is a democracy, though the

results are not statistically significant. (This may in part be because the question is




                                          21
vague, -- it could be asking whether Afghanistan is nominally a democracy or

whether it functions as an effective democracy.)11


        Turning to columns (4) – (6), using the police to solve disputes indicates a

preference for using formal procedures rather than informal institutions --

abundantly available in Afghanistan-- for dispute resolution. Treatment causally

increases reported willingness to use police by 2.3 percentage points in the

uncontrolled specification and by 3.6 percentage points with a full set of controls

(column 6).12 The latter result is statistically significant at the five percent level

and provides supportive evidence for Hypothesis 1.


        In Panel B, columns (1)-(3), we find that the fraud reduction intervention

causally increased beliefs that members of parliament are responsible for

providing services by 4.1 percentage points, compared to a base of 17.8 percent in

the control group, supporting Hypothesis 2. This result is statistically significant

and robust to the addition of a broad set of controls, as reported in columns (2)



11
   For ease of exposition, we restrict our sample to respondents who provide some response to the
four questions corresponding to our main outcome and to our question regarding whether they
were aware that the monitoring exercise was conducted by outsiders. All specification in Tables 4
and 5 therefore have either 2313 (specifications including polling centers without pre-election
survey data) or 2200 (specifications including only polling centers with pre-election data)
observations. Results (unreported) are nearly identical removing this restriction, though sample
sizes vary between specifications according to the number of respondents providing some
response to the question used as the dependent variable.
12
   The difference in point estimates is partly due to the difference in samples. Moving from
column (4) to column (5), the sample is reduced by 18 polling centers and 113 respondents. These
18 polling centers are part of the sample of 21 polling centers in Kabul that we added to the
experiment after the completion of the baseline survey.




                                               22
and (3) (as expected with random assignment to treatment). Still in Panel B,

columns (4)-(6) report effects on citizens’ attitude that it is important to cooperate

with security forces by reporting IEDs. Treatment increases reported willingness

to report by 2.5 percentage points (column (4)) in the specification without

controls, and by 3 percentage points in the specification with a full set of controls.

Both results are statistically significant, and again support Hypothesis 2, that

electoral fairness enhances outcome legitimacy.


       In summary, the electoral fraud reduction treatment increased perceptions

of legitimacy of the Afghan government for four measures of procedural and

outcome legitimacy. Those effects were statistically significant for three of the

four measures. Figure 4 summarizes those results graphically, reporting treatment

effects and 95% confidence intervals for the four measures.


                                   [Figure 4 about here]


       Turning to other measures of legitimacy collected in our survey, we find

additional evidence that electoral fraud reduction improved perceptions of

legitimacy. Our survey includes seven additional measures related to attitudes

toward government and willingness to be governed. For instance, we also

included a question about another important concept found in discussions of

government legitimacy regarding taxation. Respondents were asked to rank the

importance of paying taxes as “not at all important,” somewhat important,” or




                                         23
“very important.”13 14 Table 5 reports the results of estimating treatment effects

for these measures. Five of the seven additional measures yield estimated

treatment effects in the direction predicted by theories of procedural fairness and

public service provision. Of these, two are statistically significant at the 99

percent level, both of which are related to taxes.15


         Table 5 also reports treatment effects aggregated across outcome

measures. Following Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) and Casey, Glennerster,

and Miguel (2013), we estimate standardized treatment effects, standardizing

outcomes by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation so

that all outcomes are measured in standard deviation units. We then create an

index which is simply the arithmetic average of these standardized outcomes. We

calculate separate indexes for: (i) the four dependent variables used in our main

analysis; (ii) the seven additional outcomes reflecting alternative measures of

legitimacy related to either conditional consent or service provision; and (iii) all


13
   For the full text for these questions and a description of how they are coded to create outcome
measures see the Appendix.
14
   We also estimated treatment effects on dummy variables set equal to one when respondents
indicate supporting the Central Government, Provincial Government, or local Community
Development Council as the unit that should provide services. Consistent with our main results,
we find a significant and negative treatment effect for the provincial government, which is
appointed rather than elected. However, this may be due just to a simple adding up constraint –
since the choices are exclusive-- so we do not report it.
15
   We report estimates using as dependent variables dummy variables equal to one for respondents
indicating that (i) paying taxes is very important,; (ii) paying taxes is somewhat important; and
(iii) paying taxes is somewhat or very important. The third is the sum of the first two. We report
estimates for all three in order to indicate the insignificant but negative estimate corresponding to
(i). If we remove (iii) from the additional variable index and all variable index the estimates are
nearly identical and remain statistically significant at the 99 percent level.




                                                 24
11 variables. Estimated treatment effects on these indices are all statistically

significant at the 95 percent level, even after adjusting p-values to reflect multiple

hypothesis testing using the method of Young and Westfall (1993).16


                                [Table 5 about here]


       The estimated treatment effect of 0.10 standard deviations for the four

primary outcome variables is comparable in size to the estimated effect using the

index calculated using the remaining seven measures as an outcome (0.06

standard deviations). In summary, estimated treatment effects using the additional

seven measures and indices based on all measures yield results that strongly

reinforce the conclusion of Table 4: treatment improved attitudes toward

government and increased willingness to be governed.




Does Enhanced Fairness Increase Legitimacy if Perceived as External?


Hypotheses 3 and 4 state that an individual will not credit government with

improved legitimacy (procedural or outcome based) if they observe that

enhancements in election fairness were caused by a non-governmental (i.e.,

external) intervention. Our survey asked respondents if they had knowledge of the



16
  This method yields Family-Wise Error Rate (FWER) p-values, as described in detail in
Anderson (2008).




                                         25
researcher team or their actions in providing the letter treatment. About 11 percent

responded that they were aware. Table 6 repeats the analysis of Table 4,

estimating the same equation with an added indicator variable Aware of Delivery,

which takes the value one if the respondent is in the treated sample and responded

that they had knowledge about the treatment. These estimates are not

experimental, since awareness was not randomly assigned within the treatment

group; nor is there any means to identify the comparison group in the control

sample who would have been aware of treatment had they been treated.


                                   [Table 6 about here]


       The estimated coefficient of Aware of Delivery represents the contrast

between the predicted value of the outcome variable for the unaware treated and

that of the aware treated. That estimate is subject to possible selection bias, since

those aware of treatment might have a priori different outcomes. That would be

true, for instance, if the aware were keen observers of local politics and were

therefore more cynical about Afghan democracy.


       Being aware of letter delivery undermines the treatment effect for two of

the four outcome measures. Specifically, for the outcomes Afghanistan is a

Democracy and Police Should Resolve Disputes, including the awareness

indicator increases the size of the positive estimated treatment effect, which is

now estimated solely using the (distorted) aware sample, while generating an




                                         26
estimated negative effect for the aware sample of at least the same size (columns

1 and 4). While these estimates are not experimental, they do retain their size

when stratum fixed effects and additional covariates are added (columns 3 and 6).

For the other two variables awareness predicts a statistical zero, so that the

treatment effect is statistically the same for both aware and unaware samples. In

sum, treatment has no effect on outcomes for two of our four variables for

respondents aware that an external actor was responsible for delivering the

notification letter. We interpret this as mixed but weakly supportive evidence for

Hypotheses 3 and 4.


       All told, we find strong experimental evidence that the fraud-reduction

intervention improves perceptions of procedural and outcome legitimacy. We also

find weakly supportive evidence for the implied hypothesis that citizens must

perceive a relatively clean election to be the consequence of the actions of a

domestic government, as opposed to the result of an outside intervention, for

legitimacy to be enhanced. Taken together, these results indicate that even in a

nascent democracy with weak institutions such as Afghanistan, improving

procedural and outcome legitimacy has consequential effects on attitudes towards

government.




                                       27
Conclusions

We have reported experimental evidence showing that the fairness of elections

affects attitudes of citizens towards their government directly relevant to their

willingness to be governed, a contributor to legitimacy. Experimental evidence of

this nature is new to the literature and is particularly compelling given the setting:

even in the context of an ongoing insurgency and with an infamously ineffective

government rife with corruption, we find that enhancing electoral fairness seems

to contribute to state legitimacy in Afghanistan.


       These findings speak both to policy and to the study of legitimacy in

nascent democracies. From a policy perspective, our results reinforce the notion

that domestic legitimacy, and therefore stability, can be enhanced by interventions

that improve the fairness of elections, an assumption that undergirds the current

emphasis the international community places on holding elections in fragile states

and the considerable investments it makes to ensure electoral integrity.

Importantly, our results are mute on the effectiveness of election monitoring–the

most common intervention—as an integrity-enhancing technique. Indeed, we find

in passing some evidence suggesting that the design of election monitoring in that

Afghan election was unlikely to enhance perceptions of legitimacy, since

interventions viewed as external did not affect attitudes. Nevertheless, our results

are supportive of integrity-enhancing interventions as a general policy.




                                         28
        While we agree that elections form the core institutional component of a

legitimate state, our results cannot provide guidance on how fair elections must be

in order to legitimize a government, when compared to the counterfactual of no

elections (Hoglund et al. 2009). Electoral processes in these contexts frequently

suffer fraud (Bjornlund 2004; Hyde 2011; Kelley 2011), can incite violence

(Horowitz 1985; Hyde and Marinov 2010; Snyder 2000; Wilkinson 2004), and

may institutionalize former combatants into uncompromising political parties. In

such circumstances, staging unfair elections in an attempt to increase state

legitimacy may instead undermine it. That remains an important question for

future research.


        Legitimacy plays a key role in theories of political development, and

should also play a role in the theory of economic development, since recognition

of government’s authority to impose rules is a necessary precondition for taxation,

service provision, protection of human rights, enforcement of property rights, and

implementation of development programs—including those administered by

nongovernmental organizations and international organizations such as the World

Bank.


        These findings show that at least some attitudes toward government are

plastic: though it may be built on a base of unconditional loyalties (e.g.,

ideological, religious, or ethnic), legitimacy is affected by citizens’ perceptions of




                                         29
the integrity of elections. The theory of legitimacy as conditional recognition of

authority embraces various theories of what precisely recognition is conditioned

on, between which our evidence cannot adjudicate. Future experiments which

enhance election integrity might attempt to do so.


        Along these lines, future research might explore the extent to which

interventions that improve other aspects of governance confer legitimacy in

fragile states; improvements in the integrity not just of elections, but also of

policing, justice, health, education and other basic services should enhance

legitimacy, according to theories of outcome legitimacy. Such studies might also

consider which types of legitimacy-enhancing interventions are most cost-

effective, and how they compare to expensive interventions such as security

assistance.17




17
   On this note, our fraud-reduction intervention is remarkably inexpensive, and has been
successfully replicated in two subsequent elections. Callen, Gibson, Jung, and Long (2013) report
results from the first replication in Uganda.




                                               30
References


Alagappa, Muthiah. 1995. Political Legitimacy in Southeast Asia: The Quest for
      Moral Authority. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Anderson, Michael L.2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the
      Effects of Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedaian, Perry
      Preschool, and Early Training Projects,’’ Journal of the American
      Statistical Association, 103(484) (2008), 1481–1495.

Baird, Mark. 2010. “Service Delivery in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States.”
       WDR Background Paper. http://wdr2011.worldbank.org/service-delivery.
Batley, Richard and Claire Mcloughlin. 2010. “Engagement with Non-State
        Service Providers in Fragile States: Reconciling State-Building and
        Service Delivery.” Development Policy Review 28(2): 131-54.
Beetham, David. 1991. The Legitimation of Power. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia and Ruben Enikolopov. 2012. “Winning Hearts
       and Minds through Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
       Afghanistan. MIT mimeo.
Berman, Sheri. 2007. “How Democracies Emerge: Lessons from Europe.”
      Journal of Democracy 18(1): 28-41.
Bernstein, T., & Lü, X. 2003. Taxation without representation in rural China.
       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bjornlund, Eric. Beyond Free and Fair: Monitoring Elections and Building
       Democracy. Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2004.
Brancati, Dawn and Jack L. Snyder. 2011. “Rushing to the Polls: The Causes of
       Premature Postconflict Elections.” The Journal of Conflict Resolution
       55(3): 469-92.
Brinkerhoff, Derick W., Ronald W. Johnson, and Richard Hill. 2009. Guide to
       Rebuilding Governance in Stability Operations: A Role for the Military?
       Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute.
Callen, Michael and Nils B. Weidmann. 2013. “Violence and Election Fraud:
        Evidence from Afghanistan.” British Journal of Political Science 43(1),
        pp. 53-75.




                                       31
Callen, Michael and James D. Long. 2013. “Institutional Corruption and Election
        Fraud: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan,” Unpublished.

Callen, Michael, Clark Gibson, Danielle Jung, and James D. Long “Reducing
        Electoral Fraud with Information Communications Technology,”
        Unpublished.

Carment, David, Yiagadeesen Smay, Doug Hales, Jordan Miller, Liz St. Jean,
      Peter Tikuisis and CAE Professional Services, Ottawa Ontario. 2010.
      “Indicators of State Failure: Phase 2.”
Carothers, Thomas. 2007. “How Democracies Emerge: The “Sequencing”
       Fallacy.” Journal of Democracy 18(1): 12-28.
Cole, Beth and Emily Hsu, eds. 2009. Guiding Principles for Stabilization and
       Reconstruction. Washington: United States Institute of Peace (USIP) /
       United States Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute
       (PKSOI).
Collier, Paul, Anke Hoeffler, and Mans Söderbom. 2008. “Post-Conflict Risks.”
        Journal of Peace Research 45(4): 461-78.
Cook, Karen S, Russell Hardin, and Margaret Levi. 2005. Cooperation Without
      Trust? New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
de Zeeuw, Jeroen, ed. 2008. From Soldiers to Politicians: Transforming Rebel
       Movements After Civil War. Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Diamond, Jared M. 2006. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed.
      New York: Penguin Books.
Doyle, Michael W., and Nicholas Sambanis. Making War and Building Peace:
       United Nations Peace Operations. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
       2006.
Fortna, Virginia Page. 2008. Does Peacekeeping Work?: Shaping Belligerents'
        Choices after Civil War. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Fjeldstad, Odd-Helge, and Joseph Semboja. 2000. "Dilemmas of Fiscal
        Decentralisation: A Study of Local Government Taxation in Tanzania."
        Forum for Development Studies. Vol. 27. No. 1. Taylor & Francis Group.
Gilley, Bruce. 2009. Right to Rule: How States Win and Lose Legitimacy. New
        York: Columbia University Press.




                                       32
Goodwin-Gill, Guy S. 2006. Free and Fair Elections. Geneva: Inter-
     Parliamentary Union.
Grimes, Marcia. 2006. “Organizing Willingness: The Role of Procedural Fairness
      in Political Trust and Compliance.” European Journal of Political
      Research 45(2): 285-315.
Guyer, J. 1992. Representation without taxation: An essay on democracy in rural
       Nigeria, 1952-1990. African Studies Review, 35: 41-79.
Höglund, Kristine, Jarstad, Anna K., & Kovacs, Mimmi Söderberg. 2009. The
      Predicament of Elections in War-torn Societies. Democratization, 16 (3),
      530-557.
Horowitz, Donald L. 1985. Ethnic Groups in Conflict. Berkeley: University of
      California Press.
Hurd, Ian. 1999. “Legitimacy and Authority in International Politics.”
       International Organization 53(2): 379-408.
Hyde, Susan D. 2011. "Catch Us If You Can: Election Monitoring And
       International Norm Diffusion." American Journal of Political Science. 55
       (2): 356-369.
Hyde, Susan D., and Nikolay Marinov. 2012. "Which Elections Can Be Lost?"
       Political Analysis 20 (2): 191-210.
Kelley, Judith. 2011. "Do International Election Monitors Increase Or Decrease
       Opposition Boycotts?" Comparative Political Studies. 44(11): 1527-1556.
Kelman, Herbert C., and V. Lee Hamilton. 1989. Crimes of Obedience: Toward a
      Social Psychology of Authority and Responsibility. New Haven: Yale
      University Press.

Kish, Leslie. 1949., “A Procedure for Objective Respondent Selection within the
        Household,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,. 44 (247):
        380–87.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Katz, Lawrence F. .2007.
        “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects. Econometrica, 75: 83–
        119




                                        33
.Lake, David. 2010. "Building Legitimate States after Civil Wars," in
        Strengthening Peace in Post-Civil War States: Transforming Spoilers
        into Stakeholders, Matthew Hoddie and Caroline A. Hartzell (eds.),
        University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Levi, Margaret. 1988. Of Rule and Revenue. Berkeley: University of California
       Press.
Levi, Margaret. 1997. Willingness, Dissent, and Patriotism. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Levi, Margaret and Audrey Sacks. 2007. Legitimizing Beliefs: Concepts and
       Indicators. Cape Town, South Africa: Afrobarometer.
Levi, Margaret, Audrey Sacks, and Tom Tyler. 2009. “Conceptualizing
       Legitimacy, Measuring Legitimating Beliefs.” American Behavioral
       Scientist 53: 354-75.
Lindberg, Staffan I. 2003. “‘It’s Our Time to “Chop’: Do Elections in Africa Feed
      Neo-Patrimonialism Rather than Counter-Act it?” Democratization 10(2):
      121-40.
Locke, John, 1988. Two Treatises of Government, Cambridge UK: Cambridge
       University Press.
Lyall, Jason, Graeme Blair, and Kosuke Imai. 2013. “Explaining Support for
        Combatants during Wartime: A Survey Experiment in Afghanistan.”
        American Political Science Review 107 (4): 1-27.
Lyons, Terrence. 2002. Postconflict Elections: War Termination,
       Democratization, and Demilitarizing Politics. Institute for Conflict
       Analysis and Resolution: George Mason University.
Mansfield, Edward D. and Jack L. Snyder. 2007. “The Sequencing “Fallacy”.”
      Journal of Democracy 18(3): 5-10.
O’Brien, K. J. 2002. Collective action in the Chinese countryside. China Journal,
      48: 139-154.
Ottaway, Marina. 2003. “Democracy Challenged: The Rise of Semi-
      Authoritarianism.” World Politics 55(2): b1-b6.
Paris, Roland. 2004. At War’s End: Building Peace After Civil Conflict. New
        York: Cambridge University Press.




                                        34
Paris, Roland and Timothy D. Sisk, eds. 2009. The Dilemmas of Statebuilding:
        Confronting the Contradictions of Postwar Peace Operations. New York:
        Routledge.
Paternoster, Raymond, Robert Brame, Ronet Bachman, and Lawrence W.
       Sherman. 1997. "Do Fair Procedures Matter? The Effect of Procedural
       Justice on Spouse Assault." Law and Society Review. 31(1): 163-204.
Prud’homme, Remy. 1992. “Informal Local Taxation in Developing Countries.”
       Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 10: 1-17.
Rabushka, Alvin, and Kenneth A. Shepsle. 1972. Politics in Plural Societies: A
      Theory of Democratic Instability. Columbus, OH: Merrill.
Rothstein, Bo. 2005. Social Traps and the Problem of Trust. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Rothstein, Bo. 2009. “Creating Political Legitimacy: Electoral Democracy Versus
       Quality of Government.” American Behavioral Scientist 53(3): 311-30.
Rothstein, Bo, and Jan Teorell. 2008. “What is Quality of Government? A Theory
       of Impartial Government Institutions.” Governance 21(2): 165-90.
Sarsfield, Rodolfo, and Fabian Echegaray. 2006. “Opening the Black Box: How
        Satisfaction with Democracy and its Perceived Efficacy Affect Regime
        Preference in Latin America.” International Journal of Public Opinion
        Research 18(2): 153-73.
Seligson, Mitchell A. 2002. “The Impact of Corruption on Regime Legitimacy: A
       Comparative Study of Four Latin American Countries.” The Journal of
       Politics 64(2): 408-33.
Snyder, Jack L. 2000. From Voting to Violence: Democratization and Nationalist
       Conflict. New York: Norton.
Sunshine, Jason, and Tom R. Tyler. 2003. "The Role of Procedural Justice and
       Legitimacy in Shaping Public Support for Policing." Law & Society
       Review. 37(3): 513-548.
Taliercio Jr., Robert R. 2004. “Administrative Reform as Credible Commitment:
        The Impact of Autonomy on Revenue Authority Performance in Latin
        America.” World Development 32(2): 213-32.
Tyler, Tom R. 1990. Why People Obey the Law. New Haven: Yale University
        Press.




                                       35
Tyler, Tom R. 2006. Why People Obey the Law. Princeton: Princeton University
        Press.
Tyler, Tom R., and Yuen J. Huo. 2002. Trust in the Law: Encouraging Public
        Cooperation with the Police and Courts. Vol. 5. Russell Sage Foundation.
van de Walle, Steven, and Zoe Scott. 2009. “The Role of Public Services in State
       – and Nation – Building: Exploring Lessons from European History for
       Fragile States.” Governance and Social Development Resource Centre: 1-
       21.
Vaux, Tony and Emma Visman. 2005. “Service Delivery in Countries Emerging
       from Conflict.” Centre for International Co-operation and Security
       (CICS).
Westfall, Peter H. and Stanley Young. 1993. Resampling-based Multiple Testing:
       Examples and Methods for P-Value Adjustment John Wiley & Sons
Wilkinson, Steven I. 2004. Votes and Violence: Electoral Competition and
       Communal Riots in India. Cambridge University Press.




                                       36
Table 1: Effect of Treatment on Fraud - Three Measures
Dependent Variable:             Election Returns Form Removed (=1)                                    Votes                              Enough Votes to Win Station (=1)
                                     (1)         (2)        (3)                         (4)             (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)             (9)
Letter Treatment (=1)            -0.116*** -0.115*** -0.113***                        -0.019          -0.018          -0.032             0.003           0.001           0.001
                                  (0.032)      (0.031)    (0.031)                    (0.190)         (0.055)         (0.056)            (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.002)
   Provincial Aggregator Connection (=1)                                           22.172***       19.674***       19.670***           0.413***        0.406***        0.406***
                                                                                     (2.611)         (2.423)         (2.423)            (0.028)         (0.028)         (0.028)
   Treat x Provincial Aggregator Connection                                          -5.473*         -5.649*         -5.642*          -0.108***       -0.108***       -0.108***
                                                                                     (3.264)         (3.014)         (3.014)            (0.038)         (0.037)         (0.037)
Constant                             0.194***      0.192***       0.195             1.246***        1.481***        1.540***           0.083***        0.088***        0.081***
                                      (0.027)       (0.025)      (0.140)             (0.139)         (0.040)         (0.292)            (0.003)         (0.001)         (0.009)
R-squared                              0.0292        0.229        0.232               0.0359           0.095          0.0952            0.0078          0.0207          0.0209
Additional Covariates                    No           No           Yes                  No              No             Yes                No              No              Yes
Stratum Fixed Effects                    No           Yes          Yes                  No              Yes            Yes                No              Yes             Yes
# Observations                          455           437          437               375079          307453          307453             375079          307453          307453
# Clusters                                .            .            .                  447              429            429                447             429             429
Notes: The level of analysis corresponds to the level at which we observe the dependent variable. Columns (1), (2), and (3) report OLS specifications estimated at the
polling center level. Columns (4) - (9) are estimated at the candidate - polling station level. Correspondingly, robust (White) standard errors are reported in parentheses for
columns (1) - (3) (not clustered since data are already aggregated to the polling center level) and robust standard errors are clustered at the polling center level in columns
(4) - (9). Levels of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The "additional covariates" are the number of military events within 1KM of the polling center, whether
the polling center was visited by international monitors, and the average response within the polling center catchment from our baseline survey fielded in August 2010 to
whether the respondent is employed, years of education, general happiness (1-10), gender, marital status, and age. For descriptive statistics see Table 1 of Callen and
Long, 2010.




                                                                                      37
Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                                                    Mean     Standard Deviation   Observations
Demographics:
Employed (=1)                                                          0.524         0.500              2313
Age (years)                                                           32.571        12.286              2313
Female (=1)                                                            0.460         0.499              2313
Married (=1)                                                           0.692         0.462              2313
Education (years)                                                      7.179         5.387              2313
Beliefs:
General Happiness (1-10)                                               4.402         1.707              2313
MP Provides Services (=1)                                              0.199         0.399              2313
Afghanistan is a Democracy (=1)                                        0.678         0.467              2313
Important to Report IED to ANSF (=1)                                   0.935         0.247              2313
Police Should Resolve Disputes (=1)                                    0.183         0.387              2313
Elections and Violence:
Military Events within 1KM                                             2.567         7.456               455
Visited by Int'l Monitor (=1)                                          0.165         0.371               455
Aware of Treatment (=1)                                                0.051         0.219               455
Election Returns Form Removed (=1)                                     0.134         0.341               455
Votes                                                                  1.386         8.313            375148
Votes for Candidate Connected to the Provincial Aggregator            23.646         47.49              1795
Enough Votes to Win Station                                           0.0867         0.281            375148
Enough Votes to Win Station (Connected to the Aggregator)              0.447         0.497              1795
Notes: Military event data are from International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) Combined Information Data
Network Exchange (CIDNE) database. Data on international monitor visits are provided by Democracy
International. Vote counts are from a web scrape performed on October 24, 2010 of the Independent Election
Commission of Afghanistan website. Remaining data are from our endline survey fielded in December 2010. MP
is a member of the national parliament. An IED is an improvised explosive device, generally a roadside bomb.
ANSF are the Afghan National Security Forces, including police and military. The survey sample is restricted to
the 2,313 respondents who provide some response to the questions corresponding to the following variables: MP
Provides Services, Afghanistan is a Democracy, Important to Report IED to ANSF, and Police Should Resolve
Disputes.




                                                      38
Table 3: Randomization Verification
                                         No Letter     Letter    Difference   p value   # Control   # Treatment
Demographics:
Employed (=1)                               0.556       0.566       0.01       0.575      1410         1456
                                           (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.017)
Age (years)                                33.577      33.291     -0.285       0.547      1410         1456
                                           (0.336)     (0.335)    (0.474)
Married (=1)                                 0.71       0.706     -0.004       0.815      1410         1456
                                           (0.013)     (0.014)    (0.019)
Education (years)                           6.565       6.462     -0.103       0.699      1410         1456
                                           (0.182)     (0.193)    (0.266)
Reg Access to Electricity (=1)              0.718       0.733      0.015       0.607      1410         1456
                                           (0.021)     (0.020)    (0.029)
Beliefs:
General Happiness (1-10)                    4.913       4.949      0.035       0.768      1410         1456
                                           (0.086)     (0.084)    (0.120)
Dist Governor Keeps Fair (=1)                0.11       0.111      0.001       0.963      1301         1355
                                           (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.016)
Afghanistan is a Democracy (=1)             0.643       0.655      0.011       0.654      1286         1307
                                           (0.017)     (0.019)    (0.025)
MP Provides Services (=1)                   0.142       0.163      0.021       0.259      1396         1440
                                           (0.012)     (0.014)    (0.019)
Important to Rept IED to ANSF (=1)          0.961       0.956     -0.005       0.592      1390         1418
                                           (0.006)     (0.007)    (0.010)
Police Should Resolve Disp (=1)             0.217       0.202     -0.015       0.480      1410         1456
                                           (0.015)     (0.015)    (0.021)
Elections and Violence:
Military Events within 1KM                  2.690       2.551      0.139       0.842      226          236
                                           (0.583)     (0.398)    (0.700)
Visited by Int'l Monitor (=1)               0.146       0.177     -0.032       0.353      226          236
                                           (0.235)     (0.246)    (0.034)


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the polling center are reported in parentheses.
Survey data are from the baseline survey fielded in August 2010. Military event data
are from ISAF CIDNE.




                                                         39
                                    Table 4: Effect of Treatment on Measures of Legitimacy
                                              Panel A - Perceptions of Government
Dependent Variable:                          MP Provides Services (=1)                  Afghanistan is a Democracy (=1)
                                         (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)
Delivered Letter (=1)                 0.041**         0.049**        0.047**          0.038          0.032          0.033
                                      (0.021)         (0.019)        (0.020)         (0.025)        (0.022)        (0.022)
Constant                             0.178***        0.178***       0.171***        0.659***       0.663***       0.574***
                                      (0.014)         (0.013)        (0.044)         (0.018)        (0.016)        (0.051)
Additional Covariates                    No              No              Yes                 No              No              Yes
Stratum Fixed Effects                    No              Yes             Yes                 No              Yes             Yes
R-squared                               0.003          0.068           0.076               0.002            0.112           0.125
# Observations                          2313           2200            2200                2313             2200            2200
# Clusters                               455            437             437                 455              437             437
                                                Panel B - Support for Government
Dependent Variable:                    Important to Report IED to ANSF (=1)                Police Should Resolve Disputes (=1)
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)                 (4)             (5)            (6)
Delivered Letter (=1)                  0.025*        0.030***        0.028**               0.023         0.036**        0.036**
                                       (0.014)        (0.012)         (0.011)             (0.020)        (0.017)        (0.017)
Constant                              0.922***       0.918***       0.952***             0.171***       0.160***       0.133***
                                       (0.011)        (0.009)         (0.027)             (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.041)
Additional Covariates                    No              No              Yes                 No              No              Yes
Stratum Fixed Effects                    No              Yes             Yes                 No              Yes             Yes
R-squared                                0.003           0.113            0.123              0.001           0.072           0.081
# Observations                           2,313            2200            2200               2313            2200            2200
# Clusters                                455              437             437                455             437             437
Robust standard errors clustered at the polling center level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The "additional




                                                                       40
 Table 5: Standardized Treatment Effects for All Variables Measuring Legitimacy
                                                                                Mean in          Treatment          Naïve        FWER p-value
                                                                                Controls           Effect          P-Value
 Four Primary Outcomes Index                                                     -0.023          0.101***           0.000            0.001
                                                                                (0.017)           (0.024)
   MP Provides Services (=1)                                                     -0.023           0.126**           0.011            0.023
                                                                                (0.033)           (0.050)
   Afghanistan is a Democracy (=1)                                               -0.006             0.068           0.147            0.207
                                                                                (0.034)           (0.047)
   Important to Report IED to ANSF (=1)                                          -0.029           0.114**           0.010            0.023
                                                                                (0.034)           (0.044)
   Police Should Resolve Disputes (=1)                                           -0.033           0.096**           0.035            0.062
                                                                                (0.030)           (0.045)
 Additional Variable Index                                                       -0.007          0.060***           0.003            0.010
                                                                                (0.015)           (0.020)
   Voting Improves Future (=1)                                                    0.01              0.036           0.417            0.449
                                                                                (0.032)           (0.044)
   Courts Should Resolve Disputes (=1)                                            0.014            -0.015           0.700            0.700
                                                                                (0.027)           (0.039)
   Paying Taxes is Very Important (=1)                                            0.021            -0.071           0.138            0.207
                                                                                (0.034)           (0.048)
   Paying Taxes is Somewhat Important (=1)                                       -0.062          0.167***           0.000            0.002
                                                                                (0.032)           (0.045)
   Paying Taxes is Somewhat or Very Important (=1)                               -0.055          0.130***           0.008            0.023
                                                                                (0.037)           (0.049)
   Trust Afghan Government to Determine Guilt (=1)                                0.003             0.067           0.186            0.238
                                                                                (0.036)           (0.050)
   Govt. Does an Excellent or A Good Job of Providing Services (=1)               0.03              0.057           0.259            0.303
                                                                                (0.037)           (0.051)
 All Variables Index                                                             -0.008          0.076***           0.000            0.001
                                                                                (0.013)           (0.017)
Notes: Significance levels (naive p-value) indicated by *p < .10, **p < .05, ***p < .01. Robust standard errors clustered at polling center level
reported in parentheses. Treatment effects are standardized regression coefficients from a regression of the dependent variable, normalized by
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation, on an indicator for treatment and stratum fixed effects. The Four Primary Outcomes
Index is the average of four normalized variables in rows 2 through 5. The Additional Variable Index is the average of the seven normalized
variables in rows 7 through 13. All Variables Index is based on all 11 outcome measures. Family-wise error rate (FWER) adjusted p-values limit
the probability of any Type I errors when considering all 11 hypotheses as a group, and are calculated using the Westfall and Young (1993) free
step-down re-sampling method as detailed in Anderson (2008). All regressions use data from 2200 respondents (in 437 polling centers) except: (i)
Additional Variable Index 2026 (429); Voting Improves Future 2083(433); Trust Afghan Government to Determine Guilt 2163 (435); Government
Does an Excellent or A Good Job of Providing Services 2158 (436); and All Variable Index 2026 (429). Treatment effects for the “Additional
Variable” Index and the “All Variables” Index are robust to excluding the outcome measure “Paying Taxes is Somewhat or Very Important.”




                                                                       41
                                          Table 6: Impact of Awareness of International Involvement
Panel A - Perceptions of Government
Dependent Variable:                                           MP Provides Services (=1)                               Afghanistan is a Democracy (=1)
                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)                           (4)            (5)           (6)
Delivered Letter (=1)                                    0.040*       0.049**        0.048**                       0.044*          0.039*       0.039*
                                                         (0.021)      (0.020)        (0.020)                       (0.026)        (0.023)       (0.023)
Aware of Delivery (=1)                                    0.002        0.001          -0.01                         -0.048         -0.062        -0.048
                                                         (0.037)      (0.036)        (0.037)                       (0.040)        (0.040)       (0.041)
Constant                                                0.178***     0.178***       0.171***                      0.659***       0.663***      0.571***
                                                         (0.014)      (0.013)        (0.044)                       (0.018)        (0.016)       (0.052)
Additional Covariates                                      No            No            Yes                            No             No            Yes
Stratum Fixed Effects                                      No           Yes            Yes                            No             Yes           Yes
P-value (Delivered = Aware)                               0.412        0.298          0.214                          0.075          0.047         0.096
R-squared                                                 0.003        0.068          0.076                          0.002          0.113         0.125
# Observations                                            2313         2200           2200                           2313           2259          2259
# Clusters                                                 455          437            437                            455            439           439
Panel B - Support for Government
Dependent Variable:                                     Important to Report IED to ANSF (=1)                       Police Should Resolve Disputes (=1)
                                                            (1)           (2)           (3)                           (4)           (5)           (6)
Delivered Letter (=1)                                    0.026*        0.029**       0.029**                         0.029       0.043**       0.047**
                                                         (0.014)       (0.012)       (0.012)                       (0.021)       (0.018)       (0.018)
Aware of Delivery (=1)                                    -0.007        0.008         -0.012                        -0.053        -0.059      -0.085**
                                                         (0.022)       (0.020)       (0.020)                       (0.038)       (0.037)       (0.037)
Constant                                                0.922***      0.918***      0.951***                      0.171***      0.160***      0.127***
                                                         (0.011)       (0.009)       (0.028)                       (0.013)       (0.011)       (0.041)
Additional Covariates                                       No            No            Yes                           No            No           Yes
Stratum Fixed Effects                                       No           Yes            Yes                           No            Yes          Yes
P-value (Delivered = Aware)                                0.376        0.386          0.091                         0.095         0.028        0.005
R-squared                                                  0.003        0.113          0.124                         0.002         0.073        0.084
# Observations                                             2313         2200           2200                          2313          2200         2200
# Clusters                                                  455          437            437                           455           437          437
Robust standard errors clustered at the polling center level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.-5, * p<0.1. All regressions include stratum fixed effects. The
additional covariates are the number of military events within 1KM of the polling center, whether the polling center was visited by international monitors, whether
the respondent is employed, their years of education, their general happiness (1-10), gender, marital status, and age.




                                                                                       42
Figure 1: Experimental Sample in Afghanistan




                                               43
Figure 2: Announcement of Monitoring




                                       44
Figure 3: Announcement of Monitoring (Dari)




                                         45
Figure 4: Treatment Effects




Note: Brackets reflect 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                          46
Figure 5: Treatment Effects for all Measures of Legitimacy




Note: Brackets reflect 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                             47
APPENDIX: OUTCOMES QUESTIONS AND VARIABLE CODING

Who is mainly responsible for delivering services in your neighborhood (RANDOMIZE
ORDERING): the central government, your Member of Parliament, religious or ethnic leaders, the
provincial government, or the community development council?

1. Central government; 2. Member of parliament; 3. Religious or ethnic leaders; 4. Provincial government; 5.
Community development council; 6. Other (record verbatim); 98. Don’t know; 99. RTA

The variable MP Provides Services (=1) is a dummy variable equal to one for individuals responding 2.
Responses of 98 and 99 are treated as missing.

In your opinion, is Afghanistan a democracy or not a democracy?

1. Yes; 2. No; 98. Don’t know ; 99. RTA

The variable Afghanistan is a Democracy (=1) is a dummy variable equal to one for individuals responding 1.
Responses of 98 and 99 are treated as missing.

In your opinion, how important is it for you to share information about insurgents to the Afghan
Security Forces (for example, pending IED attacks or the location of weapons caches): is it very
important, somewhat important, or not at all important?

1. Very important; 2.Somewhat important; 3. Not at all important; 98.Don’t know; fd99.RTA

The variable Report IED to ANSF (=1) is a dummy variable equal to one for individuals responding 1 or 2.
Responses of 98 and 99 are treated as missing.

If you had a dispute with a neighbor, who would you trust to settle it (randomize ordering): head of
family, police, courts, religious leaders, shura, elders, ISAF, or other?

1. Head of family; 2. Police; 3. Courts; 4. Religious leaders; 5. Shura; 6. Elders; 7. ISAF; 8. Other (record
verbatim); 98. Don’t know; 99.

The variable Police Should Resolve Disputes (=1) is a dummy variable equal to one for individuals responding 3.
The variable Court Should Resolve Disputes is a dummy equal to one for individuals responding 3. Responses of
98. and 99. are treated as missing.

Do you think that voting leads to improvements in the future or do you believe that no matter how
one votes, things never change?

1. Improvements in the future; 2. Things never change; 98. Don’t know; 99. RTA

The variable Voting Improves Future (=1) is a dummy variable equal to one for individuals responding 1.
Responses of 98 and 99 are treated as missing.

In your opinion, how important is it for you to pay taxes to the government: is it very important,
somewhat important, or not at all important?

1.Very important; 2. Somewhat important; 3. Not at all important; 98.Don’t know; 99.RTA

The variable Paying Taxes is Very Important (=1) is a dummy variable equal to one for individuals responding 1.
The variable Paying Taxes is Somewhat Important (=1) is a dummy equal to one for individuals responding 2. The
variable Paying Taxes is Very or Somewhat Important (=1) is a dummy equal to one for individuals responding 1
or 2. Responses of 98 and 99 are treated as missing.




                                                        48
Let us suppose that your friend has been accused of a crime. Who do you trust to determine whether
your friend is guilty: head of your qawm or the Afghan government?

1. Head of your qawm; 2. Afghan government; 98. Don’t know; 99. RTA

The variable Trust Afghan Government to Determine Guilt (=1) is a dummy equal to one for respondents
answering 2. Responses of 98 and 99 are treated as missing.

Does the central government do an excellent, good, just fair or poor job with the money it has to
spend on services?

1. Excellent; 2. Good; 3.Just fair; 4. Poor; 98.Don’t know; 99.RTA

The variable Govt. Does an Excellent or a Good Job of Providing Services (=1) is a dummy equal to one for
respondents answering 1 or 2. Responses of 98 and 99 are treated as missing.




                                                        49
