NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATENTS AS QUALITY SIGNALS? THE IMPLICATIONS FOR FINANCING CONSTRAINTS
ON R&D
Dirk Czarnitzki
Bronwyn H. Hall
Hanna Hottenrott
Working Paper 19947
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19947
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

The authors thank Thorsten Doherr for help with retrieving the patent data and participants at the CONCORDi
2013 (Seville, Spain) for helpful comments. Hottenrott appreciated research funding from the Flemish
Science Foundation (FWO). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19947.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Dirk Czarnitzki, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Hanna Hottenrott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patents as Quality Signals? The Implications for Financing Constraints on R&D
Dirk Czarnitzki, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Hanna Hottenrott
NBER Working Paper No. 19947
February 2014, Revised February 2015
JEL No. G32,O31,O32,O38
ABSTRACT
Information about the success of a new technology is usually held asymmetrically between the research
and development (R&D)-performing firm and potential lenders and investors. This raises the cost
of capital for financing R&D externally, resulting in financing constraints on R&D especially for firms
with limited internal resources. Previous literature provided evidence for start-up firms on the role
of patents as signals to investors, in particular to Venture Capitalists. This study adds to previous insights
by studying the effects of firms’ patenting activity on the degree of financing constraints on R&D
for a panel of established firms. The results show that patents do indeed attenuate financing constraints
for small firms where information asymmetries may be particularly high and collateral value is low.
Larger firms are not only less subject to financing constraints, but also do not seem to benefit from
a patent quality signal.
Dirk Czarnitzki
K.U. Leuven
Department of Managerial Economics
Strategy and Innovation
Naamsestraat 69, 3000 Leuven
Belgium
dirk.czarnitzki@econ.kuleuven.ac.be
Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org

Hanna Hottenrott
Düsseldorf Institute for Competition Economics
(DICE)
Heinrich Heine University
Universitätsstrasse 1
40225 Düsseldorf
Germany
hottenrott@dice.hhu.de

1

Introduction

A view widely held by economists and entrepreneurs is that investments in research
and development (R&D) are discouraged by imperfections in capital markets. The
main reason is that information about the success of a new technology is usually held
asymmetrically between the R&D performer and potential lenders and investors,
making it difficult for these outsiders to judge the R&D-performing firms’ quality
(Arrow 1962). This raises the cost of external capital and makes it in some cases
impossible to obtain financing for projects that would have a positive expected net
present value if normal interest rates or the cost of internal funds (if available) were
used to estimate value. In the light of this phenomenon, an increasing number of
academic studies have attempted to understand, identify, and explain the occurrence
of financing constraints for R&D and innovation.1
Drawing on the concept of job market signals (Spence 1973), several studies have
suggested that patents provide signals to external investors that mitigate such
financing constraints. As lenders may be able to derive probabilities for the success of
R&D-active firms across certain industries, but usually have difficulties assessing the
value of R&D activities of individual firms, the role of quality signals thus lies in their
potential to reduce information asymmetries by providing a “sorting mechanism”. Signals
thus help outsiders to derive expectations about the quality of the firm that cannot be
directly observed, such as R&D success. Due to the inherent characteristics of the R&D
process, when evaluating R&D-intensive firms external lenders and investors therefore
usually have to rely on observable firm characteristics which are presumably correlated
with characteristics directly related to the R&D project(s) and their success, which are not
easily observable. Long (2002) was among the first to argue that patents are an

effective instrument for reducing information asymmetries between the patenting firm
and outside investors. Patents have properties that may make them ideal candidates as
proxies for the quality assessment of R&D-active firms: they are costly to obtain,
easily observable and verifiable by outsiders. If lenders believe that patents correlate
with other, less easily observable firm characteristics which are not necessarily directly

1
See Hubbard (1998), Hall and Lerner (2010) and Czarnitzki and Hottenrott (2010) for surveys of the
literature.

1

related to the inventions, patent applications or grants may function as signals for
otherwise unobservable or difficult-to-measure attributes, such as knowledge capital or
the productivity of R&D spending. Moreover, the patenting process may help to reveal
information about technological discoveries and their potential value that otherwise

would be more difficult to convey to lenders and investors. The ability to convey
information credibly to outsiders at relatively low cost may therefore be a highly
valuable certification function of patents (Long, 2002, Arora et al. 2001).
Previous research that has studied the signaling value of patents has focused mainly
on start-up firms in high-tech industries. This literature usually finds a positive
relationship between patents and Venture Capital (VC) financing (e.g. MacMillan
1985; Baum and Silverman 2004; Mann and Sager 2007, Haeussler et al. 2009; Conti et
al. 2013, Hsu and Ziedonis 2013). While the evidence for patents as a quality signal for

attracting VC financing concludes that they do indeed function that way, the evidence
for the impact of patents on obtaining later stage financing, such as for the success of
initial public offerings (IPOs), is rather mixed (Deeds et al. 1997; Stuart et al. 1999;
Heeley et al. 2007).
This paper contributes to the existing literature by providing panel data evidence for a
large sample of established, R&D-active firms. To our knowledge, it is the first to
look at established firms rather than start-ups. Recent research stressed that not only
firms’ age (young firms are usually also small), but also size among older firms
matters for access to financing (Czarnitzki and Hottenrott 2011a; Fort et al. 2013).
The following analysis will therefore study the certification effect of patents taking
size heterogeneity among the firms into account. Moreover, it is among the first
papers to study the relationship using patents filed at the European Patent Office
rather than the US Patent and Trademark Office. We further employ a methodology
that allows studying financing constraints in the market for bank finance as bank
loans constitute the major external financing source for firms in most European
countries.
More precisely, the study adds to previous research on the topic by investigating a
large sample of R&D-active firms from the Flemish part of the OECD R&D survey in
a broad range of industries comprising both small and large firms. We estimate panel
data models for the period 2000 to 2009 that allow us to control for unobserved firmspecific effects. However, due to the unbalanced nature of the panel and the fact that
2

the dependent variable is censored at zero, we are unable to estimate fully dynamic
panel data models.
The results show that patents indeed attenuate financing constraints. This holds for the
patent stock of the firms as well as for recently filed patents. As patents may be
particularly useful in reducing information asymmetries between firms and lenders
when information asymmetries are large and when alternative ways of achieving
credibility are limited, we expect small firms to benefit more from patent signals than
larger ones. In line with these expectations, we find the effects to hold only for small
firms with less than 50 employees. Larger firms are not only less subject to financing
constraints in the first place, but also do not seem to benefit from a patent quality
signal. We do not find any corresponding effect for young firms versus old firms, but
this may be due to the fact that our sample includes only established young firms
(those older than 5 years old) and not startups.
This article proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines the motivation for this research
and briefly summarizes related research. Section 3 sets out the conceptual framework
of our analysis and section 4 describes the data. The econometric set-up, our model
specifications and the results are described in section 5. Section 6 concludes.

2
2.1

Capital Market Imperfections and the Signaling Value of Patents
The role of internal finance for R&D

Generally a firm is considered to be financially constrained if it cannot carry out its
R&D activities at desired scale and scope due to a lack of financing availability or a
very high cost of financing. Unlike most investment in tangible goods, R&D projects
are characterized by high and usually firm specific investments, on the one hand, and
low collateral value, on the other hand. Before willing to grant a loan, banks usually
require some degree of collateral value. Especially small, R&D-active firms may fail
to provide sufficient collateral value to lenders that would back potential loans.
Additionally, information asymmetries between the R&D-active firm and lenders
adversely affect financing conditions. Information asymmetries may be particularly
severe in case of small firms for which credibly conveying information regarding their
technological capabilities and overall creditworthiness is hard. As argued by Berger
and Udell (1998), “unlike large firms, small firms do not enter into contracts that are
3

publicly visible or widely reported in the press – contracts with their labor force, their
suppliers, and their customers are generally kept private”. Moreover, small firms
usually do not issue traded securities that are continuously priced in public markets
and often do not have audited financial statements that are available to providers of
outside finance.
Consequently, it is relatively more expensive for lenders to collect information on
small firms, who usually apply for loans of relatively small amounts, where cost is
measured by screening costs per borrowed or invested Euro. Likewise, small firms
face a relatively high cost of providing information to lenders as doing so requires
scarce human, financial and time resources. As a result, small firms may have larger
difficulties to credibly convey their quality to outsiders than larger firms.
If instead of detailed assessment, lenders consider average project quality in the
market to assess a firm’s R&D quality, this may result in a “lemon’s premium” for
above-average projects increasing financing costs even for the most promising firms
(Leland and Pyle, 1977). Constrained firms therefore (have to) rely to a larger extent
on internal resources when financing their R&D than firms that mainly invest in
capital goods (Hall 1992; Himmelberg and Peterson 1994; Harhoff 1998; Bougheas et
al. 2003; Levitas and McFayden 2009; Czarnitzki and Hottenrott 2011a). This fact
constrains R&D projects for firms whose internal financial sources are limited and
whose innovation potential is high (Brown et al. 2012; Borisova and Brown 2013;
Czarnitzki and Hottenrott 2011b, Hottenrott and Peters 2012). Not surprisingly,
earlier empirical evidence supported the view that small firms in particular encounter
difficulties financing R&D leading to delayed, canceled or postponed projects
(Carpenter and Petersen 2006; Schneider and Veugelers 2010; Czarnitzki and
Hottenrott 2011a).2 In line with these previous insights, we thus hypothesize that

2
One might think that this lack of access to debt would lead to firms issuing equity. However, small
firms may be particularly reluctant to issue equity, even if this excludes them from certain projects. In
Belgium, as in many other European countries, raising equity for financing investment projects
generally appears to be disfavored and only relatively few firms are listed at stock exchanges.
Particularly small, family owned firms view issuing of new equity as not particularly desirable as it
dilutes their ownership position. For example, Deloof and Jegers (1999) point out there were no public
issues of a straight bond by a Belgian company between 1990 and 1995. Borrowing from banks is the
most common form of raising funds for investment besides internal sources such as intra-group loans
(see for example Deloof 1998).

4

Hypothesis 1: Small R&D-active firms are more likely to be financially constrained in
their R&D investment than larger R&D-active firms. Thus, small firms’ R&D
investment should be more sensitive to internal liquidity than that of larger firms.
2.2

The role of patents

If firms seek access to external financing while engaged in complex R&D projects that
require a high degree of specialized skills to understand the technological details,
lenders and investors usually have to rely on observable firm characteristics which are
presumably correlated with properties that are not easily observable such as those directly
related to the firms’ R&D project(s). Because it can be costly and difficult for potential
lenders to assess the value and thus the creditworthiness of a firm, quality signals may be
used to reduce cost and effort devoted to quality assessment of the firms. Signals may
provide a “sorting mechanism” based on an easily observable attribute that allows
deriving expectations about qualities of the firm that are not immediately observable.

Long (2002) argued that patents are effective for reducing information asymmetries
between the patenting firm and outside investors. She distinguished “the simple view
of intellectual property rights” that regards patents as an exchange of information for
compensation in the form of protection, from a broader view that considers patents
also as a tool to credibly convey information about the underlying innovation. The
argument is based on the fact that patents have properties that may make them good
and readily available proxies for the quality assessment of R&D-active firms. First,
patents are costly to obtain (administrative and attorneys’ fees in addition to the R&D
that is often needed to come up with a patentable invention),3 and are easily
observable and verifiable for outsiders. Myers and Majluf (1984) stressed the
importance of supplying a “verifiable detail” to convey information. Patents are
publicly available documents that minimize information costs for potential lenders
and investors and since penalties for intentionally misrepresenting information in a
patent application are severe, outsiders know that the information contained in a
patent has some credibility (Long 2002).

3

Note that inventions do not always require systematic R&D upfront.

5

Second, if lenders assume that patents correlate with difficult-to-measure firm
characteristics that are not necessarily directly related to the firms’ patented
inventions, patents may still be a useful signal. For instance, patents provide
information about the firms’ ability to perform valuable research as patents measure
the outcome of past R&D and thus “advertise” the firms’ innovative capabilities. For
an invention to be patentable, it must be new, industrially applicable and involve an
inventive step. These requirements and the fact that patent applications need to be
approved by the patent office through a certification process, suggest that possessing a
patent is the result of successful previous R&D, hence signaling the general R&D
competencies of the firm (Stuart et al. 1999).4 Henderson and Cockburn (1994), for
example, used patent counts to measure the research competencies of firms in the
pharmaceutical industry and Harhoff (2009) argues that patents may signal the quality
of the firms’ R&D staff and its ability to handle intellectual property rights.
Moreover, market value studies typically find that both R&D expenditures and patent
stocks correlate positively with firms’ market value, and that patent stocks add
information on the value of firms’ knowledge assets beyond R&D stocks (Hall 2000;
Hall et al. 2005; Czarnitzki et al. 2006). Thus, lenders may use patent counts to
extrapolate the future value of the firm. In addition, firms owning a patent experience
a larger growth rate and higher productivity than firms not owning a patent and this
relationship has been shown to be stronger for small patentees in the UK (Helmers
and Rogers 2011; Hall et al. 2013).
Levitas and McFayden (2009) note that patents raise the prospects of future cash
flows and as patents protect firms - at least to some extent - against competition, they
may be expected to earn higher profit margins in the future. Moreover, since patents
facilitate the licensing of technology, patents may signal additional returns to the
patented technologies (e.g. Kulatilaka and Lihui 2006).

4

The threshold for patentability in the United States is considered by some observers to be low,
especially in IT-related sectors (Jaffe and Lerner, 2004), which casts doubts on the signaling value of
patents. The threshold is considered to be higher in Europe (van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie 2011). In
addition, Haeussler et al. (2009) argue that European patents are approximately 5 to 10 times more
expensive than U.S. patents. However this is a controversial area, and there exist dissenters (Christie et
al. 2013). Hall et al. (2007) find that the valuation of US and EPO patents in US and European firms is
fairly similar.

6

Almost more important than the profitability of the firm for lenders is the survival of
the firm. The high risk of bankruptcy is one reason why small and young firms face
difficulties in raising external financing. Cockburn and Wagner (2007) show that
possessing patents is positively correlated with the survival of the firm and Mann and
Sager (2007) also find a positive relationship between patenting activity and several
success measures among which survival.
From the perspective of the firm, a reluctance to disclose innovation-related
information to outsiders because of fear of imitation by competitors may exist
(Bhattacharya and Ritter 1983; Anton and Yao, 1998), so that one would expect
rational firms to seek patent protection only if the expected returns from the patent
outweigh the costs of disclosing the information. If patents, however, have some
signaling value, firms may be willing to disclose the information on their inventions
in patent applications not only in exchange for being able to exclude others from
using the information in certain ways, but also in order to reduce informational
asymmetries between themselves and outsiders. Being aware of such a signaling
value, firms may apply for patents to signal information about themselves and their
R&D that would be more expensive or even impossible, or less credible when
revealed in other contexts. This may explain why firms (and especially small and
young companies) patent even when the need to exclude others is not important
because of high cost of imitation. Moreover, because of the comparatively higher
burden of obtaining a patent for small firms, it provides an even stronger patent signal
to external parties. Finally, patents may also signal some salvage value that will be
available if the firm goes bankrupt. However, it can be argued that the true collateral
value is very difficult to assess and that therefore the signal stems more from the fact
that patents make research output “as tangible as it gets”.
Based on these arguments, we hypothesize that patents have some signaling value that
helps the firm obtain finance:
Hypothesis 2: Firms’ past patenting activities alleviate financing constraints.
We will measure the presence of these constraints via the sensitivity of firms’ R&D
investment to the availability of internal funds. Additionally, the previous
considerations lead us to hypothesize that small firms benefit more from the existence
of patent signals than larger firms. Thus, we further hypothesize the following:

7

Hypothesis 3: Firms’ past patenting activities are more important for alleviating
financing constraints for small firms’ than for larger firms.
A crucial feature of a patent is that it signals hidden attributes of the firm that lenders
assume will increase the value of the firm or may make it likely that the firm will
repay its debt, even if the value gain is not directly related to the patent. For example,
having a patent may constitute a competitive advantage through being a first-mover in
the industry (Bessen and Maskin 2009). According to Long (2002) this might explain
why industries in which competitive advantage in product markets is often derived
from being a first mover, such as semiconductors and information technology, are
also among the industries in which patenting is most active (Hall and Ziedonis 2001).
Further, it might explain why small firms, which usually face greater informational
asymmetries in capital markets than large firms, tend to patent relatively more
intensely (in comparison to their R&D) than large firms, even though they may
enforce their patents less (Griliches et al. 1987; Mansfield 1986).5
Importantly, Lemley (2000) argues that venture capitalists use patent applications as
evidence that the company is well managed, is at a certain stage in development, and
has defined and carved out a market niche, rather than attributing a certain value to
the patent itself. Similarly, patents may simply indicate the firm’s confidence in its
research which may not be necessarily related to the relevance of the technology for
future inventions. Thus, if patents constitute a quality signal, we expect that
Hypothesis 4: The signaling value of a patent application is related to its existence,
but unot related to the covered technology’s ex-post value.
2.3

Empirical evidence

Since the work of MacMillan (1985) patents have been recognized as a relevant selection
criterion for Venture Capital (VC) investors. A considerable number of studies has since
supported the hypothesis of a positive relationship between the patent stock of high-tech
start-ups and the amount of VC funding received.

5

This argument applies to small producing firms. There is other evidence that small non-producing
firms that specialize in acquiring patents litigate more than other firms, at least in the United States. See
Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004), inter alia.

8

Hall and Ziedonis (2001) interview executives in the US semiconductor industry and
find that they consider patent rights to be of significant importance in attracting VC
funding. Similarly, Baum and Silverman (2004) show a positive relationship between
patent applications at the US Patent Office and VC financing. However, they
conclude that the importance of patents in this regard varies across industries. Mann
and Sager (2007) analyze the relationship between patenting of software start-up
firms and the progress of those firms through the VC cycle. They find significant and
robust positive correlations between patenting and the number of financing rounds,
total investment, as well as the receipt of late stage financing. Interestingly, they
observe that the effect of patents depends less on the size of the patent portfolio than
on the firm’s receipt of at least one patent.
Hsu and Ziedonis (2013) argue that patents can increase the perception about the
value of start-ups and that new entrepreneurial firms benefit most in early stages of
financing when technological uncertainty is high and alternative means for conveying
quality to outsiders is lacking. In particular, they find that venture-backed
semiconductor start-ups with a higher patent application stock than others are more
likely to attract initial funding from a prominent venture capitalist. For start-ups by
founders without prior success in securing initial funds from prominent VCs, patents
are even more influential. Moreover, they find patents to induce steeper valuation
adjustments in earlier rounds of VC financing.
Using a sample of German and British biotechnology companies, Haeussler et al.
(2009) find that VC funding happens earlier when patent applications are present.
Levitas and McFayden (2009) suggest that patents signal the firms’ invention and
innovation competencies and facilitate access to external financing as they observe
that patent owning firms seem to rely less on accumulating large cash holdings to
fund their (future) R&D projects. Most recently, Conti, Thursby and Rothaermel
(2013) examine a sample of start-up firms in the Georgia Institute of Technology new
firm incubator and find that those with patents obtain more external financing; the
authors conclude that patents serve as a signal for venture capitalists. Hoenen et al.
(2014), however, find for U.S.-based biotechnology firms that patent applications are
positively associated with first-round, but not with second-round VC financing. Conti,
Thursby and Thursby (2013) concluded that patents serve to attract new investors and

9

are intended for that purpose by Israeli start-up firms. This signal, however, is only
effective for venture capitalists, but not for private investors.
While previous research usually finds a positive relationship between patents and VC
financing, evidence for later stage financing is rather ambiguous. Examining the IPO
performance of biotechnology start-ups, Deeds et al. (1997) find no effects of patents
on the amounts raised in an IPO and conclude that patents may only be “noisy”
signals that do not really affect the expectations of public investors. Stuart et al.
(1999) observe that biotechnology start-ups advertise their patent filings when aiming
at initial public offerings (IPOs) although these authors also find that patents have
minimal effect on market value of new biotechnology listings. Likewise, Heeley et al.
(2007) find contradictory results concluding that patents can serve as signaling
devices in sectors such as biopharmaceuticals and chemicals, while they find no such
evidence for information technology (IT) firms.
The motivation for the following study is thus based on two aspects that have not
been addressed by previous research. First, this study is the first to use panel data
evidence for a large sample of established, R&D-active firms. Recent research on
financing constraints for R&D reported evidence for such constraints not only for
young, start-up firms, but also for more established firms (Czarnitzki and Hottenrott
2011a,b; Czarnitzki et al. 2011; Hottenrott and Peters 2012; Mina et al. 2013; Lahr
and Mina 2013). However, no study examines the role of patents for mitigating
financing constraints for these firms. Second, the following study is among the first to
look at this question using patents filed at the European Patent Office.

3

Conceptual Framework

Following on the seminal work of Fazzari et al. (1988), many econometric studies
have approached the detection of financing constraints by comparing different groups
of firms in terms of their investments’ sensitivity to internal financing. While this
approach was initially applied for any type of investment, later studies have adopted
the methodology analogously to investment in R&D (e.g., Hall 1992; Himmelberg
and Peterson, 1994). For the group of supposedly unconstrained firms, R&D spending
should not be as sensitive to the availability of internal funds as the R&D of
constrained firms, as the former group is able to raise financing externally. Recent
research further stressed the importance of R&D smoothing through cash holdings
10

especially for firms that are most likely to face financing frictions (Brown and
Peterson 2011; Brown et al. 2012). In line with this methodology, we use a standard
empirical model of R&D investment sensitivity to internal liquidity and examine how
the estimates of this model vary across firms of different sizes. We measure internal
liquidity by the firms’ working capital including cash holdings. To explore the role of
firm size, we distinguish between large and small firms where “small” is defined
using the European Commission definition, namely that the firm has fewer than 50
employees, and estimate separate equations for small and large firms’ investment to
identify differences in the reliance of firms on internal funds, on the one hand, and
difference in the effects of firms patenting activity on access to external financing, on
the other. We expect a positive relationship between firms’ liquidity and the firms’
expenditures in R&D and we expect this relationship to be stronger for the small
firms, as suggested by hypothesis (1).
If patents serve as a quality signal the firms’ stocks of patents (or the number of preperiod patent applications) should reduce the firms’ reliance on internal funds for their
R&D investments. Harhoff (2009) argues that patents do not necessarily have to be
granted yet in order to work as a signal as even patent applications reveal information
and require money and time. Hence, we use patent applications rather than granted
patents in the subsequent analysis. We expect that the interaction term between patent
applications and internal funding is negative, (partially) off-setting the positive effect
of internal liquidity.

4

Data

The following analysis uses a unique database that we constructed based on several
sources: the Flemish R&D survey, the OECD/EPO patent citations database, and the
Bureau van Dijk BEL-FIRST database. The proposed analysis requires nonanonymized firm level data including variables such as R&D collected over a long
period of time as well as financial information for small firms that are not subject to
strict publication rules for accounting data. Although such data is available for other
countries, it is usually not possible for external researchers to access these data in the
non-anonymized form that allows search by company names in a patent database. For
the present paper, we had such data available and we were able to link firms and

11

patents at the firm level using text-field string matching based on firms’ names and
addresses.
Information on firms’ R&D-related activities comes from the Flemish part of the
OECD R&D survey. This survey is harmonized across OECD countries and is
conducted every second year in order to compose the OECD Main Science and
Technology Indicators. The sampling population from which the survey sample is
drawn targets all R&D-active companies in Flanders. Our analysis is based on
repeated cross sections that form an unbalanced panel from five consecutive waves of
the R&D survey covering the period from 2000 until 2009. Each wave provides
information at the firm level for two consecutive years. The definition of research and
development used in the survey is based on the definition of the OECD Frascati
Manual (1993, 2002) which frames the methodology for collecting and using statistics
about R&D in OECD countries.
Patent information comes from a database issued by the European Patent Office
(EPO), the “OECD/EPO patent citations database” (Webb et al., 2005). This database
covers all patents applied for at the EPO since its foundation in 1978 as well as all
patents applied for under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) in which the EPO is
designated, so-called “Euro-PCT applications”. Additionally, information from the
Belgian patent office was used to include information about patents filed in Belgium
only. Patent data is available as a time series from 1978 until the end of 2011.
The accounting and balance sheet data for our firms stems from the BELFIRST
database provided by Bureau van Dijk. BELFIRST is a comprehensive database that
contains information on about 1.2 million active and non-active Belgian companies.
Approximately half of the companies have financial account information; the
remainders are generally individuals (sole traders).
Our sample comprises firms that invested at least once in R&D during the panel
period and are observed at least twice during that time. We require two years of data
since we estimate simple panel data models that control for unobserved heterogeneity.
On average, we observe each firm about 4 times in our panel. After eliminating data
with missing values in the variables of interest and requiring the firms to be observed
at least twice during the sample period, our final unbalanced panel consists of 4,309
unique firm-year observations referring to 1,135 different firms active in a broad

12

range of industries. Table A1 in the appendix provides details on the distribution of
firms across industries.
4.1

Variables

Firms’ R&D expenditures (more precisely, firms’ R&D intensity measured as the
ratio of R&D spending to tangible capital) serve as the dependent variable in the
following analysis (R&D). We derive indicators for the firms’ capital structure from
balance sheet information.6 The firms’ stock of working capital serves as a measure of
operating liquidity. As suggested by Hall and Kruiniker (1995), using working capital
instead of cash flow as a measure of firms’ liquidity is preferable, because it is a
better indicator of the funds available for investment.7 Although working capital is
affected by cash flow, working capital is a more precise liquidity indicator when it
comes to investment decisions as it also includes not only cash but also values that
can relatively easily be converted into cash; in short, it is a stock rather than a flow.
Working capital (WCAP) is defined as net short-term assets, that is, the difference
between current assets and current liabilities of a firm. In this study, we use a
somewhat stricter measure that is to a high degree comparable across firms in our
sample and not biased by accounting options, computing working capital WCAP as
cash + inventories + accounts receivable – accounts payable.8 Other short term assets
(other current assets, prepaid expenses, and deferred charges) and short term liabilities
(other short term debt and other creditors) are not included. The higher the working
capital the more secure is a firm’s liquidity and accordingly its financial flexibility.
This variable can take positive or negative values. Positive working capital means that
short-term liabilities are covered by current assets whereas negative working capital
indicates that a firm’s current assets are not sufficient to cover its current liabilities.

6

These accounts follow the Belgian GAAP on an annual basis.

7

The appropriateness of cash flow as an indicator for financial liquidity and the interpretation of the
sensitivity of R&D investment to changes in cash flow has been criticized in the literature (Hao and
Jaffe 1993; Fazzari and Petersen 1993; Kaplan and Zingales 1997, 2000). Especially for large firms,
cash flow levels may be determined by accounting practice as well as by dividend policies (Jensen and
Meckling 1976; Jensen 1986).
8
Accounts receivable and accounts payable are termed Trade Debtors and Trade Creditors in the data
source. Inventories are called Stocks.

13

As an indicator of the state of the firm’s balance sheet and its access to the credit
market, we use the ratio of long term debt (consisting of all non-current liabilities
payable later than one year) to tangible assets of the firm.9 For this variable, we use a
two period lag as debt is measured at the end of the year t–2, so that its visibility to
potential lenders is effective in t–1. We calculate the firms’ debt-to-tangible assets
ratios (DEBTRATIO) rather than debt-to-equity ratios as the former type is more
meaningful in reflecting the firms’ liabilities relative to the firms’ collateral value.
Thus, as common in the literature, we scale the dependent variable as well as WCAP
and DEBT by firm assets (see e.g. Fazzari et al. 1988; Fazzari and Petersen 1993;
Harhoff 1998). We use tangible assets (K) from the firm accounts, which excludes
intangible assets, financial assets, and current assets.
Our measure of the key variable, patenting activity, is computed as the stock of patent
applications made by the firm. We compute this quantity for each firm and year as a
perpetual inventory of past and present patent applications of the firm with a constant
depreciation rate (δ) of 15 percent, as is common practice in the literature (see
Griliches and Mairesse, 1984):
PATSTOCK i ,t  (1   ) PATSTOCK i ,t 1  PATAPPSi ,t

(1)

We also control for the size of the firms’ tangible assets, measured as the log of those
assets. Larger firms may be able to realize economies of scale and scope when doing
R&D activities, which may affect their R&D intensity either positively or negatively.
This result was originally pointed out by Fisher and Temin (1973), who show that a
finding that R&D intensity increases with firm size is neither necessary nor sufficient
to show that the productivity of R&D increases with firm size or the size of the R&D
program. Therefore we have no prior expectation about the sign of this coefficient.
Because R&D investment may also depend on the life cycle of the firm, and younger
firms are often observed to invest relatively more in R&D than older firms, we control
for age-related effects by including the log of age, ln(AGE). Additionally, the dummy
variable GROUP is included to take into account that firms that are part of an

9

We also experimented with a debt measure based on a firm’s total liabilities (current plus non-current
liabilities), but the results were quite similar so we do not display them in the paper.

14

enterprise group may conduct more R&D since firms associated with a group can
benefit from intra-firm knowledge spillovers as well as from R&D funding through
intra-group sources. A set of yearly time dummies is included to account for overall
business cycle effects and 16 sector dummies on the basis of the European standard
industry classification (NACE Bel rev2) are included to capture differences in
technological opportunities that determine R&D investment. To avoid simultaneity
bias due to feedback effects from the dependent variable to current explanatory
variables, we use lagged values of all time-varying independent variables (with the
exception of AGE).
4.2

Descriptive statistics

Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for these variables for the full sample as well
as for the groups of small and larger firms separately. We define small firms as those
whose employment averages less than 50 during the sample period, which is
essentially the definition used by the European Commission. Out of a total of 4,390
firm-year observations 44% refer to small firms.
Average R&D to tangible assets ratio in the full sample is 0.88 corresponding to
annual R&D spending of about 3 million euros on average. Median spending is much
lower, however, at about 132 thousand euros (not reported). Almost 20% of firms
have at least one patent in the sample period. The average patent stock is 1.09 and
firms file on average 0.6 patents per year. In the group of patent-active firms, i.e.
firms with at least one patent application the average number is 2.9 patents per year
(not reported). The firms’ long term debt is around 22 million euros on average
resulting in a mean debt to tangible assets ratio of 1.34; the median is much lower at a
ratio of 0.52. The working capital to tangible assets ratio is 4.87 and firms
employment averages 256 (median 64). The mean firm age is close to 29 years and
57% of the firms are part of an enterprise group.
When splitting our sample into small and larger firms, we see interesting differences
in the main variables between these two groups. Small firms have significantly (at 1%
level) higher R&D expenditures to tangible assets ratios, smaller patent stock and
fewer patent applications in a given year. Small firms’ patents receive significantly
fewer citations, reflected in smaller citations stocks. Moreover, these firms are
younger, more often independent ventures and have lower debt ratios (DEBT/K), on
15

average. The amount of working capital is also significantly lower for the sub-sample
of small firms as one would expect, but the mean of the working capital to tangible
assets ratio is larger for the group of small firms.
In terms of their basic characteristics, we believe that the firms in the sample are
representative of Flemish R&D performers. We base this assertion on two facts: 1)
the sampling methodology is that used by government statistical agents to collect data
for various R&D reports, both Eurostat and OECD. 2) Key statistics of the sample,
such as the patentee share of 20 per cent, are well in line with numbers for Europe in
general. On average, 19% of European manufacturing firms with innovation activity
filed at least one patent. The share varies between 15% in countries like Italy and
Denmark, 18% in the Netherlands, 24% in Germany and 27% in France (European
Communities/Eurostat 2004, p. 60). Further, the firm-size distribution is similar to the
one of other European countries like Germany, Austria, France and the UK where the
large majority of firms employs less than 250 employees and the median firm size
ranges between 40 and 50 employees (Rubini et al. 2012).

16

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics (main variables)
Variable
Units
Full sample (4,390 obs. on 1,147 firms)
R&Di,t/ Ki,t
ratio
PATSTOCKt-1
count
PATAPPSt-1
count
CITSTOCKt-1
count
WCAPi,t-1/ Ki,t-1
ratio
DEBTi,t-2/ Ki,t-1
ratio
Ki,t-1
million €
EMPi,t
headcount
AGEi, t
years
GROUPi
dummy
Large firms (2,428 obs. on 567 firms)
R&Di,t/ Ki,t
ratio
PATSTOCKt-1
count
PATAPPSt-1
count
CITSTOCKt-1
count
WCAPi,t-1/ Ki,t-1
ratio
DEBTi,t-2/ Ki,t-1
ratio
Ki,t-1
million €
EMPi,t
headcount
AGEi, t
years
GROUPi
dummy
Small firms (1,962 obs. on 580 firms)
R&Di,t/ Ki,t
ratio
PATSTOCKt-1
count
PATAPPSt-1
count
CITSTOCKt-1
count
WCAPi,t-1/ Ki,t-1
ratio
DEBTi,t-2/ Ki,t-1
ratio
Ki,t-1
million €
EMPi,t
headcount
AGEi,t
years
GROUPi
dummy

5

Mean

Std. Dev.

0.88

3.88

1.09

8.06

0.60
9.72
4.87
1.34
17.96
255.70
28.79
0.57

4.52
181.72
9.40
3.27
99.26
693.01
19.82
0.50

0.50
1.89
1.04
1.34
17.49
1.59
31.72
443.93
33.00
0.76

1.81
10.77
6.04
3.27
244.09
3.79
131.86
888.29
22.19
0.43

1.36
0.11
0.06
0.10
5.60
1.04
0.94
22.77
23.58
0.33

5.41
0.51
0.34
1.29
10.59
2.44
2.27
14.00
14.85
0.47

Min

Max
0
0
0
0

-0.91
0

0.001
1
5
0
0
0
0
0

-0.82
0
0.02
13
5
0
0
0
0
0

-0.91
0
1
1
6
0

128.57
231.2
132
5,667.5
112.26
38.76
2,253.24
11,575
138
1
27.81
231.2
132
38.76
5,667.5
38.76
2,253.24
11,58
138
1
128.57
7.4
5
36
111.5
38.13
49.63
85
106
1

Econometric Analysis

In the following econometric analysis, we estimate censored panel regression models
as not all of our firms in the sample perform R&D in each year, which results in a left
censoring of the dependent variable. Small firms especially may conduct R&D only
on an irregular basis. Indeed, in our sample the number of censored observations is

17

larger in the group of firms with fewer than 50 employees. Thus, we estimate random
effects Tobit models that can be written as
yit  max  0, xit   ci  uit  ,



uit | xi , ci  N 0,  u2

i  1, 2,  , N , t  1, 2,  , T

(2)



where y denotes the dependent variable, x the set of regressors, c a firm-specific timeconstant effect, and u the usual random error term. The parameters to be estimated are
denoted by the vector .
The first specification of the model to be estimated assumes that there is no
correlation between c and x (see Wooldridge, 2002, pp. 540-541, for further technical
details). Note that it is not appropriate to estimate a fixed effects Tobit model, as the
maximum likelihood estimator of this model is not consistent (see e.g. Cameron and
Trivedi 2005). As the uncorrelatedness assumption between x and c can easily be
challenged, we relax this assumption by adding “within” means of each of the time
varying covariates to the set of regressors to proxy “quasi-fixed effects”, following
Wooldridge (2002). Thus, if ci    xi  ai we can write

yit  max  0,  xit   xi  ai  uit 

(3)

with uit | xi , ai  N  0,  u2  and ai  N  0,  a2  .
The appropriateness of the Wooldridge model, i.e. that the assumption of
uncorrelatedness between the firm-specific effect and the regressors is not valid, will
be tested by the joint significance of the x-variables’ “within” means.
The basic model for R&D investment is specified as:10
WCAPi,t 1
WCAPi,t 1
R & Dit*
 0  1 ln(PATSTOCKi,t 1 )  2
 3
 ln(PATSTOCKi,t 1 )
Kit
Ki,t 1
Ki,t 1
4

DEBTi,t 2
Ki,t 1

8

(4)

  h Zik   i  t  ci  uit
h5

10

Although the model contains a time-invariant firm-specific effect we also include the time-invariant
regressors GROUP and the industry dummies, as the firm-specific effect is treated as a random
component in the estimation.

18

Where Zik corresponds to the set of firm-level control variables including SIZE in terms
of tangible assets, AGE and GROUP. γi and δt denote the 16 two-digit industry and the
10 year dummies respectively. The model for the observable R&D/K ratio is the
following:
 R & Dit*
R & Dit 
  K it
K it
 0


if xit   ci  uit  0

(5)

otherwise.

We include an interaction term of the working capital ratio and the patent indicator to
measure the impact of patenting activity on the firms’ sensitivity in R&D investment
to the availability of internal liquidity as captured by working capital. The patent
indicator PATSTOCKi,t-1 measures the firms discounted patent stock as described above
at period t-1. We use the natural log of one plus PATSTOCKi,t-1 in estimation to because
of the skewness of the patent distribution (and to avoid missing values when the stock
is zero). One may also include an indicator that captures recent patenting activity, i.e.
a dummy for new patent applications (PATDUMMY) that takes the value one if the
firms filed for at least one patent in t-1.
One problem that arises when estimating R&D investment equations is the potential
simultaneity between R&D and the variables such as leverage, size, etc used to
predict it. We have tried to mitigate this problem by using lags of all our predictor
variables, but given the intertemporal nature of firm strategies, especially those
associated with R&D behavior, this is not a complete solution. It might have been
desirable to estimate dynamic panel data models since theoretical investment models
are typically based on the firm’s inter-temporal optimization problem conditional on
the current level of (R&D) capital stock (see Brown and Peterson 2011; Brown et al.
2012; Mulkay et al. (2001)). However, application of the methods used by these
authors would require four consecutive observations per firm in order to conduct
meaningful panel regressions. Our panel dataset is not only unbalanced but has also
gaps in the time-series structure because firms did not necessarily respond to the
surveys in adjacent years. Therefore, we found it impossible to estimate dynamic
models given the sparseness of the data.
In addition, due to the unbalanced nature of our panel data, we could not follow the
familiar panel data approach of using lagged values of the regressors as instrumental

19

variables, as we would lose a large share of the observations. In addition, the validity
of such instruments would be questionable as many variables show high persistency
over time. Thus instruments external to the current model would be required.
Unfortunately it is very difficult to think about appropriate instrumental variables in
the present context even conceptually, and the availability of appropriate data
constitutes another hurdle for implementing appropriate IV regressions.
5.1

Estimation Results

The results of the random effects panel model are presented on the left hand-side of
Table 2 and the results for the model that allows for correlated effects by including
the within sample means of the time variant firm characteristics are presented on the
right panel. Table 2 shows the results of the specification with the PATSTOCK variable
as outlined above. The first and fourth columns present the results for the full sample,
columns two and five show the results for small firms and columns three and six for
larger firms.
First, it should be noted that the tests of whether x and c are uncorrelated are rejected
for the regressions for both subsamples (tests on joint significance on within means).
Thus, we prefer the Wooldridge generalization of the random effects model over the
‘traditional’ random effects model. In the following, we therefore limit our discussion
to these results.
As can be seen in Table 2, we observe a significant positive coefficient on lagged
working capital intensity for the full sample. The sample split models, however,
indicate that this effect is mainly driven by small firms. In line with previous literature
identifying financing constraints by investments’ sensitivity to internal liquidity, we
may interpret the different size in the coefficients between small and large firms as an
indication that smaller firms are more dependent on internal means for financing their
R&D (supporting Hypothesis 1).
The patent stock itself is related positively and significantly to R&D spending in all
model specifications. Our main attention is directed at the interaction effect between
the firms’ past patent activity and the firm’s liquidity. As can be gathered from Table
2, the sign of the coefficient of the interaction term (WCAP t-1 / K t-1)* ln(PATSTOCKt-1) is
negative and significant, but only in the sample of small firms. Its negative sign
suggests that the firm’s patent stock helps to reduce the dependence on working
20

capital (supporting Hypothesis 2 and 3). This “mitigation” effect is robust to the
inclusion of controls for correlated fixed effects. In terms of the magnitude of the
mitigation effect, we see that the interaction coefficient of -0.105 when compared to
the working capital coefficient of 0.175 corresponds to about two-thirds of the initial
effect. In other words, the larger a small firm’s patent stock, the lower its dependency
on internal liquidity when investing in R&D. In terms of marginal effects, we also
find that the patent stock has a significant economic impact on investment. Consider a
small firm that does not hold any patents and has otherwise average firm
characteristics including an average value of WCAP/K. Now suppose it is hit by a shock
in liquidity such that its value of WCAP/K is reduced by one standard deviation.
Consequently, its R&D investment to tangible assets ratio is expected to decline by
about 48%, other things equal. If, however, the same liquidity shock hits a small firm
that patents at the average value of the patent stock distribution in the sample, its
investment to assets ratio would only reduce by 23%. Thus, the significant coefficient
estimates of the liquidity, the patent stock and their interaction, also translate into
economically significant results.
These insights are robust to the altering the specification by using a dummy variable
for recent patenting activity only.11 Thus, in general, small firms depend highly on
their internal resources, but having patent applications alleviate the constraint, on
average. Thus, whatever attributes of the firms’ patents are assumed to correlate with,
the signal seems to be positive. In line with previous studies, we find that liquidity is
less associated with R&D in larger firms. In addition, although the past patent stock is
strongly associated with current R&D intensity, patents have no impact on the small
liquidity coefficient, suggesting that there is no signaling role of patents for large
firms.
We further tested for which thresholds in the firm size distribution these results hold.
For that purpose, we interacted size with the three variables working capital, patent
stock, and their interaction. The result are shown in Figure 1. Using a loglinear
interaction, all the three coefficients become insignificant at about 100 employees and

11
Detailed results are available from the authors upon request. The χ2(3) for coefficient equality across
small and large firms is 82.6 for patent applications and 75.1 for the patenting dummy.

21

approach zero as firm size reaches 1000 employees. We also tried a splitting the
sample at 100 employees instead of 50, and found that the results were similar but
slightly weaker.12
To test whether the effects differ between sectors, we ran the models on different
industry sub-groups. When we distinguish Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) (518 obs.) from non-ICT sectors, we find positive and significant
working capital coefficients and significant negative interaction effects in both
groups. Interestingly, the working capital coefficient is much larger in the ICT group.
When we distinguish manufacturing from services, we find that manufacturing drives
the results, which is not surprising given the relative importance of patents in that
sector. Dividing the sample further is really not feasible given the limited number of
observations with positive patenting.
The control variables show the expected signs. Among the larger firms, more physical
capital-intensive firms invest less in R&D, while group membership is positively
associated with R&D for small firms. Not surprisingly, industry is a strong predictor
of R&D spending. Interestingly, for the sub-sample of small firms, we further find
evidence for a sensitivity of R&D to business cycle movements as captured by the
year dummies, while larger firms’ R&D spending seems less sensitive to fluctuations
in the business cycle.

12

For a sample split of young versus old firms, where young is defined as age less than or equal to 20
years (results are similar for a cut at 25 years), we find that both sub groups are sensitive to financing
constraints and that this sensitivity is mitigated by patents. Similarly, testing young/small versus
old/small we find again very similar patterns in both groups. These results point to the conclusion that
not their age that constrains firms in our sample, but rather their size. It should be noted, however, that
our sample contains firms that are at least active for five years, i.e are not truly nascent firms. The
results in the paper also show that the variable age itself is never statistically significant in predicting
R&D intensity in the presence of the other variables.

22

Figure 1: Coefficients as a function of average firm employment
2.0

1200

1.5

1000
800

1.0
600
0.5
400
0.0

200
0

-0.5
1

3

7

20
55
148 403
Number of employees

1097 2981 8103

Number of firms

Working capital coeff.

Patent stock coeff.

Interaction

23

Table 2: Estimation results from Tobit regressions of R&D intensity (R&D over tangible assets) on lagged patent stock
Variable
ln(PATSTOCK)t-1
WCAP t-1 / K t-1
(WCAP t-1 / K t-1)*ln(PATSTOCK)t-1
DEBT t-2 / K t-1
ln(Kt-1)
ln(AGEt)
GROUPt
Joint sign. of time dummies χ2(9)
Joint sign. of ind. dummies χ2(15)
Joint sign. of within means χ2(4)

Log-Likelihood
 (s.e.)
# observations
# censored observations

Random-Effects Panel Model
full sample
EMPL < 50
EMPL > 50
0.785 ***
1.689***
0.409***
(0.156)
(0.610)
(0.071)
0.111 ***
0.159***
0.008
(0.009)
(0.016)
(0.006)
-0.051 ***
-0.105***
0.001
(0.010)
(0.023)
(0.005)
0.042 **
0.104*
0.045***
(0.021)
(0.054)
(0.010)
-0.368 ***
-0.581***
-0.265***
(0.062)
(0.152)
(0.044)
-0.120
-0.365
0.029
(0.181)
(0.371)
(0.111)
0.295 *
0.695**
0.006
(0.168)
(0.334)
(0.099)
23.0***
22.1***
13.2
102.2***
55.6***
68.0***
-10,118.7
-5,093.6
-3,717.3
0.633 (0.015)
0.564 (0.025)
0.733 (0.017)
4,390
1,962
2,428
666
305
361

full sample
0.574**
(0.203)
0.115***
(0.010)
-0.052***
(0.010)
0.043*
(0.023)
-0.216
(0.125)
-0.096
(0.182)
0.312*
(0.170)
23.9***
96.2***
5.8
-10,115.8
0.633 (0.015)
4,390
666

Wooldridge Estimator
EMPL < 50
EMPL > 50
1.353*
0.243 ***
(0.740)
(0.086)
0.175***
-0.001
(0.019)
(0.007)
-0.105***
0.003
(0.023)
(0.005)
0.085
0.045 ***
(0.062)
(0.011)
0.013
-0.422 ***
(0.248)
(0.071)
-0.289
0.007
(0.373)
(0.111)
0.661**
-0.016
(0.337)
(0.099)
25.1***
14.2
49.7***
66.4***
11.3**
18.0***
-5,088.0
-3,708.4
0.566 (0.024)
0.733 (0.016)
1,962
2,428
305
361

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. *** (**, *) indicate a significance level of 1% (5%, 10%). All models include an intercept (not shown). Coefficients of variables’
within means in Wooldridge model are omitted from the table. The value of  indicates the share of the total variance which is due to the cross-sectional variation.

24

5.2

Patent signal or patent value?

The previous results suggest that patents affect the firms’ dependence on internal funds for
conducting R&D for small firms. If this effect were due to a signaling value of patents then we
would expect the effect to be related to the patent application and not necessarily to the ex-post
value of the patented technology. In other words, the effect should stem from the patent
application independently of whether or not the technology turned out to be highly valuable in
the end. For the purpose of testing this, we use the forward citations to the patent applied for in t1 by the firm. As shown in previous research, the value distribution of patented inventions is
subject to considerable uncertainty early in the patent life and ultimately highly skewed. Using a
number of measures (renewal rates, citations, surveys, etc.) researchers have found that only a
few patents turn out to be of high economic value, while the remainder are worth almost nothing
(Pakes, 1985; Schankerman and Pakes, 1986; Harhoff et al., 1999; Deng, 2007). Thus, one does
not expect patents to alleviate financing constraints unless patents signal something more, for
example overall technological competencies, than simply the expected rents from appropriating
returns on R&D via IP protection. This would make the patent right itself valuable,
independently of the value of the underlying technology. Hall et al. (2005) suggest using forward
patent citations (references to the patent in subsequent patent applications) as a patent value
indicator. The more citations a firm’s patents receive, the more influential are these patents for
follow-on technology developments, and consequently the higher is the assumed economic value
of the patents. Research on the appropriateness of forward citations as value indicator found
citations to correlate positively and significantly with patents’ economic value reported in
surveys (Harhoff et al., 1999; Jaffe et al., 2000; Gambardella et al. (2008).
In the sample of small firms, we observe only very few patenting firms that receive citations to
their patents at all (18 firms, corresponding to slightly less than one third of the small firms who
patent). In other words, the reported signaling effect is unlikely to be due to the ex-post value of
the underlying invention, as proxied by the average number of forwards citations to the patent in
a five year-window after the patent was filed.
Among larger firms, about 12 percent (or half of the patenting firms) receive citations to their
patents. On average, these firms received 8 citations to their patents in the sample period. This
number is of course downward biased by the number of non-patenting firms in our sample.
25

Among the firms with at least one patent, the overall number of citations is 27 with a maximum
of 4554 total citations. More meaningful is the average number of citations per patent that firms
receive, on average. In the sub-sample of large firms this number is 0.47, with a maximum of
255 citations per patent. It should be noted that we consider patent profiles at the level of the
firms which implies that we aggregate citations over all the patents the firm applied for in a
given year and then divide by patents
The citations per patent variable has a very skewed distribution, as expected. Table 3 below
shows the distribution of the citation stock-patent stock ratio (lagged) for our sample:
Table 3: Citation Distribution
CITSTOCKt-1/PATSTOCKt-1

Number of observations

None
0-1

4148
75

1-2

47

2-5

48

5-10

35

More than 10

37

Given the skewness of the citation distribution, we therefore experimented with a number of
specifications of the citations variable: the lagged cite stock-patent stock ratio (in levels and
logs), the previous year’s citation/patent ratio (in levels and logs), and a simple dummy for the
242 observations with a nonzero citation stock. The citations stock (CITSTOCK) is calculated in
the same fashion as the patent stock. The results are presented in Table 4, for the whole sample
of firms. The coefficients of WCAP/K and the signs and significance levels of the control variables
are comparable to the previous specification. Neither the citations term nor its interaction with
working capital is ever significant, singly or jointly, supporting Hypothesis 4. 13
The irrelevance of the ex-post patent quality points to the conclusion that the signalling value of
a patent is irrespective of the actual value of the patented technology for small firms and
13

We also experimented with using a series of dummies for different levels of average cites per patent, as in Hall et
al. (2005), but without success.

26

controlling for patent quality does not compromise the result for larger firms.14 We caution that
this conclusion may be somewhat weaker than the conclusion that patents matter for financing,
for two reasons: 1) citations may be a relatively weak indicator of value, especially citations
based on EPO data, which are fewer in number; 2) these citations have been collected over a
relatively short horizon.

6

Conclusion

Previous literature has suggested that patents may a serve as a signal to lenders and investors
easing access to external financing in addition to their original function of protecting an
invention from imitation. The current study was motivated by a gap in the literature on the role
of patents as quality signals for established R&D-active firms. The role of patents as quality
signals for these firms, unlike for start-up firms and entrepreneurial ventures, has received little
systematic treatment so far. The focus on a European economy allowed a study of the
certification effects for bank loans, as they constitute the most important source of external
funding for most SMEs in Europe.
In line with previous research, the results showed that small firms are more likely to rely on
internal liquidity to fund their R&D activities as a result of limited access to external financing.
Moreover, the results showed that patenting activity may help small firms to attract external
financing more easily compared to non-patenting firms. Hence, their R&D spending relies to a
lesser extent on available internal funds. We also found that the mitigating effect of patent
applications is not due to the actual ex-post value of the patented technology, and we therefore
conclude that patents do have some signaling effect beyond the fact that they proxy for the
underlying technological and economic value of the patented invention. An alternative and
related interpretation of our findings is that the private value of the invention is so uncertain at
the time of application that capital markets and financial institutions are unable to distinguish

14

Note that the number of citations is always truncated. Moreover, in our case, observations in the years later than
2008 have a shorter citation window than five years. We tested the sensitivity of our results to dropping these
observations and found that the coefficients’ magnitude and significance is hardly affected.

27

among the various patents held by small firms, although they do evaluate the mere existence of a
patent application positively.
Our findings add to previous research that suggested that patents play a particularly valuable
signaling role in the start-up phase of a firm by finding patents to be important for small firms to
attract external financing even if they are already established. The results thus stress that firms
size may not only determine the likelihood that firms face financing constraints for R&D, but
also whether patent help firms to signal technology competencies. As about half of the firms in
our sample qualify as being small, the significance of the findings for technological advances at
the level of the Flemish economy is clear. If small firms slow down growth in order to adapt
their growth to the rates that can be maintained with its available financial means, as a
consequence, growth of such firms is constrained by internal finance postponing technological
advances and forgoing some technological opportunities. For many small technology firms, the
signaling value of patents may thus be valuable adding to the protection function of patents.
In light of the relatively high share of small and medium-sized firms in many European regions,
these insights are interesting beyond the region of Flanders. Testing the generalizability of the
results to other regions or countries, however, would require conducting a comparable study on
internationally harmonized data. Such an approach is feasible, but requires researchers who have
access to non-anonymized data on firm-level R&D and other firm characteristics, country by
country. We would certainly expect to find similar results on other European countries whose
economies and financial markets resemble Belgium’s.
Long (2002) argues that investors give high importance to patent counts when looking at
established firms. In contrast, when looking at less-established firms, investors investigate the
quality as well as the quantity of the patents. This may have affected our findings as the present
study explicitly studied established firms. So it might be, that if we had considered young firms
in our sample, patent quality would have mattered more. This distinction should be addressed in
more detail in future research. Moreover, as individual patents can convey information about an
particular invention, “patent portfolios may provide information about the lines of research a
firm is conducting and how quickly the research is proceeding” (Long 2001). Future research
may therefore benefit from a more detailed assessment of the firms’ patent portfolios in order to
disentangle the portfolio effect from the signal value of the individual patent.

28

Future research would also benefit from studying in much greater detail how the signal varies
between different external investors and also whether it matters for attracting public R&D
funding. Previous research suggested that public funding agencies may act like private investors
in the sense that they favor less uncertain projects that are more likely to result in marketable
products sooner.
Finally, we cannot rule out that our findings are subject to some degree of simultaneity bias.
Therefore it would be useful to find exogeneous shocks to financing in order to identify the
parameters of the R&D investment equation with fewer endogeneity concerns.
Despite these limitations, this study contributes to the literature on patent signals in several ways.
First, studying a sample of firms in Europe, this study is the first to investigate signalling value
of European patent application. Second, while previous evidence is mainly found for early stage
financing such as Venture Capital in selected industries, in this paper we explicitly focused on
more established firms for which the financing constraints argument cannot be explained by a
liability of newness. Third, we find that the patent signalling effect does not seem to arise in
larger firms and, fourth, that the effect on external financing tends to be driven by the mere
presence of patents rather than observable ex post indicators of the value of those inventions. It
would be highly desirable for future work to investigate the replicability of these results in other
economies.

29

Table 4: Estimation results from Tobit regressions with Wooldridge correction of R&D over tangible assets with citations
form of citation variable (CITATIONSt -1)
ln(CITSTOCK/PATSTOCK)
0.491 **
(0.209)
0.116 ***
WCAP t-1 / K t-1
(0.010)
(WCAP t-1 / K t-1)*PATSTOCKt -1
-0.032 *
(0.017)
-0.169
CITATIONSt -1
(0.125)
0.029
(WCAP t-1 / K t-1)*CITATIONSt t-1
(0.018)
DEBT t-2 / K t-1
0.044 *
(0.023)
-0.218 *
ln(Kt-1)
(0.125)
ln(AGE t-1)
-0.093
(0.182)
GROUP
0.319 *
(0.170)
3.1
Joint test for citation variables χ2(2)
Joint sign. of time dummies χ2(9)
24.1***
Joint sign. of ind. dummies χ2(15)
95.7***
Joint sign. of within means χ2(4)
5.9
Log-Likelihood
-10,114.2
0.632 (0.015)
 (s.e)
# observations
4,390
# censored observations
666
Variable
PATSTOCKt-1

CITSTOCK/PATSTOCK
0.780***
(0.156)
0.111***
(0.009)
-0.051***
(0.010)
0.000
(0.019)
0.002
(0.007)
0.042**
(0.021)
-0.368***
(0.062)
-0.118
(0.181)
0.296*
(0.168)
0.1
23.9***
96.2***
5.7
-10,115.8
0.633 (0.015)
4,390
666

ln(average citations per
patent)
0.598***
(0.199)
0.115***
(0.010)
-0.054***
(0.011)
-0.155
(0.192)
0.031
(0.037)
0.044*
(0.023)
-0.218*
(0.125)
-0.097
(0.183)
0.315*
(0.170)
0.9
24.0***
96.1***
6.0
-10,115.3
0.632 (0.015)
4,390
666

average citations per
patent
0.588***
(0.199)
0.115
(0.010)
-0.052***
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.021)
0.003
(0.010)
0.044*
(0.023)
-0.216*
(0.125)
-0.095
(0.183)
0.311*
(0.170)
0.1
23.9***
95.9***
5.8
-10,115.8
0.633 (0.015)
4,390
666

dummy (non-zero
CITSTOCK)
0.616***
(0.203)
0.115***
(0.010)
-0.055***
(0.011)
-0.398
(0.389)
0.063
(0.065)
0.044*
(0.023)
-0.224*
(0.125)
-0.092
(0.182)
0.319*
(0.169)
1.3
23.6***
96.4***
9.5*
-10,115.3
0.631 (0.015)
4,390
666

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. *** (**, *) indicate a significance level of 1% (5%, 10%). All models include an intercept (not shown). Coefficients of variables’ within means in
Wooldridge model are omitted from the table. The value of  indicates the share of the total variance which is due to the cross-sectional variation.

30

References
Anton, J. and Yao, D. (2002). The Sale of Ideas: Strategic Disclosure, Property Rights,
and Contracting, Review of Economic Studies, 69(3), 513-531.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A. and Gambardella, A. (2001). Markets for Technology: The
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Baum, J.A. and Silverman, B.S. (2004). Picking Winners or Building Them? Alliance,
Intellectual, and Human Capital as Selection Criteria in Venture Financing and
Performance of Biotechnology Startups, Journal of Business Venturing 19(3),
411-436.
Berger, A. and Udell, G. (1998). The Economies of Small Business Finance: The Roles
of Private Equity and Debt Markets in the Financial Growth Cycle, Journal of
Banking and Finance 22(6-8), 613-673.
Bessen, J. and Maskin, E. (2009). Sequential Innovation, Patents, and Imitation, RAND
Journal of Economics 40(4), 611-635.
Bhattacharya, S. and Ritter, J. (1983). Innovation and Communication: Signaling with
Partial Disclosure, Review of Economic Studies 50(2), 331-346.
Bond, S. and Van Reenen, J. (2007). Microeconometric Models of Investment and
Employment, in: J.J. Heckman and E.E. Leamer (eds.), Handbook of
Econometrics 6, London, North-Holland, 4417-4498.
Bougheas, S., Görg, H. and Strobl, E. (2003). Is R&D Financially Constrained? Theory
and Evidence from Irish Manufacturing, Review of Industrial Organization 22(2),
159-174.
Brown, J.R. and Petersen, B.C. (2011), Cash holdings and R&D smoothing, Journal of
Corporate Finance 17, 694–709.
Brown, J.R., Martinsson, G. and Petersen, B.C. (2012). Do financing constraints matter
for R&D?, European Economic Review 56, 1512–1529.
Cameron, A.C. and Trivedi, P.K. (2005). Microeconometrics: Methods and
Applications, New York, Cambridge University Press.
Carpenter, R. and Petersen, B.C. (2002). Capital Market Imperfections, High-Tech
Investment, and New Equity Financing, Economic Journal 112, 54-72.
Christie, A., C. Dent,J. Liddicoat, and A. Lim (2013). What Difference Does Patent
Examination Make?: An Analysis of the Effect of Examination in the USPTO, the
EPO and APO. Paper presented at the TILEC Workshop on Innovation and the
Patent System, June 20-21.
Cockburn, I. and Wagner, S. (2007). Patents and the Survival of Internet-Related IPOs,
NBER Working Paper No. 13146.
Conti, A., Thursby, M.C., and Rothaermel, F.T. (2013). Show Me the Right Stuff:
Signals for High Tech Startups, Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,
20(2), 341–364.
Conti, A., Thursby, M.C., and Thursby, J. (2013). Patents as Signals for Startup
Financing, The Journal of Industrial Economics, 61(3), 592–622.
31

Czarnitzki, D., Hall, B.H. and Oriani, R. (2006). The Market Valuation of Knowledge
Assets in US and European Firms, in: D. Bosworth and E. Webster (eds.): The
Management of Intellectual Property, Cheltenham, Edward Elgar: 111-131.
Czarnitzki, D. and Hottenrott, H. (2010). Financing Constraints for Industrial
Innovation: What do we know?, Review of Business and Economics 55(3), 346362.
Czarnitzki, D. and Hottenrott, H. (2011a). R&D Investment and Financing Constraints
of Small and Medium-Sized Firms, Small Business Economics 36(1), 65-83.
Czarnitzki, D. and Hottenrott, H. (2011b). Financial Constraints: Routine versus Cutting
Edge R&D Investment, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 20(1),
121-157.
Deeds, D., DeCarolis, D. and Coombs, J. (1997). The Impact of Firm Specific
Capabilities on the Amount of Capital Raise in an Initial Public Offering:
Evidence From the Biotechnology Industry, Journal of Business Venturing 12,
165–187.
Deloof, M. (1998). Internal Capital Markets, Bank Borrowing, and Financing
Constraints: Evidence From Belgian Firms, Journal of Business Finance and
Accounting, 25(7&8), 945-968.
Deloof, M. and Jegers, M. (1999). Trade Credit, Corporate Groups, and the Financing
of Belgian Firms, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 26(7&8), 945-966.
Deng, Y. (2007). Private Value of European Patents, European Economic Review 51,
1785-1812.
European Communities / Eurostat (2004), Innovation in Europe Results for the EU,
Iceland and Norway, in: Panorama of the European Union, European
Commission, Theme 9 Science and Technology, Brussels.
Fazzari, S., Hubbard, R. and Petersen, B.C. (1988). Financing Constraints and
Corporate Investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141-206.
Fazzari, S.M. and Petersen, B.C. (1993). Working Capital and Fixed Investments: New
Evidence on Financing Constraints, RAND Journal of Economics, 24(3), 328-342.
Fisher, F.M. and P. Temin (1973). Returns to Scale in Research and Development:
What Does the Schumpeterian Hypothesis Imply? Journal of Political Economy
81(1), 56-70.
Fort, T. C., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., and Miranda, J. (2013). How Firms Respond
to Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size, IMF Economic Review
61(3), 520-559.
Gambardella, A., Harhoff, D. and Verspagen, B. (2008). The Value of European
Patents, European Management Review 5, 69-84.
Griliches, Z. and Mairesse, J. (1984). Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level, in: Z.
Griliches (ed.), R&D, Patents, and Productivity. Chicago, University of Chicago
Press.
Griliches, Z. (1986). Productivity, R and D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the
1970’s, American Economic Review, 76(1), 141-154.

32

Griliches, Z., Pakes, A. and Hall, B.H. (1987). The Value of Patents as Indicators of
Inventive Activity, in: Economic Policy and Technological Performance, P.
Dasgupta and P. Stoneman (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 97-124.
Haeussler, C., Harhoff, D. and Mueller, E. (2009). To Be Financed or Not – The Role of
Patents for Venture Capital Financing, ZEW Discussion Paper No. 09-003.
Hall, B.H. (1992). Research and Development at the Firm Level: Does the Source of
Financing Matter? Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper No. 4096.
Hall, B.H. (2000). Innovation and Market Value, in: R. Barrell, G. Mason and M.
O’Mahoney (eds.), Productivity, Innovation and Economic Performance,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, B.H., C. Helmers, M. Rogers and V. Sena (2013). The importance (or not) of
patents to UK firms. Oxford Economic Papers 65(3), 603-629.
Hall, B.H., A.B. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg (2005). Market Value and Patent Citations.
RAND Journal of Economics 36, 16-38.
Hall, B.H. and Kruiniker, H. (1995). The Role of Working Capital in the Investment
Process, unpublished manuscript, Berkeley.
Hall, B. H. and Lerner, J. (2010), The Financing of R&D and Innovation, in: Hall, B.
and N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, ElsevierNorth Holland, Version August 2009.
Hall, B. H. and Ziedonis, R. H. (2001), The Patent Paradox Revisited: an Empirical
Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979-1995, RAND
Journal of Economics, 32(1), 101-128.
Hall, B. H., G. Thoma and S. Torrisi (2007). The Market Value of Patents and R&D:
Evidence from European Firms. Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No.
13428.
Hao, K.Y. and Jaffe, A.B. (1993). Effect Of Liquidity On Firms' R&D Spending,
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 2(4), 275 – 282.
Harhoff, D. (1998). Are There Financing Constraints for R&D and Investment in
German Manufacturing Firms? Annales d' Economie et de Statistique 49/50, 421456.
Harhoff, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F.M. and Vopel, K. (1999). Citation Frequency and the
Value of Patented Innovation, Review of Economics and Statistics 81(3), 511-515.
Harhoff, D. (2009). The Role of Patents and Licenses in Securing External Finance for
Innovation, European Investment Bank (EIB) Papers 14(2), 75-97.
Heeley, M.B., Matusik, S.F., Jain, N. (2007). Innovation, Appropriability, and the
Underpricing of Initial Public Offerings, Academy of Management Journal 50(1),
209-225.
Helmers, C. and Rogers, M. (2011). Does Patenting Help High-Tech Start-ups?,
Research Policy, 40(7), 1016-1027.
Henderson, R. and Cockburn, I. (1994). Measuring Competence? Exploring Firm
Effects in Pharmaceutical Research, Strategic Management Journal 15(S1), 6384.

33

Himmelberg, C. and Peterson, B. (1994). R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel Study of
Small Firms in High-Tech Industries, Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 3851.
Hoenen, S., Kolympiris, C., Schoenmakers, W. and Kalaitzandonakes, N. (2014), The
diminishing signaling value of patents between early rounds of venture capital
financing,
Research
Policy,
forthcoming.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.respol.2014.01.006.
Hottenrott, H. and Peters, B. (2012). Innovative Capability and Financing Constraints
for Innovation: More Money, More Innovation?, Review of Economics and
Statistics 94(4), 1126-1142.
Hsu, D. and Ziedonis, R. (2013). Resources as Dual Sources of Advantage: Implications
for Valuing Entrepreneurial-Firm Patents, Strategic Management Journal 34,
761–781.
Hubbard, R. (1998). Capital-Market Imperfections and Investment, Journal of
Economic Literature 36, 193-225.
Jaffe, A. and Lerner, J. (2004). Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent
System is Endangering Innovation and Progress and What to Do About it,
Princeton, N.J. Princeton University Press.
Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg M. and Fogarty, M. (2000). Knowledge Spillovers and Patent
Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors, American Economic Review
90(2), 215-218.
Jensen, M. (1986). Agency Cost of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,
American Economic Review 76, 323-339.
Jensen, M. and Meckling, W. (1976). The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Cost, and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305360.
Kaplan, S. and Zingales, L. (1997). Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide
Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?, Quarterly Journal of Economics
112(1), 169-215.
Kaplan, S. and Zingales, L. (2000). Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities are not Valid
Measures of Financing Constraints, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2), 707712.
Kulatilaka, N. and Lihui, L. (2006), Impact of Licensing on Investment and Financing
of Technology Development, Management Science 52(12), 1824-1837.
Lahr, H. and Mina, A. (2013), Dynamic financial constraints and innovation: Evidence
from the UK Innovation Surveys, European Conference on Corporate R&D and
Innovation CONCORDi-2013 conference paper, Seville (Spain).
Lanjouw, J.O. and M. Schankerman (2004). Protecting Intellectual Property Rights: Are
Small Firms Handicapped? Journal of Law and Economics 47, 45–74.
Leland, H. and Pyle, D. (1977). Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and
Financial Intermediation, Journal of Finance 32, 371-387
Lemley, M.A. (2000). Reconceiving Patents in the Age of Venture Capital, Journal of
Small and Emerging Business Law 4, 137-148.

34

Levitas, E. and McFadyen, M.A. (2009), Managing Liquidity in Research-Intensive
Firms: Signaling and Cash Flow Effects of Patents and Alliance Activities,
Strategic Management Journal 30(6), 659–678.
Long, C. (2002). Patent Signals, University of Chicago Law Review 69(2), 625-679.
MacMillan, I.C., Siegel, R. and Subbanarasimha, P.N. (1985). Criteria Used by Venture
Capitalists to Evaluate New Venture Proposals, Journal of Business Venturing
1(1), 119-128.
Mann, R.J. and Sager, T.W. (2007), Patents, Venture Capital, and Software Start-ups,
Research Policy 36(2), 193-208.
Mansfield, E. (1986). Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study, Management
Science, 32(2), 173-181.
Mina, A., Lahr, H. and Hughes, A. (2013), The Demand and Supply of External
Finance for Innovative Firms, Industrial and Corporate Change 22(4), 869–901.
Mulkay, B., B.H. Hall and J. Mairesse (2001). Investment and R&D in France and in
the United States. In Herrman, Heinz, and Rolf Strauch (eds.), Investing Today for
the World of Tomorrow, Springer Verlag. Also available as a National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper w8038. Cambridge, MA.
Myers, S. and Majluf, N. (1984). Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When
Firms Have Information That Investors do Not, Journal of Financial Economics
13, 187-221.
OECD (1993, 2002). Frascati Manual: Proposed Standard Practice for Surveys on
Research and Experimental Development, Luxembourg.
Pakes, A. (1985). On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return, Journal of
Political Economy 93(21), 390-408.
Rubini, L., Desmet, K., Piguillem, F. and Crespo, A. (2012), Breaking Down the
Barriers to Firm Growth in Europe: the Fourth EFIGE Policy Report, Bruegel
Blueprint Series, Volume XVIII, Brussels.
Schankerman, M. and Pakes, A. (1996). Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in
European Countries during the Post-1950 Period, The Economic Journal 96,
1052-1076.
Schneider C. and Veugelers R. (2010). On Young Innovative Companies: Why They
Matter and How (not) to Policy Support Them, Industrial and Corporate Change
19(4), 969 - 1007.
Spence, M. (1973). Job Market Signaling, Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3), 355374.
Stuart, T.E., Hoang, H. and Hybels, R. (1999), Interorganizational Endorsements and
the Performance of Entrepreneurial Ventures, Administrative Science Quarterly
44(2), 315-349.
Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2011). The Quality Factor in Patent Systems,
Industrial and Corporate Change, 20(6), 1755-1793.
Webb C., Dernis, H., Harhoff D. and Hoisl, K. (2005). Analyzing European and
International Patent Citations: A Set of EPO Database Building Blocks. STI
Working Paper 2005/9, OECD.
35

Wooldridge, J.M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

36

Appendix
Table A1: Industry classifications
Industry
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

NACE rev. 2
10, 11, 12
13, 14, 15
16, 31
17, 18
19, 20
21
22
24, 25, 33
27, 28
26
29, 30
41

Description
Food and Tobacco
Textiles, Clothing and Leather
Wood and Furniture
Paper
Chemicals
Pharmaceuticals
Rubber and Plastic
Metal
Machines and Equipment
ICT
Transport
Building and Construction

Firms
107
79
42
19
85
19
60
94
148
58
30
33

Observations
394
302
137
99
357
81
225
389
606
245
123
110

%
8.97
6.88
3.12
2.26
8.13
1.85
5.13
8.86
13.80
5.58
2.80
2.51

13

1, 5, 23, 37, 35, 32

Miscellaneous Manufacturing

76

340

7.74

14
15

45, 46, 47, 49, 55, 58
59, 64, 68, 69, 71 - 79

94
124

335
374

7.63
8.52

16

61, 62

Commerce and Transport
Other Services
Software Development and
Communication

79

273

6.22

1,147

4,390

100.00

Table A2: Variable description
Label

Unit

Description

Source

R&D

million €

annual R&D expenditure

PATSTOCK

count

PATAPPS

count

CITSTOCK

count

CITATIONS

count

WCAP

million €

DEBT
K
EMP

million €
million €
headcount

AGE

years

discounted sum of patent
application since first observed
patent
sum of patent applications in a
given year
discounted sum of patent citations
since first observed patent
sum of citations to patents in first
observed patent
book value cash + inventories +
accounts receivable – accounts
payable
book value of liabilities
book value of tangible assets
number of dependent employees
in a given year
survey year minus founding year

OECD R&D survey Flanders
provided by ECOOM
(K.U.Leuven)
European Patent Office

GROUP

[0,1]

Survey question on group
structure

European Patent Office
European Patent Office
European Patent Office
Bureau van Dijk BEL-FIRST
database
Bureau van Dijk BEL-FIRST
Bureau van Dijk BEL-FIRST
Bureau van Dijk BEL-FIRST and
OECD R&D survey
Bureau van Dijk BEL-FIRST
and OECD R&D survey
OECD R&D survey Flanders

Note: year and industry dummies not presented. Year refers to the reference year of the corresponding survey and the
industry definition stems from the survey and has been crosschecked with the BEL-FIRST Database. It refers to the
company’s main activity.

37

