NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE ON HOSPITALIZATION AND MORTALITY:
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE PART D
Robert Kaestner
Cuiping Long
G. Caleb Alexander
Working Paper 19948
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19948

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014

Funding for this research was provided by the National Institute of Aging, National Institutes of Health
(1R01AG042396). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19948.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Robert Kaestner, Cuiping Long, and G. Caleb Alexander. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effects of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospitalization and Mortality: Evidence from Medicare
Part D
Robert Kaestner, Cuiping Long, and G. Caleb Alexander
NBER Working Paper No. 19948
February 2014
JEL No. I12,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
We examine whether obtaining prescription drug insurance through the Medicare Part D program
affected hospital admissions, expenditures associated with those admissions, and mortality. We use
a large, geographically diverse sample of Medicare beneficiaries and exploit the natural experiment
of Medicare Part D to obtain estimates of the effect of prescription drug insurance on hospitalizations
and mortality. Results indicate that obtaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D
was associated with an 8% decrease in the number of hospital admissions, a 7% decrease in Medicare
expenditures, and a 12% decrease in total resource use. Gaining prescription drug insurance through
Medicare Part D was not significantly associated with mortality.

Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner.robert@gmail.com
Cuiping Long
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Economics
clong22@uic.edu

G. Caleb Alexander
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Epidemiology
galexand@jhsph.edu

1. Introduction
Congress created the Medicare Part D program to provide subsidized prescription drug insurance
for Medicare recipients. The creation of Part D was motivated, in part, by the growing importance of
prescription drugs in preventing and treating diseases, and the growing costs of buying prescription
drugs.1 As a result of Part D, the proportion of elderly with prescription drug insurance increased from
approximately 66% to 90% (Zimmer 2012; Kaestner and Khan 2012; Levy and Weir 2010; Engelhardt
and Gruber 2011; Kaiser Family Foundation 2010).
The cost of Medicare Part D is substantial. Federal and State expenditures on Part D were $67.7
billion in 2011.2 Moreover, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) forecasted that expenditures on Part
D will increase by $51 billion from 2013 to 2022 because of the expansion of the generosity of Medicare
Part D contained in the Affordable Care Act that will gradually eliminate the gap in coverage popularly
referred to as the doughnut hole (Congressional Budget Office 2012). Notably, the CBO forecast was net
of $35 billion in savings (“offsets”) from Part D due to reductions in the use of other medical services
because of greater use of prescription drugs. Indeed, during the debate over Part D, many legislators made
statements reflecting the notion that obtaining prescription drug insurance will reduce other types of
health care spending. Typical of such statements are the following taken from the Congressional Record
June 17, 2003, (http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-in/query/D?r108:12:./temp/~r108FHAhy2::)
“Now we find through research funded by Government, through research funded by the drug
companies, and products that have emerged from that research, that many of the sicknesses you
used to go to the hospital for and stayed for 3 or 4 days can be taken care of by taking a pill. Yet
Medicare says if you go to the hospital and run up a bill of however many tens of thousands of

1

For the 20 years prior to passage of Medicare Part D, prescription drug use was growing faster than the population
and prescription drug spending was growing faster than overall spending on health care. See Prescription Drug
Trends, Kaiser Family Foundation 2010, http://www.kff.org/rxdrugs/upload/3057-08.pdf, website accessed April 2,
2013.
2
2012 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees, Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical
Insurance Trust Funds, http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-andReports/ReportsTrustFunds/downloads/tr2012.pdf, website accessed April 2, 2013.

1

dollars to stay that many days, we will pay for it. But if you take the pill that makes the hospital
visit unnecessary, we will not. That clearly doesn't make sense. There is the need for the benefit
of prescription drugs, and the Medicare system needs to catch up to circumstance.” (Senator
Robert Bennett, Republican Utah)
“There is a dramatic change in the pattern and practice of medicine. Perhaps no better example is
what happens with stomach illness. Twenty years ago, there was not much one could do for
somebody who suffered from ulcers other than to have surgery. But now with prescription drugs
that address the underlying causes, stomach surgery has been reduced by two-thirds. Yet, in
Medicare there is no coverage for those prescription drugs. You can't have a modern Medicare
without a prescription drug component.” (Senator Kent Conrad, Democrat North Dakota)

While Senators Bennett and Conrad, among others, believed that a prescription drug benefit
would reduce spending on non-pharmacy services and improve health, the evidence at the time to support
their statements was, at best, sparse. Moreover, there are plausible reasons to expect that prescription drug
coverage would have little effect on non-pharmacy spending, for example, because of the possibility that
much of the additional prescription drug use that comes with insurance may be marginal in terms of
health benefits. The relative dearth of evidence on whether prescription drugs are substitutes for other
medical spending persists today and is reflected in the recent CBO (2012) report, which relied on a
limited number of studies to draw its conclusions about offsetting effects of Part D on spending on other
medical services.3
In this paper, we examine whether obtaining prescription drug coverage through the Medicare
Part D program affected hospital admissions and inpatient expenditures associated with those admissions
for a variety of illnesses such as congestive heart failure (CHF), stroke, dehydration and chronic
3

The applicability of some of the studies reviewed in the CBO report to Medicare Part D is questionable. For
example, Gaynor et al. (2007) examined non-elderly, and Stuart et al. (2009) treated prescription drug coverage as
exogenous. We review most of the other studies contained in CBO report below.

2

obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We also assess whether gaining Medicare Part D coverage was
associated with mortality. Data for the analysis is primarily from Medicare claims for inpatient services
(Medicare Provider Analysis and Review, MEDPAR) from 2002 to 2009, thus spanning the
implementation of Medicare Part D in 2006. We also use data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary
Survey (MCBS) over the same period to obtain information about prescription drug insurance of
Medicare beneficiaries because such information is not available in the data on inpatient claims. With
these data, we compare hospital admissions, inpatient spending and mortality before and after
implementation of Medicare Part D for elderly who were more or less likely to gain prescription drug
insurance through Medicare Part D.
We find that obtaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D significantly reduced
hospital admissions and Medicare expenditures for those admissions. Overall, gaining prescription drug
insurance through Medicare Part D was associated with an 8% decrease in the number of hospital
admissions, a 7%, or $138, decrease in annual Medicare expenditures for hospitalization, and a 12%, or
$728, annual decrease in total resource use (i.e., charges) associated with hospital admissions. Among
specific types of admissions, prescription drug insurance was associated with significant decreases in
admissions for CHF (18%), coronary atherosclerosis (13%), and COPD (32%). Associations between
prescription drug insurance and resource use were larger than associations between prescription drug
coverage and the number of admissions, which implies that gaining prescription drug insurance affected
resource-intensive admissions more than low-cost admissions. Gaining prescription drug coverage
through Medicare Part D was not associated with mortality. Given that approximately 11 million persons
gained prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D, mostly through stand-alone Part D plans, we
estimate that reduced hospital expenditures associated with increased prescription drug coverage
produced aggregate savings of approximately $1.5 billion per year, or approximately 2.2% of the total
cost of Medicare Part D in 2011.

3

2. Prescription Drug Insurance and Hospitalization: Previous Literature4
Relatively few studies have examined the association between prescription drug insurance and the
use of non-pharmacy services, including hospitalization, among the elderly. No study that we are aware of
examined whether prescription drug insurance affected mortality. The lack of research on these important
questions stands in contrast to the large literature that has examined the effect of prescription drug
insurance (or changes in cost sharing) on prescription drug use. In a systematic review of the literature,
Goldman et al. (2007) concluded that there are a relatively small number of studies of the association
between prescription drug insurance (or cost sharing), and health and use of other (e.g., inpatient)
services. Moreover, these authors noted that studies in this area usually focused on small samples of
chronically ill patients. For the chronically ill, Goldman et al. (2007) reported that most studies found
consistent evidence that prescription drug insurance was associated with improved health. However,
results from studies of broader populations are inconsistent. A similar conclusion was reached by Gibson
et al. (2005) in their review.
There are several studies closely related to the current research, but instead of reviewing them
individually, we summarize the gaps in knowledge that remain so as to highlight the contribution of our
research. First, few studies used nationally representative samples of elderly persons. Soumerai et al.
(1991), Johnson et al. (1997), Hsu et al. (2006), and Zhang et al. (2009) all used samples from one
specific insurance plan to study how changes in prescription drug benefit design (Soumerai et al. 1991;
Johnson et al. 1997; Hsu et al. 2006), or prescription drug insurance (Zhang et al. 2009), affected nonpharmacy medical spending. While these samples and settings provided natural experiments that were an
advantage from a research design perspective, the narrowness of the samples and contexts limit the
applicability (i.e., external validity) of the findings. For example, estimates of the effect of a change in
prescription plan benefit generosity on hospitalizations of Medicare managed care enrollees in Northern
4

We limit the review to studies of elderly, so we exclude studies such as Gaynor et al (2007), and we include studies
that used methods that accounted in some way for the non-random choice of prescription drug insurance. We do not
review studies of the effect of prescription drug insurance on elderly persons with specific illnesses (e.g., Soumerai
et al. 1994; Pilote et al. 2002; Stuart et al. 2004; Hsu et al. 2006; and Tjia and Briesacher 2008). We also do not
include studies of the effect of entering the coverage gap in Part D (see Stubbings and Lau 2013 for a review).

4

California (Hsu et al. 2006), or managed care enrollees in Pennsylvania (Zhang et al. 2009) may not
generalize to broader population and the effect of gaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare
Part D.
Second, a considerable amount of previous research has focused on the effects of changes in
benefit generosity rather than gaining prescription drug insurance (Soumerai et al. 1991; Johnson et al.,
1997; Hsu et al., 2006; Chandra et al., 2010; McWilliams et al. 2011). It is unclear whether these studies
can inform the debate over the possible offsetting effects of gaining prescription drug coverage through
Medicare Part D because gaining coverage represents a larger treatment, and extrapolating from these
studies to infer the effect of Part D may be misleading.
Third, because of the non-experimental nature of previous studies, there are standard concerns
with respect to internal validity. For example, Chandra et al. (2010) used a difference-in-differences
approach to examine the effect of prescription drug benefit design changes in two insurance plans for
retired California public employees on the use of other medical services. The authors report large and
often significant differences in pre-policy trends in prescription drug use and hospitalizations between the
treatment and comparison groups, which suggest that the research design may not be completely valid.5
Afendulis et al. (2011) and Liu et al. (2011) also used a difference-in-differences approach to study
whether Medicare Part D was associated with changes in hospitalization and non-pharmacy spending. In
both cases, the authors compared the non-elderly to the elderly. One concern with these studies is whether
the non-elderly are indeed comparable to the elderly. As Afendulis et al. (2011) reported, there were
differences in rates of hospitalization in the pre-period between the elderly and non-elderly and
differences in the trend in rates of hospitalization between the elderly and non-elderly. These differences
suggest that the near-elderly may not be an appropriate comparison group for the elderly.
5

Chandra et al. (2010) also reported that the decreases in prescription drug use associated with the policy changes
were associated with immediate and relatively large increases in hospitalization (e.g., first quarter after the
copayment change). While some pharmaceutical treatments may result in immediate improvement in health,
Chandra et al. (2010) examined all inpatient services rather than a subset tightly linked to pharmaceutical therapy.
McWilliams et al. (2011) also reported an immediate (relative) decrease of 10 percent in inpatient spending in the
first quarter of 2006 when Medicare Part D was only partly implemented and only a portion of the no/limited
coverage group was affected.

5

Finally, there are no studies that we are aware of that have examined whether prescription drug
insurance is associated with mortality. It is plausible that gaining prescription drug insurance would
decrease mortality among the elderly given the demonstrated clinical effectiveness of some drugs such as
statins, anti-hypertensive drugs and blood thinners.
To summarize, there are relatively few studies of the effect of prescription drug insurance on the
use of non-pharmacy medical services such as hospitalization among the elderly, and the evidence from
these studies is mixed—some studies find offsets (e.g., Chandra et al. 2010 and McWilliams et al. 2011)
and some do not (e.g., Soumerai et al. 1991; Breischer et al. 2005; Khan et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2011;
Kaestner and Khan 2012). Indeed, there are only two studies of the effect of gaining prescription drug
insurance through Medicare Part D on the use of inpatient services for a representative sample of the
Medicare population and these studies report mixed evidence (Kaestner and Khan 2012; Afendulis et al.
2011). There are no studies of the effect of prescription drug use on mortality. Moreover, most studies in
the literature examine changes in co-payments and plan design features and not whether a person did or
did not gain prescription drug insurance (e.g., Soumerai et al. 1991; Hsu et al. 2006; Chandra et al. 2010;
McWilliams et al. 2011). Many studies use narrow samples from one insurance plan (e.g., Zhang et al.
2009) that lack external validity in terms of producing knowledge of the effects of prescription drug
insurance on the broad population of elderly in the United States. Finally, as is often the case with nonexperimental studies, there are standard concerns about the internal validity of the research designs.
Our paper fills some of the gaps in the previous literature and provides evidence relevant to
theory—whether prescription drugs are substitutes with other medical services for a large, national
sample of Medicare beneficiaries—and policy—whether the costs of Medicare Part D are likely to be
reduced by offsets in the use of inpatient services. We also provide the first analysis of the effect of
prescription drug coverage on mortality.

3. Empirical Approach
3.a. Conceptual Model
6

The empirical analysis is motivated by basic, economic theory and substantial empirical evidence
that obtaining insurance for prescription drugs, for example through Medicare Part D, increases use of
prescription drugs because insurance lowers the price of prescription drugs (moral hazard effect) and
increases the ability to pay for prescription drugs (income effect).6 Because virtually all elderly in the
United States have medical insurance through Medicare prior to Part D, elderly without prescription drug
insurance may have underutilized drug therapy vis-à-vis non-drug treatments because medical treatments
were heavily subsidized. However, after gaining prescription coverage through Part D, which substantial
evidence has showed increased prescription drug use, the use of non-pharmacy services such as inpatient
care may have decreased because of substitution of now cheaper drug therapy for medical treatment.
Whether substituting drug therapy for medical treatment will improve or worsen health depends
on whether drug therapy is more or less efficacious than the medical treatments it replaced. It may be
rational to replace medical care (e.g., inpatient) with prescription drugs even if doing so adversely affects
health because there may be costs savings (i.e., reduced copayments associated with medical care), or
other benefits (e.g., less invasive treatment) associated with using prescription drugs. Health, and
therefore hospitalization, may also be unaffected by prescription drug insurance because of moral hazard
effects of insurance (health benefits of prescription use that are below the marginal cost of use). Consider
that prior to Medicare Part D, data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) indicate that
elderly without prescription drug insurance filled nearly as many prescriptions per year as elderly with
prescription drug insurance (Kaestner and Khan 2012). Thus, many seniors without prescription drug
insurance use at least some of the drugs that may have been essential to maintain health. The additional
drug use associated with prescription drug insurance may have modest health benefits and little effect on
hospitalizations. In fact, greater use of prescription drugs and use of a greater number of therapeutic
classes of drugs may increase adverse drug events, worsen health and increase hospitalizations (Laazrou
et al. 1998; Tamblyn et al. 2001; Gurwitz et al. 2003; Fu et al. 2010).

6

See for example: Lichtenberg and Sun (2007), Ketcham and Simon (2008), Yin et al. (2008), Schneeweiss et al.
(2009), Zhang et al. (2009) and Kaestner and Khan (2012).

7

In sum, while it is possible that prescription drug insurance may lead to more prescription drug
use, improvements in health, and reductions in downstream medical costs such as hospitalizations, it is
also possible that the primary effect of prescription drug insurance is to increase the use of drugs with
marginal health benefits and little change in hospitalizations or mortality. Indeed, prescription drug
insurance may even lead to worse health outcomes and increased hospital and other health care utilization
due to adverse drug reactions.
3.b. Estimation: Difference-in-differences Approach
Our empirical objective is to estimate the association between gaining prescription drug insurance
through Medicare Part D, and hospitalization and mortality. The main obstacle to obtain estimates that
can be plausibly interpreted as causal is that elderly with and without prescription drug insurance are
likely to differ in ways that affect health and use of services. For example, elderly with prescription drug
insurance may be sicker and/or more risk averse than elderly without insurance, and both of these factors
would likely affect health and use of other healthcare services. To address this selection problem, we
exploit the natural experiment afforded by Medicare Part D, which significantly increased prescription
drug insurance coverage.
The first approach we use in conjunction with the implementation of Medicare Part D is a
difference-in-differences (DID) approach. The DID approach compares changes in the use of, and
spending on, inpatient services (mortality) pre- to post-Medicare Part D for those who were more likely to
gain prescription insurance as a result of Medicare Part D to changes in the use of, and spending on,
inpatient services (mortality) pre- to post-Medicare Part D for those who were less likely to gain
prescription drug insurance from Part D. Note that we refer to elderly more or less likely to gain
prescription drug coverage as a result of Medicare Part D because, as we explain in more detail later, we
do not know whether a person was or was not covered by prescription drug insurance before or after
Medicare Part D. We can only measure the proportion of people with or without prescription drug
insurance for groups defined by demographic characteristics.

8

We implement the DID approach using Medicare claims for inpatient services (MEDPAR) and
enrollment (Medicare Denominator file) data aggregated by year (2002 to 2009), age (66-68, 69-70,7172, 73-74, 75-77, 78-79, 80-81, 82-84), gender and region (nine Census regions). We aggregated the data
by these three attributes because information about these characteristics are available in the MCBS, which
we use to derive prescription drug coverage before and after Medicare part D.7 Aggregation yields 672
cells: 96 age-gender-region cells for each of eight years.8 For each aggregated cell, we construct rates of
mortality (from Denominator file), and rates of hospitalization (from MEDPAR) for several types of
illnesses (e.g., congestive heart failure) and for all hospitalizations combined. We also construct measures
of expenditures per person for each type of hospitalization. We describe the data more completely below.
To classify persons into treatment and comparison groups, we use information from the MCBS
on prescription drug insurance during the 2002 to 2005 period, which is prior to implementation of
Medicare Part D, to calculate the proportion of persons in each of the 96 demographic cells that lacked
prescription drug insurance prior to Part D. We drop cells with less than 75 observations from the
combined 2002 to 2005 MCBS to ensure that the estimate of the proportion without prescription
insurance is reasonable. The proportion of each cell that is uninsured prior to Medicare Part D measures
the extent of treatment because after Medicare Part D, the variation in the proportion of each cell without
prescription drug insurance was greatly reduced and cells with a high proportion uninsured in 2002 to
2005 period experienced the largest decrease in uninsured pre- to post Medicare Part D. Note that we do
not calculate the proportion uninsured for each cell in each year, but for groups of years. The MCBS,
while relatively large, is not large enough to calculate reliable year-specific estimates of the proportion
without prescription drug insurance in each cell (i.e., age, gender and region group). The constructed

7

Ideally, we would like to use more characteristics than these three, but, as we describe below, the sample size of
the MCBS limits the amount of characteristics we can use. For example, the MCBS is too small to use state instead
of region, and too small to use race. However, the variables we have used are effective, as we demonstrate below.
8
There are 768 possible combinations of year (8), age (8), gender (2) and region (9). Of these, we used 672 because
we selected only cells that 75 or more observations in the MCBS, which was used to construct information about
prescription drug insurance. For example, no cells of sufficient size were available in New England region, so there
were only eight regions. Using a different threshold for the minimum number of observations in a cell in the MCBS
made little difference to results reported below.

9

measure of the proportion without prescription insurance in each cell is constant in all years between 2002
and 2005. We constructed a similar variable for the period between 2006 and 2009. Finally, we
constructed the proportion of each cell that had prescription drug insurance (i.e., one minus the proportion
uninsured) in each of these two periods.
Figure 1 shows the relationship between the change in the proportion without prescription
insurance between 2006-09 and 2002-05 (i.e., 2006-09 minus 2002-05), and the proportion without
prescription insurance in 2002-2005 for the 96 age-gender-region cells. As the figure indicates, the
change in the proportion uninsured is negatively related to the proportion uninsured in 2002 to 2005—the
groups more likely to be without prescription insurance in 2002 to 2005 experienced the greatest gains in
prescription drug insurance pre- to post-Part D. A linear regression line (shown in Figure 1) has a slope of
–0.92 indicating that for each percentage point increase in the proportion without prescription drug
insurance in 2002 to 2005, the change in the proportion uninsured pre- to post-Part D decreased by nearly
one (0.92) percentage point. The figure reveals clearly that the proportion of a cell that is uninsured in
2002 to 2005 accurately measures the extent of treatment—the increase in prescription drug coverage
associated with Medicare Part D.
The regression model to implement the DID approach is:

HOSP   i 
it

2009
2009
  t YEARt 
  t (YEARt * UNINSUREDi )  vit
t  2002
t  2002

(1) i  1,...,96

t  2002,...,2009
In equation (1), the hospitalization rate (HOSP) of cell “i” in year “t” depends on a cell-specific fixedeffect (αi) and year fixed effects ( YEAR t ), which are allowed to differ by the proportion of the cell that is
without prescription insurance in 2002 to 2005 ( YEAR * UNINSURED i ).9 Also included in the regression
t
model, but not shown in equation (1), are age-by-gender-by-year fixed effects, region-by-year fixed

9

We also used a quadratic specification for the proportion uninsured and results (not reported) are very similar to
those obtained using the linear specification shown in equation (1).

10

effects, and the proportion of each cell that is enrolled in Medicare Advantage (HMO). An analogous
model is used for mortality.
The key coefficients in equation (1) are for the interactions between year and the proportion of a
cell that is uninsured in 2002 to 2005. Prior to 2006, the coefficients on the interaction terms should
ideally be zero because the time trend in hospitalization (mortality) should, by assumption of the research
design, be equal for cells more or less likely to be uninsured prior to Medicare Part D. Subsequent to
2006, the majority who were uninsured gained prescription drug coverage. Therefore, if there is an effect
of prescription drug coverage on hospitalizations (mortality), it would appear in the coefficients on the
post-2005 interaction terms.
3.c. Evidence of the Validity of the DID Approach
The validity of the DID approach depends on whether in the absence of Medicare Part D, trends
in hospitalizations and mortality were the same for demographic groups (cells) more or less likely to be
without prescription drug insurance prior to Medicare Part D. The specification of equation (1), which
includes interactions between the demographic components (i.e., age, region and gender) that define the
cells and year, bolsters the likely validity of the key assumption, as the specification controls for
differential trends by age-by-gender and by region.
While the identifying assumption of common trends cannot be tested in a definitive manner, it is
possible to observe whether the coefficients on the pre-2006 interaction terms ( YEAR * UNINSURED i )
t
are significant, which tests whether prior to Medicare Part D the trends in hospitalizations and mortality
are the same for demographic groups (cells) more or less likely to be without prescription drug insurance
prior to Medicare Part D. Finding that the coefficients on the pre-2006 interaction terms are insignificant
supports the validity of the DID approach. We discuss results of the specification tests in more detail
below, but we note here that in all but one (out of 26) cases, we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of
common trends prior to 2006, which is evidence that supports the DID research design.

11

Evidence from a previous study also suggests that the DID approach used here is valid. Khan et
al. (2008) also use a DID research design that compares changes in the use of inpatient services of people
who gained (or lost, but most gained) prescription drug insurance status to changes in inpatient use of
people who experienced no change in prescription drug insurance. To test the validity of their approach,
Khan et al. (2008) estimate DID models using all observations for people who never switched insurance
status and observations on those that switched, but only in years prior to the time they switched
prescription drug insurance status. The authors randomly assigned true, future switchers a pseudo-switch
year—a year in which they supposedly gained prescription drug coverage. If those who switched
prescription drug insurance and those who did not switch insurance status have common trends in
outcomes, which is the underlying assumption of the DID approach, then the coefficient on the pseudo
insurance coverage variable is expected to be zero. Khan et al. (2008) find exactly this for all outcomes in
their study (self-reported poor health status, functional disability, and hospitalization). Results from Khan
et al. (2008) provide substantial support for the validity of the DID approach we use in this paper,
particularly because the changes in prescription drug insurance that are used here are solely due to the
implementation of Medicare Part D.10
3.d. Estimation: Instrumental Variables Approach
DID estimates of the interaction terms between year and the proportion of a cell uninsured prior
to Medicare Part D are intention-to-treat estimates because not everyone without prescription drug
insurance prior to Part D obtained prescription insurance after Part D. Previous studies suggest that
approximately 70% to 80% of those without prescription drug insurance prior to Part D obtained coverage
(Levy and Weir 2010; Engelhardt and Gruber 2011; Kaestner and Khan 2012).11 One approach to

10

Khan et al. (2008) used longitudinal data from the MCBS and changes in prescription drug insurance resulting
from individual decisions, which are less likely to be exogenous, although tests results indicated that the changes in
insurance appear to be plausibly exogenous.
11
This range of estimates is consistent with data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey reported in Kaestner
and Khan (2012) that showed that 368 out of 518 (71%) people who did not have prescription drug insurance in
2004 gained coverage by 2006. Kaestner and Khan (2012) also reported that only 24 of 1065 people with
prescription drug insurance in 2004 reported dropping prescription drug insurance between 2004 and 2006.

12

estimating the effect of prescription drug insurance on hospitalization, or the treatment-on-treated effect,
is instrumental variables (IV). The following algebraic representation illustrates the IV approach:
HOSP   i   POST _ PARTDt   INSUˆREDit  vit
it
(2) i  1,...,96
t  pre  2002  05, post  2006  09

~
INSUREDit  ~i   POST _ PARTDt  ~( POST _ PARTDt * UNINSUREDi )  v~it
(3) i  1,...,96
t  pre  2002  05, post  2006  09
In equation (2), the hospitalization rate (HOSP) of cell “i” in year “t” depends on a cell-specific fixedeffect (δi), a dummy variable indicating the year is post 2005 (POST=1 if year is 2006 to 2009), and the
predicted proportion of cell “i” that had prescription drug insurance in in period “t” (INSURED). As
described earlier, we calculate prescription drug insurance information from the MCBS. Also included in
the regression model, but not shown in equation (2), are age by gender by post-period (POST) fixed
effects, region by post-period (POST) fixed effects, and the proportion of each cell that is enrolled in a
HMO.
Equation (3) is analogous to equation (1), except for the dependent variable INSURED, and it is
the first stage model used to predict the proportion of a cell that is insured. We have used the symbol “~”
to differentiate parameters in equations (1) and (3). The excluded instrument used to predict the
proportion insured is the interaction between the post-Part D indicator and proportion without prescription
drug insurance in 2002 to 2005.
We estimate the IV approach using data collapsed to the pre-Medicare Part D period (2002-2005)
and the post-Medicare Part D period (2006-2009). Doing so reflects the fact that we derive the
information on the proportion of each demographic cell that has prescription drug insurance from the
MCBS and because of small samples in the MCBS we use several years of data to create cell means. The
information on prescription drug insurance does not vary by individual year, but only by the pre- and
post-Medicare Part D periods. Collapsing the data is unproblematic given that tests of whether there were

13

differences in pre-Part D trends in hospitalization by the proportion uninsured could not reject the null
hypothesis of common trends.
3.e. Evidence of the Validity of the IV Approach
The identifying assumption of the IV approach is the same as that of the DID. Namely, that in the
absence of Medicare Part D, trends in hospitalizations and mortality would not differ by the proportion of
a cell that is without prescription drug insurance prior to Part D. In other words, the exclusion
restriction—omitting the interaction between the post-Part D indicator and proportion uninsured from
equation (2)—is valid. The same arguments made above as to the validity of the DID approach apply to
the IV approach so we will not repeat them here. However, we conducted another assessment of the
identifying assumption by estimating the reduced form model associated with the IV, but using data only
from the pre- Medicare Part D period. Specifically, we estimate:

i   POST _ 2003t  ( POST _ 2003t *UNINSUREDi )  vit
HOSPit  
(4) i  1,...,96
t  pre  2002  03, post  2004  05
In equation (4), we have used the symbol “…” to denote reduced form parameters. The key aspect to note
about equation (4) is that only pre-Part D data are used. So the test of the identification assumption is
whether the coefficient on the interaction term between proportion of a cell that is uninsured (in 2002 to
2005) and the indicator post-2003 is zero. We discuss the results of this placebo analysis in greater detail
below, but note here that in all cases (26) the coefficient on the interaction term between proportion of a
cell that is uninsured and the indicator post-2003 is not statistically significant and small in magnitude.
The insignificant placebo estimates obtained from equation (4) are evidence that the IV approach is valid.
3.f. Interpretation of IV Estimate
The IV approach estimates the effect of prescription drug insurance on hospitalization and
mortality for elderly affected by Medicare Part D (local average treatment effect-LATE). Kaestner and
Khan (2012) examined characteristics of the group likely to be uninsured prior to Part D, and reported
that age, education, income, race and region are all significant predictors of being uninsured. Overall,
14

those without prescription drug insurance prior to Medicare Part D tend to low-educated, low-income,
black, older and more likely to come from the east and west south central divisions. Thus, our estimates
of the effect of prescription drug coverage due to Medicare Part D will be applicable to persons with these
characteristics (except for race), which is a group particularly interesting to public health policy. Our
estimates also pertain to the benefit design and generosity of prescription drug insurance as obtained
through Medicare Part D. One alternative way to view the IV estimates is as the effect of a relative
change in prescription insurance coverage that generates approximately a 30% to 40% increase in use of
prescription drugs, which is in the middle of the range of estimates in the literature of the change in
prescription drug use associated with gaining coverage through Medicare Part D (Lichtenberg and Sun
2007; Yin et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2009; Kaestner and Khan 2012).12

4. Data
The data we use are from three sources: the Medicare Provider Analysis and Review file
(MEDPAR), the Medicare Beneficiary file (Denominator file), and the Medicare Current Beneficiary
Survey (MCBS). The MEDPAR files provide information on all hospital admissions for Medicare
beneficiaries not enrolled in Medicare Advantage (i.e., capitated HMO). The Denominator file provides
information on all Medicare beneficiaries and the reason for their eligibility, whether they are in Medicare
Advantage plan, whether they are disabled or have ESRD, and the year of death. The MCBS provides
information on prescription drug insurance. The years covered by each of these data sources are 2002 to
2009.
The sample used in the analysis is selected using the following criteria:


Non-Hispanic, white persons 66-84 years old on December 31 of the year;



enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare (i.e., no Medicare Advantage) and not covered by Medicaid;



exclude people with ESRD or Disability;

12

For studies that estimated intention-to-treat effects of Medicare Part D on prescription drug use, we have scaled
the estimate by the change in prescription drug insurance.

15



and exclude people who died during the year (for analysis of hospitalizations).

We exclude people in Medicare Advantage because they do not have information in MEDPAR claims.
We exclude people covered by Medicaid and people with ESRD or Disability because they are quite sick
relative to the large majority of Medicare enrollees, and their greater level of illness may cause them to
have significantly different trends in hospitalization and mortality. For the analysis of hospitalizations, we
exclude people who died because they do not have full-year information. Finally, we exclude Hispanic
and non-Hispanic black persons because of the limited number of such persons in the MCBS and the
relative geographic concentration of these groups.
The MCBS is a nationally representative survey of Medicare beneficiaries that we use to
construct measures of prescription drug insurance coverage pre- and post-Medicare Part D. Individuals in
the MCBS are drawn using stratified random sampling from an enrollment list of persons entitled to
Medicare on January 1st of that year, and the survey is intended be representative of all geographical
areas and age groups. Each year, a supplemental sample is added to account for attrition so as to maintain
an average sample size of approximately 12,000 individuals. Persons remain in the sample for four years.
We use the Cost and Use file of the MCBS which provides detailed information of the respondent’s
insurance status including prescription insurance.
We define someone as uninsured if they did not have prescription drug insurance for the full
year.13 We aggregate the MCBS data into demographic cells based on eight age groups (66-68, 69-70, 7172, 73-74, 75-77, 78-79, 80-81, and 82-84), two gender groups, and nine Census regions. However,
sample sizes in each year for the 144 possible cells were relatively small, so we combine years into two
periods: 2002-2005 and 2006-2009. We then drop all cells that had fewer than 75 observations in the preperiod of 2002-2005 leaving 96 demographic cells. For each cell, we calculate the weighted mean of the
proportion with and without prescription drug insurance. We impose the minimum observation threshold
of 75 to increase the precision of our estimate of the proportion of the cell that is uninsured.

13

Approximately 90% of persons who were uninsured at least 7 or more months during the year were uninsured for
the entire year. Using a less stringent definition (e.g., 7 or more months uninsured) had little effect on estimates.

16

The Denominator file provides the number of persons covered by Medicare in each demographic
cell defined by year, age, gender and region, which we use as the denominator in the calculation of cell
hospitalization rates. The Denominator file also provides information on the year of death, which we use
to construct rates of mortality (per 1000 persons). We apply the same sample selection criteria to these
data. There are a total of 768 cells reflecting the 96 demographic groups and eight years of data. We also
use the Denominator file to construct the proportion of people in each demographic cell that is enrolled in
Medicare Advantage. Because we do not include persons enrolled in Medicare Advantage in the analysis
and because the proportion of enrollees was increasing during our period of analysis, we constructed the
proportion of persons enrolled in Medicare Advantage to include in the regression models to account for
any potential changes in sample composition that could be correlated with the implementation of
Medicare Part D. Including or excluding this variable makes little difference to results reported below.
The MEDPAR file provides information on all hospitalizations for the sample of Medicare
beneficiaries. We sum the number of hospitalizations in each of the 96 demographic cells in each year and
this count became the numerator in the cell-specific hospitalization rates. Note that hospitalization rates
are measured per 1,000 persons. We sum hospitalizations within a cell in two ways: first, by the number
of people, so persons with more than one hospitalization are only counted once, and second, by the
number of hospitalizations, which counts all hospitalizations. Results do not differ significantly for the
two measures so we only report results using the latter measure. We define several measures of
hospitalization focusing on the most common hospitalizations, as well as those designated as patient
quality indicators (PQI) by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Specifically, we use the
following categories of hospitalization: acute myocardial infarction (AMI), congestive heart failure
(CHF), stroke, pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), osteoarthritis (osteoarthrosis),
coronary atherosclerosis and other heart disease, cardiac dysrhythmias, urinary tract infection, trauma
(injuries and poisonings not including from prescription drugs), and all hospitalizations combined. We
include admissions for trauma, which consist of a relatively large group of conditions (e.g., burns,
fractures), because it is less likely that prescription drug insurance would affect trauma admissions. So
17

trauma admissions are used as a falsification test. Definitions of trauma hospitalizations are based on
information from the Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research.14
In addition to the number of hospitalizations per 1,000 persons, we also construct measures of
expenditures for each type of hospitalization. We measure expenditures as the total Medicare payments
made to the hospital for each type of admission per person. To construct expenditures, we sum all
payments for a specific type of hospitalization for all persons in a cell and then divide by the number of
persons in that cell. Therefore, this is a measure of expenditures per person for each type of
hospitalization. We construct a similar variable using total hospital “charges” for the admission, which we
view as a measure of resource use.
Table 1 reports the weighted, sample means and standard deviations for the different rates of
hospitalizations by year. The 11 types of admissions account for approximately 40% of all hospital
admissions, which is consistent with the selection of the most common admissions. If trauma is omitted,
the other 10 admission types account for approximately 35% of all admissions. Approximately 25% of
the sample is admitted to the hospital each year. Total admissions remained relatively constant from 2002
to 2006, but declined by approximately 10% between 2006 and 2009. Many admissions, particularly for
heart disease and respiratory illness declined substantially over the period. However, admissions for
osteoarthritic conditions increased by approximately 25%. Mortality rates were 32 per 1000 in 2002 and
declined steadily to 27 per 1000 by 2009.

5. Results
5.a. Difference-in-differences Estimates: Number of Hospital Admissions
In Table 2 we present difference-in-differences (DID) estimates for the 12 types of hospital
admissions. We obtain estimates using weighted, ordinary least squares methods where the weight is the
14

The definitions of hospitalizations are taken form the following two sources:
http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/Modules/PQI_TechSpec.aspx. and “Statistical Brief #14” by HealthCare Cost
and Utilization Project, October 2006. The link for the codebook is “Appendix A - Clinical Classification SoftwareDIAGNOSES (January 1980 through September 2013)”
http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/AppendixASingleDX.txt.

18

number of persons in each cell.15 DID estimates in Table 2 use a sample that omits 2006, which is the
transitional year when Medicare Part D was implemented.16 For each outcome, we show estimates of the
coefficients on the interactions between the proportion uninsured and year dummy variables. Also shown
in the column to the right of these estimates are F-tests of the hypothesis that the pre-period (2002 to
2005) and post-period (2007 to 2009) interactions are jointly zero. Finally, the constrained DID estimate,
which we obtain using data collapsed to two periods (pre- and post-Medicare Part D), is in the last row for
each type of hospitalization. The constrained DID estimate is the reduced form estimate for the IV
approach.
We first note that only one of the 12 F-tests of the hypothesis that interactions between the
proportion of a cell that is uninsured and the pre-Medicare Part D year dummy variables are jointly zero is
statistically significant. The significant case is for AMI and it is due to one unusually large coefficient. In
fact, only two of the 36 individual estimates associated with the pre-period interactions are statistically
significant (reference year is 2002), and p-values of the F-statistics range from 0.16 to 0.997 with 8 of the
12 p-values above 0.50, and only two p-values below 0.2. The results of these F-tests provide evidence to
support the validity of the DID research design, as they suggest that trends in hospitalizations prior to the
implementation of Medicare Part D did not differ by the proportion of a cell that is without prescription
drug insurance, which is the measure of treatment intensity. In contrast, F-tests of whether trends in
hospitalization differed by the proportion without prescription insurance in the post-Part D period indicate
some significant differences. Three of the F-tests are statistically significant and half have p-values of
0.22 or less.
The DID estimates from a sample that has been collapsed to two periods, pre- and post-Medicare
Part D, provide a useful way to assess the implications of the larger set of DID estimates. As noted, these
constrained, two-period estimates are the reduced form of the instrumental variables procedures. The DID

15

Un-weighted estimates were also obtained. We do not show these. However, below we report the weighted and
un-weighted IV estimates to indicate the difference due to weighting.
16
In Appendix Table 1 we provide estimates based on data from 2002 to 2009 inclusive of 2006.

19

estimates are shown in the last row for each type of hospital admission. Eleven of the 12 reduced form
estimates are negative and five are statistically significant at 0.10 level.17
Magnitudes of the reduced form estimates are non-trivial. For CHF admissions, the reduced form
estimate suggests that increasing the proportion of a cell that is without prescription drug insurance in
2002 to 2005 by 100 percentage points (from 0 to 1) is associated with a 1.82 decrease in CHF
admissions per 1000, or approximately a 18% decrease in CHF admissions. Analogous estimates for the
other types of admission are: -2.34 (13%) for Coronary Atherosclerosis; -2.19 (31%) for COPD; -0.79
(20%) for dehydration; and -19.81 (8%) for any type of admission. Given that every percentage point
increase in the proportion without prescription insurance in the pre-period (2002 to 2005) is associated
with nearly a percentage point (0.92) increase in the proportion who gained insurance pre- to postMedicare Part D, the DID reduced form estimates will have magnitudes that are similar to the IV
estimates.
To assess the validity of the DID and IV approaches, we estimated the reduced form model (see
equation 4) using pre-Part D data (2002 to 2005). We refer to this as a placebo test and it assesses whether
trends in hospitalizations between 2002-03 and 2004-05 are the same for demographic groups with
different proportions of elderly without prescription drug insurance, which is the measure of treatment
intensity. Table 3 reports these placebo reduced form estimates and, for comparison purposes, the actual
reduced form estimates that were already reported in Table 2.
Estimates in row one of Table 3 are from the placebo, reduced form analyses. No estimates are
statistically significant. In addition, all estimates are relatively small in magnitude; 8 of the 12 estimates
have effect sizes of 5% (of mean) or less and the largest effect size is 11% (stroke). In cases where the
actual reduced form effect was statistically significant, the effect sizes of the placebo estimates are
17

We also calculated standard errors using a permutations test. To conduct the test, we randomly assigned the
proportion of a cell without prescription drug insurance to each of the 96 demographic cells (using the 96 actual
values). We then estimated the reduced form model We conducted 500 such analyses and calculated the p-value as
the proportion of estimates with an absolute value greater than the actual estimate. Interestingly, using this method
produced six reduced form estimates that were significant at the 0.05 level. In general, the p-values obtained from
the permutations test were smaller than those obtained form the regression models.

20

substantially smaller. Finally, the placebo reduced form estimates are about evenly divided between
negative and positive estimates. Overall, estimates in Table 3 provide evidence that the DID and IV
approaches are reasonable and plausibly valid.18
5.b. Instrumental Variables Estimates: Number of Hospitalizations
Table 4 presents instrumental variables estimates (equation 2). For each type of hospitalization,
we report four estimates. We obtained estimates using two time periods, 2002 to 2009 inclusive and
exclusive of 2006, and two methods of estimation, weighted and un-weighted regression. Arguably,
estimates from weighted regressions are preferred because they are representative of the underlying
population. Similarly, because Medicare Part D was not fully implemented until June of 2006, it is
reasonable to prefer estimates that exclude 2006. Accordingly, we focus the discussion of the IV
estimates on weighted estimates that exclude the transition year of 2006.
Our preferred estimates indicate that gaining Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage is
associated with a significant (0.10 level or greater):


0.6 per 1000 (8%) decrease in AMI admissions;



1.9 per 1000 (18%) decrease in CHF admissions;



2.5 per 1000 (13%) decrease in Coronary Atherosclerosis admissions;



2.3 per 1000 (32%) decrease in COPD admissions;



0.8 per 1000 (20%) decrease in dehydration admissions;



and a 20.8 per 1000 (8%) decrease in all types of admissions.

In most cases, the time period (include/exclude 2006) and the method (weighted/unweighted) we use to
obtain estimates does not alter substantially the basic results reported above. Other estimates in Table 3
are quite small including trauma admissions, which we did not expect to be influenced by prescription
drug insurance.
5.c. Instrumental Variables Estimates of Hospital Charges and Expenditures
18

Appendix Table 3 presents the placebo, reduced form estimates for Medicare hospital expenditures. Results are
qualitatively similar to those for the quantity of admissions.

21

Table 5 presents instrumental variables estimates for total “charges” per person for each type of
hospital admission. The organization of Table 5 is the same as that used for Table 4. The corresponding
DID estimates are in Appendix Table 2.
The IV estimates in Table 5 are generally consistent with those in Table 4—decreases in the rate
of admission per 1000 persons are associated with decreases in charges per person. Specifically, gaining
prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D is associated with a:


$49 per person (27%) decrease in charges on CHF admissions;



$73 per person (11%) decrease in charges on Coronary Atherosclerosis admissions;



$42 per person (39%) decrease in charges on COPD admissions;



$18 per person (35%) decrease in charges on dehydration admissions;



$62 per person (22%) decrease in charges on admissions for trauma;



and a $728 per person (12%) decrease in charges on all admissions.

Notably, in most cases, the effect of prescription drug insurance on hospital charges is greater in
percentage terms than the effect of prescription drug insurance on rates of hospitalization, which suggests
that prescription drug insurance reduced resource-intensive admissions more than other admissions. For
example, prescription drug coverage is associated with a 32% decrease in the number of COPD
admissions and a 39% decrease in charges per person on COPD admissions.
Table 6 presents instrumental variables estimates for Medicare expenditures per person for each
type of hospital admission. Gaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D is associated
with a:


$12 per person (23%) decrease in Medicare expenditures on CHF admissions;



$11 per person (34%) decrease in Medicare expenditures on COPD admissions;



$4 per person (27%) decrease in Medicare expenditures on dehydration admissions;



and a $138 per person (7%) decrease in Medicare expenditures on all admissions.

22

As was the case with charges, the effect of prescription drug insurance on Medicare hospital expenditures
tends to be greater in percentage terms than the effect of prescription drug insurance on rates of
hospitalization, which suggests that prescription drug insurance reduced resource-intensive admissions
more than other admissions., although this is not the case for all admissions combined.
5.d. Instrumental Variables Estimates: Mortality
Table 7 presents instrumental variables estimates for mortality and its presentation follows that of
previous tables (Appendix Table 4 shows DID estimates for mortality). The preferred estimates indicate
that prescription drug insurance is associated with a small and statistically insignificant 0.12 per 1000
(0.3%) increase in mortality. Other estimates in Table 7 are similarly small and none are significant.

6. Conclusions
Evidence from clinical trials establishes that prescription drugs improve health. Indeed, for some
drugs such as statins, anti-hypertensive drugs and blood thinners, the (cost) effectiveness of
pharmaceutical therapy is substantial (Musini et al. 2009; Taylor et al. 2013). There is also ample
evidence that prescription drug insurance, including Medicare Part D, significantly increases prescription
drug use (see for example, Goldman et al. 2007; Yin et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2009; Kaestner and Khan
2012). Combined, these two facts imply that gaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D
will improve health and reduce the use of, and spending on, non-pharmacy medical services. However,
there are reasons to expect that this logic may not be correct and that gaining prescription drug insurance
through Medicare Part D will not affect the use of other medical services. Most importantly, there may be
a relatively small health benefits from greater use of prescription drugs that comes with insurance such as
Medicare Part D because of moral hazard. Prior to gaining prescription drug insurance, many elderly
bought a substantial number of prescription drugs, and if so, it is logical they bought the most effective
drugs in terms of health benefits.
To date, the evidence on whether prescription drug insurance will improve health (mortality) and
result in offsets—savings form reduced spending on other services—is inconclusive. To our knowledge
23

there are no previous studies of the effect of prescription drug insurance on mortality, and there are only
three studies examined whether there are offsets associated with gaining prescription insurance through
Medicare Part D. Zhang et al. (2009), using a sample of elderly in one health plan from Pennsylvania,
found that a 74% increase in prescription drug spending associated with Medicare Part D resulted in a 7%
decrease in spending on non-pharmacy medical care. Afendulis et al. (2011), using aggregate state-level
data, reported that the 28 percentage point increase in prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part
D is associated with a 4% decrease in hospitalizations. Finally, Kaestner and Khan (2012), using a sample
from the MCBS, reported that gaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D was not
significantly associated with changes in inpatient or outpatient spending, although the study lacked
statistical power to detect small to moderate effects. Other evidence related to the question, but not
specifically in the context of Medicare Part D, is mixed, as described in the literature review earlier in
Section 2.
Given the importance of the issue and the lack of a consensus answer, we examined whether
gaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D is associated with changes in mortality and
rates of, and expenditures on, several types of hospitalizations and all hospitalizations combined for a
large, geographically diverse group of Medicare beneficiaries. Our estimates indicate that gaining
prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D is associated with an 8% decrease in the number of
hospital admissions per 1000 people, a 7% decrease in Medicare payments per person for inpatient
services, and a 12% decrease in inpatient charges per person. Our estimates also indicate that Medicare
Part D prescription insurance is associated with changes in the severity of admissions as the change in
expenditures and charges associated with prescription drug coverage was usually greater than the change
in the quantity of admissions associated with prescription drug coverage. We found no evidence that
gaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare Part D affected mortality.
Overall, Medicare Part D prescription insurance is associated with a $138, or 7%, decrease in
Medicare inpatient expenditures per person. This figure represents a considerable “offset” of the cost of
prescription drugs. The CBO estimates that in 2008, average spending on prescription drugs among non24

poor (not low-income subsidy eligible), Medicare Part D participants was $1,800.19 So the offset we
estimate here represents 8% of the total cost of prescription drugs among the elderly affected. If we
assume that 11 million (28%) elderly gained prescription drug coverage through Medicare Part D, which
is consistent with actual estimates, and that the offset we find here applies, then the total “offset” is $1.5
billion per year, or approximately 2.2% (1.5 divided by 67.7 total state and federal expenditure) of the
total annual cost of Medicare Part D.
In summary, our estimates suggest that gaining prescription drug insurance through Medicare
Part D significantly reduced hospital admissions and hospital expenditures. The “offset” in downstream
spending resulting from gaining prescription drug insurance is considerable and represents approximately
2.2% of total Medicare Part D spending. The existence of such offsets substantially lowers the net cost of
Medicare Part D—more so than estimated by the CBO. The existence of “offsets” also implies that stand
alone prescription drug plans such as those that characterize Medicare Part D cannot exploit these offsets
through pricing because the “offsets” accrue to the medical insurer, which in this case is the federal
government for fee-for-service Medicare enrollees. Medicare Advantage (HMO) plans can exploit this
source of savings and this may partly explain why Medicare Advantage plans often included prescription
drug benefits prior to Medicare Part D.

19

See: Congressional Budget Office, Economics and Budget Issue Brief, December 2011, Spending Patterns for
Prescription Drugs under Medicare Part D, http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/12-01MedicarePartD.pdf).

25

References
2012 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal
Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds.
, http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-andReports/ReportsTrustFunds/downloads/tr2012.pdf, website accessed 5/7/13.
Afendulis, C. C., Y. He, A. M. Zaslavsky, and M. E. Chernew. 2011. “The Impact of Medicare Part D on
Hospitalization Rates.” Health Services Research, 46(4): 1022-1038.
Briesacher, B. A., B. Stuart, X. Ren, J. A. Doshi, and M. V. Wrobel. 2005. “Medicare Beneficiaries and
the Impact of Gaining Prescription Drug Coverage on Inpatient and Physician Spending.” Health
Services Research, 40(5 Pt.1): 1279-1296.
Chandra, A., J. Gruber, and R. McKnight. 2010. “Patient Cost- Sharing, Hospitalization Offsets, and the
Design of Optimal Health Insurance for the Elderly.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 193213.
Congressional Budget Office. 2012. “Offsetting Effects of Prescription Drug Use on Medicare’s Spending
for Medical Services.” http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/43741MedicalOffsets-11-29-12.pdf, website last accessed 5/7/13.
Engelhardt, Gary V., and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. "Medicare Part D and the Financial Protection of the
Elderly." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4): 77-102.
Fu, Jun, Cui-Jie Shao, Fu-Rong Chen, Ho-Keung Ng, and Zhong-Ping Chen. 2010. “Autophagy Induced
by Valproic Acid Is Associated with Oxidative Stress in Glioma Cell Lines.” Neuro-oncology 12
(4) (April): 328–340. doi:10.1093/neuonc/nop005.
Gaynor, M., J. Li, and W. B. Vogt. 2007. “Substitution, Spending Offsets, and Prescription Drug Benefit
Design.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 10(2): Article 4,
http://www.bepress.com/fhep/10/2/4.
Gibson, T. B., R. J. Ozminkowski, and R. Z. Goetzel. 2005. “The Effects of Prescription Drug Cost
Sharing: A Review of the Evidence.” Am J Manag Care, 11: 730-740.
Goldman, D. P., G. F. Joyce, and Y. Zheng. 2007. “Prescription Drug Cost Sharing: Associations with
Medication and Medical Utilization and Spending and Health.” JAMA, 298(1): 61-69.
Hsu, J., M. Price, J. Huang, R. Brand, V. Fung, R. Hui, B. Fireman, J. P. Newhouse, and J. V. Selby.
2006. “Unintended Consequences of Caps on Medicare Drug Benefits.” N Engl J Med,
354(22): 2349-2359.
Johnson, R. E., M. J. Goodman, M. C. Hornbrook, and M. B. Eldredge. 1997. “The Effect of Increased
Prescription Drug Cost-Sharing on Medical Care Utilization and Expenses of Elderly Health
Maintenance Organization Members.” Med Care, 35(11): 1119-1131.

Kaestner R. and N. Khan. 2012. “Medicare Part D and its Effect on the Use of Prescription Drugs and
Use of Other Health Care Services of the Elderly.” unpublished manuscript, University of Illinois
(revised version of NBER Working Paper #16011).
26

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2010. Prescription Drug Trends.
http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/3057-08.pdf, website last accessed
5/8/13.
Ketcham, J. and K. Simon. 2008. “Medicare Part D’s Effects on Elderly Drug Costs and Utilization.”
American Journal of Managed Care, 14(11 Suppl): SP14-22.
Khan, N., R. Kaestner, and S. Lin. 2008. “Effect of Prescription Drug Coverage on Health of the Elderly”
Health Services Research, 43(5): 1576-1597.
Levy, H., and D. R. Weir. 2010. “Take-up of Medicare Part D: Results from the Health and Retirement
Study.” J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci, 65B(4): 492-501.
Lichtenberg, F. R., and S. X. Sun. 2007. “The Impact of Medicare Part D on Prescription Drug Use by the
Elderly.” Health Aff (Millwood), 26(6): 1735-1744.
Liu, F. X., G. C. Alexander, S. Y. Crawford, A. S. Pickard, D. Hedeker, and S. Walton. 2011. “The
Impact of Medicare Part D on Out-of-Pocket Costs for Prescription Drugs, Medication
Utilization, Health Resource Utilization, and Preference-Based Health Utility.” Health Services
Research, 46(4): 1104-1123.
McWilliams, J. M., A. M. Zaslavsky, and H. A. Huskamp. 2011. “Implementation of Medicare Part D
and Nondrug Medical Spending for Elderly Adults with Limited Prior Drug Coverage.” JAMA,
306(4): 402-409.
Musini VM, Tejani AM, Bassett K, Wright JM. Pharmacotherapy for hypertension in the elderly. 2009.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD000028. DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD000028.pub2.
Pilote, L., C. Beck, H. Richard, and M. J. Eisenberg. 2002. “The Effects of Cost-Sharing on Essential
Drug Prescriptions, Utilization of Medicare Care and Outcomes after Acute Myocardial
Infarction in Elderly patients.” CMAJ, 167: 246-252.
Schneeweiss, S., A. R. Patrick, A. Pedan, L. Varasteh, R. Levin, N. Liu, and W. H. Shrank. 2009. “The
Effect of Medicare Part D Coverage on Drug Use and Cost Sharing among Seniors Without Prior
Drug Benefits.” Health Aff, 28(2): w305-w316.
Soumerai, S. B., D. Ross-Degnan, J. Avorn, T. McLaughlin, and I. Choodnovskiy. 1991. “Effects of
Medicaid Drug-Payment Limits on Admission to Hospitals and Nursing Homes.” N Engl J Med,
325(15): 1072- 1077.
Soumerai, S. B., T. J. McLaughlin, D. Ross-Degnan, C. S. Casteris, and P. Bollini. 1994. “Effects of a
Limit on Medicaid Drug Reimbursement Benefits on the Use of Psychotropic Agents and Acute
Mental Health Services by Patients with Schizophrenia.” N Engl J Med, 331(10): 650-655.
Stuart, B., J. A. Doshi, B. Briesacher, M. V. Wrobel, and F Baysac. 2004. “Impact of Prescription
Coverage on Hospital and Physician Costs: A Case Study of Medicare Beneficiaries with Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.” Clinical Therapeutics, 26(10): 1688-1699.
Stubbings, JoAnn, and Denys T Lau. 2013. “Medicare Part D Research Highlights and Policy Updates,
27

2013: Impact and Insights.” Clinical Therapeutics 35 (4) (April): 402–412.
doi:10.1016/j.clinthera.2013.02.024.
Tamblyn, R. et al. 2001. “Adverse Events Associated with Prescription Drug Cost-Sharing among Poor
and Elderly Persons.” JAMA, 285(4): 421-429.
Taylor F, Huffman MD, Macedo AF, Moore THM, Burke M, Davey Smith G, Ward K, Ebrahim S. 2013.
Statins for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD004816. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004816.pub5
Tjia, J. and B. A. Briesacher. 2008. “Prescription Drug Benefits and Use of Guideline Recommended
Medications by Elderly Medicare Beneficiaries with Diabetes Mellitus.” J AM Geriatr Soc,
56(10): 1879-1886.
Yin, W., A. Basu, J. X. Zhang, A. Rabani, D. Meltzer, and G. C. Alexander. 2008. “The Effect of the
Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Benefits on Drug Utilization and Expenditures.” Ann Intern
Med, 148(3): 169-177.
Zhang, Y., J. M. Donohue, J. R. Lave, G. O’Donnell, and J. P. Newhouse. 2009. “The Effect of Medicare
Part D on Drug and Medical Spending.” N Engl J Med, 361: 52-61.
Zimmer, David M. 2012. “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Prescription Drug Demand.” Unpublished
manuscript, http://people.wku.edu/david.zimmer/index_files/partD.pdf, website last accessed
5/7/13

28

-.55 -.5 -.45 -.4 -.35 -.3 -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05

Change in Proportion Uninsured 2006/9 - 2002/5

Figure 1
Association Between the Change in Proportion Uninsured
and Proportion Uninsured in 2002-2005

ß = -0.92 (0.08)

.15

.2

.25

.3

.35

.4

.45

.5

.55

.6

Proportion Uninsured in 2002-2005

29

Table 1
Sample Means and Standard Deviations of Hospital Admissions per 1000 by Year
Type of Admissions

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Acute Myocardial Infarction

8.63
(3.15)

8.07
(3.00)

7.54
(2.85)

6.93
(2.65)

6.54
(2.45)

6.12
(2.35)

5.96
(2.30)

5.55
(2.17)

Congestive Heart Failure

10.66
(5.87)

10.71
(6.07)

10.41
(6.14)

9.64
(5.83)

9.29
(5.73)

8.50
(5.36)

7.94
(5.19)

7.60
(5.00)

Coronary Atherosclerosis
and Other Heart Disease

19.33
(6.49)

18.48
(6.58)

18.48
(6.50)

17.06
(6.37)

16.59
(6.22)

14.05
(5.34)

12.16
(4.72)

10.34
(4.12)

Stroke

6.58
(2.95)

6.14
(2.80)

5.88
(2.71)

5.65
(2.62)

5.49
(2.54)

5.15
(2.42)

5.01
(2.37)

4.88
(2.30)

Cardiac Dysrhythmias

11.97
(4.57)

11.46
(4.54)

11.31
(4.58)

10.96
(4.43)

11.14
(4.53)

11.14
(4.52)

11.17
(4.56)

10.94
(4.57)

Pneumonia

9.88
(4.90)

9.99
(4.82)

9.19
(4.52)

10.04
(5.05)

8.84
(4.45)

8.47
(4.33)

7.71
(4.26)

7.16
(3.82)

COPD

7.93
(2.35)

7.57
(2.16)

6.70
(2.00)

6.23
(1.95)

5.57
(1.71)

5.46
(1.73)

6.41
(2.25)

6.04
(2.04)

Dehydration

4.13
(2.28)

3.99
(2.14)

3.92
(2.06)

3.91
(2.08)

4.08
(2.18)

4.12
(2.16)

3.54
(1.95)

2.98
(1.62)

Osteoarthritis

12.25
(2.78)

13.14
(3.26)

14.47
(3.50)

15.31
(3.65)

15.30
(3.51)

15.35
(3.59)

15.39
(3.62)

15.80
(3.62)

Urinary Tract Infection (UTI)

3.27
(2.10)

3.40
(2.24)

3.56
(2.42)

3.66
(2.56)

3.74
(2.68)

3.89
(2.86)

4.00
(3.05)

4.07
(3.18)

Trauma

11.83
(7.89)

11.95
(7.97)

12.11
(8.14)

12.17
(8.26)

12.17
(8.29)

12.06
(8.16)

11.63
(7.87)

11.24
(7.73)

All Admission

259.64
(76.64)

256.41
(77.33)

255.73
(78.29)

252.79
(78.41)

250.02
(78.22)

242.17
(76.48)

235.65
(76.78)

226.23
(73.52)

Mortality

32.29
31.48
30.27
30.02
29.26
28.62
28.34
27.05
(19.10) (18.76) (18.23) (18.24) (17.79) (17.66) (17.66) (16.97)

Observations
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
Notes: The unit of observation is the age-gender-region cell. Figures are weighted by cell size. Standard deviations
are in parenthesis.

30

Table 2
Difference-in-differences Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Admissions
AMI

Joint
F-Test

CHF

Interactions Proportion Uninsured in 02-05 and Year
0.61 (0.90)
-1.07 (1.25)
2003
1.82 (0.90)**
2.86
-0.28 (1.25)
2004
-0.73 (0.90)
0.04**
-1.42 (1.25)
2005
-0.28 (0.92)
-1.90 (1.28)
2007
-0.33 (0.93)
0.12
-2.16 (1.28)*
2008
0.15 (0.93)
0.95
-3.39 (1.29)**
2009
Reduced Form Estimate
-0.58 (0.55)
-1.82 (0.94)*
2007-09
Mean 02-05

7.79

COPD

Joint
F-Test

0.56
0.64
2.39
0.07*

10.36

Joint
DehyJoint
F-Test
dration
F-Test
Interactions Proportion Uninsured in 02-05 and Year
-0.99 (1.05)
0.16 (0.66)
2003
-0.50 (1.05)
0.53
0.23 (0.66)
0.04
2004
-1.22
(1.06)
0.66
0.14
(0.66)
0.99
2005
-2.14
(1.08)**
0.05
(0.68)
2007
-3.58 (1.08)**
4.19
-1.28 (0.68)*
1.78
2008
-2.93 (1.08)**
0.01**
-0.79 (0.68)
0.15
2009
Reduced Form Estimate
-2.19 (0.76)**
-0.79 (0.40)*
2007-09

Atherosclerosis

-0.62 (1.56)
-0.48 (1.56)
1.17 (1.57)
-1.16 (1.60)
-2.99 (1.60)*
-2.82 (1.61)*

Joint
F-Test

0.53
0.66
1.58
0.19

Stroke

0.03 (0.83)
-1.30 (0.83)
0.01 (0.83)
-0.12 (0.85)
0.27 (0.85)
-1.14 (0.85)

Joint
F-test

1.26
0.29
1.03
0.38

Cardiac
Dysrhythmias
-1.69 (1.16)
0.28 (1.16)
0.03 (1.17)
-0.63 (1.19)
-0.60 (1.20)
-2.09 (1.20)*

Joint
F-Test

1.22
0.30
1.09
0.35

Pneum.

0.11 (1.03)
-0.38 (1.03)
1.80 (1.04)*
-0.38 (1.06)
1.36 (1.06)
-0.77 (1.06)

-2.34 (1.17)**

-0.05 (0.51)

-0.74 (0.76)

-0.17 (0.62)

18.34

6.06

11.42

9.78

Osteoarthritis
-1.29 (1.40)
-2.07 (1.40)
-1.09 (1.41)
-0.82 (1.43)
-0.47 (1.44)
-2.24 (1.45)
-0.14 (1.04)

Joint
F-Test

0.74
0.53
0.88
0.45

UTI

-0.22 (0.72)
0.20 (0.72)
0.07 (0.72)
0.11 (0.74)
0.60 (0.74)
-0.66 (0.74)
0.02 (0.60)

Joint
F-Test

0.12
0.95
0.94
0.42

Trauma

0.34 (1.37)
-0.88 (1.37)
-0.83 (1.37)
-0.88 (1.40)
-0.47 (1.41)
-1.36 (1.41)
-0.60 (1.30)

Joint
F-Test

0.40
0.76
0.34
0.80

Joint
F-Test

Any
Admit.
-2.1 (8.6)
3.9 (8.6)
0.8 (8.6)
-12.1 (8.8)
-22.0 (8.8)**
-22.4 (8.8)**

1.74
0.16
1.48
0.22

Joint
F-Test

0.17
0.92
2.88
0.04**

-19.8 (7.6)**

7.11
3.99
13.80
3.47
12.02
256.1
Mean 02-05
Notes: Unit of observation is the year-age-gender-region cell and there are 672 observations. All regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, year fixed
effects, region by year fixed effects, and age by gender by year fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05.

31

Table 3
Placebo Tests: Reduced Form Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Admissions
AMI

CHF

AtheroSclerosis

Stroke

Pneum.

COPD

Dehydration

Osteoarthritis

UTI

Trauma

Any
Admit

-0.67
(0.61)

Cardiac
Dysrhythmias
0.91
(0.80)

Placebo Reduced Form

0.24
(0.62)

-0.24
(1.00)

0.64
(1.18)

0.47
(0.72)

-0.24
(0.86)

0.12
(0.45)

-0.68
(0.98)

0.21
(0.44)

-0.86
(0.84)

4.6
(6.0)

Actual Reduced Form

-0.58
(0.55)

-1.82
(0.94)*

-2.34
(1.17)**

-0.05
(0.51)

-0.74
(0.76)

-0.17
(0.62)

-2.19
(0.76)**

-0.79
(0.40)*

-0.14
(1.04)

0.02
(0.60)

-0.60
(1.30)

-19.8
(7.5)**

7.79
10.36
18.34
6.06
11.42
9.78
7.11
3.99
13.80
3.47
12.02
256.13
Weighted Mean 02-05
Observations
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
Notes: Unit of observation is the period-age-gender-region cell. For the placebo test, the pre-period is 2002-2003 and the post period is 2004-2005. All
regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, post, region by post fixed effects, and age by gender by post fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by cell
size. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05

32

Table 4
Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Admissions

Type of Hospital Admission
Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 7.79
Congestive Heart Failure (CHF)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 10.36
Coronary Atherosclerosis
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 18.34
Stroke
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 6.06
Cardiac Dysrhythmias
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 11.42
Pneumonia
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 9.78
COPD
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 7.11
Dehydration
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 3.99
Osteoarthritis
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 13.80
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 3.47
Trauma
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 12.02
All Admission

Weighted
Post 2006
Post 2007

Unweighted
Post 2006
Post 2007

-0.46
(0.34)

-0.60*
(0.36)

-0.72**
(0.36)

-0.89**
(0.38)

-1.70**
(0.57)

-1.91**
(0.63)

-1.67**
(0.62)

-1.82**
(0.66)

-2.05**
(0.75)

-2.45**
(0.74)

-1.61**
(0.77)

-2.15**
(0.72)

0.13
(0.32)

-0.05
(0.33)

0.46
(0.36)

0.31
(0.36)

-0.54
(0.45)

-0.78
(0.48)

-0.27
(0.50)

-0.42
(0.53)

0.17
(0.41)

-0.18
(0.39)

0.12
(0.47)

-0.30
(0.43)

-2.10**
(0.46)

-2.29**
(0.50)

-2.45**
(0.51)

-2.66**
(0.54)

-0.89**
(0.26)

-0.82**
(0.26)

-0.92**
(0.30)

-0.93**
(0.29)

-0.16
(0.61)

-0.15
(0.67)

0.01
(0.69)

-0.06
(0.72)

0.13
(0.33)

0.02
(0.38)

-0.11
(0.37)

-0.25
(0.43)

-0.54
(0.72)

-0.63
(0.83)

-0.28
(0.81)

-0.34
(0.91)

-17.36**
(4.58)

-20.76**
(5.07)

-19.03**
(4.86)

-22.44**
(5.28)

Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 256.13
Observations
192
192
192
192
Notes: Unit of observation is the period-age-gender-region cell. The instrument for proportion insured is
the interaction term between proportion uninsured in 2002-2005 and post-period dummy variable. All
regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, post, region by post fixed effects, and age by gender by
post fixed effects. Weighted regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05

33

Table 5 Total Charge Amount
Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Expenditures

Type of Hospital Admission
Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 328.7
Congestive Heart Failure (CHF)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 177.0
Coronary Atherosclerosis
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 671.6
Stroke
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 135.2
Cardiac Dysrhythmias
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 259.4
Pneumonia
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 163.4
COPD
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 107.0
Dehydration
Weighted Mean 2002-05 =50.6
Osteoarthritis
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 413.1
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 45.3
Trauma
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 280.8
All Admission

Weighted
Post 2006
Post 2007

Unweighted
Post 2006 Post 2007

1.8
(21.4)

-19.1
(21.1)

-5.7
(23.6)

-30.0
(23.0)

-37.7**
(14.1)

-48.5**
(15.7)

-39.8**
(16.1)

-50.3**
(17.1)

-72.2*
(40.7)

-73.3*
(38.8)

-51.1
(42.7)

-58.6
(39.8)

-5.7
(13.1)

-15.8
(14.3)

7.7
(15.0)

-0.9
(15.9)

8.2
(19.0)

-4.2
(19.6)

25.7
(21.1)

19.2
(21.4)

-10.1
(12.1)

-18.7
(13.6)

-11.5
(13.5)

-20.7
(14.7)

-43.9**
(9.2)

-41.6**
(10.9)

-48.0**
(9.9)

-45.0**
(11.4)

-19.0**
(5.2)

-18.2**
(5.7)

-17.1**
(5.9)

-17.0**
(6.4)

28.1
(27.5)

28.4
(31.8)

32.2
(31.7)

28.2
(35.5)

9.6
(8.0)

9.5
(8.8)

13.3
(9.5)

13.0
(10.2)

-47.6*
(28.1)

-61.7**
(30.6)

-40.5
(33.7)

-54.7
(34.8)

-528.7**
(204.0)

-727.5**
(232.3)

-500.6**
(221.6)

-726.2**
(240.5)

Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 6078.0
Observations
192
192
192
192
Notes: Unit of observation is the period-age-gender-region cell. The instrument for proportion insured is
the interaction term between proportion uninsured in 2002-2005 and post-period dummy variable. All
regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, post, region by post fixed effects, and age by gender by
post fixed effects. Weighted regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05

34

Table 6 Medicare Payment Amount
Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Expenditures

Type of Hospital Admission
Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 100.4
Congestive Heart Failure (CHF)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 52.8
Coronary Atherosclerosis
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 217.9
Stroke
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 44.8
Cardiac Dysrhythmias
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 79.4
Pneumonia
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 49.6
COPD
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 32.4
Dehydration
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 16.3
Osteoarthritis
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 130.9
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI)
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 13.4
Trauma
Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 86.6
All Admission

Weighted
Post 2006
Post 2007

Unweighted
Post 2006 Post 2007

-2.4
(5.6)

-7.5
(5.6)

-7.2
(6.2)

-13.8**
(6.1)

-9.6**
(3.3)

-12.0**
(3.7)

-9.3**
(3.6)

-11.7**
(3.9)

-6.0
(9.5)

-8.6
(8.7)

-1.2
(10.0)

-6.1
(8.9)

-0.03
(4.3)

-4.2
(4.7)

5.9
(4.8)

2.1
(5.3)

8.1
(5.6)

5.6
(5.8)

12.5**
(6.3)

11.1*
(6.4)

0.5
(3.0)

-1.8
(3.1)

-0.03
(3.4)

-2.2
(3.4)

-10.8**
(2.5)

-11.1**
(2.8)

-13.5**
(2.8)

-13.0**
(3.0)

-4.8**
(1.3)

-4.4**
(1.4)

-4.9**
(1.5)

-4.9**
(1.5)

7.0
(6.8)

7.7
(7.7)

8.6
(7.8)

8.3
(8.5)

2.7*
(1.5)

2.8
(1.7)

3.2*
(1.8)

2.9
(1.9)

-8.2
(6.7)

-12.8
(7.8)

-5.7
(7.9)

-10.1
(9.0)

-79.3*
(42.2)

-137.5**
(47.9)

-81.2*
(46.8)

-148.8**
(52.2)

Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 1980.6
Observations
192
192
192
192
Notes: Unit of observation is the period-age-gender-region cell. The instrument for proportion insured is
the interaction term between proportion uninsured in 2002-2005 and post-period dummy variable. All
regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, post, region by post fixed effects, and age by gender by
post fixed effects. Weighted regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05

35

Table 7
Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Mortality

Mortality

Weighted
Post 2006
Post 2007
-0.49
0.12
(0.68)
(0.66)

Unweighted
Post 2006 Post 2007
0.18
1.03
(0.76)
(0.71)

Weighted Mean 2002-05 = 31.01
Observations
192
192
192
192
Notes: Unit of observation is the period-age-gender-region cell. The instrument for proportion insured is
the interaction term between proportion uninsured in 2002-2005 and post-period dummy variable. All
regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, post, region by post fixed effects, and age by gender by
post fixed effects. Weighted regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05

36

Appendix Table 1
Difference-in-differences Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Admissions, 2002 to 2009 Including 2006
AMI

Joint
F-Test

CHF

Interactions Proportion Uninsured in 02-05 and Year
0.61 (0.89)
-1.08 (1.22)
2003
1.81 (0.89)**
2.96
-0.29 (1.22)
2004
-0.74 (0.89)
0.03**
-1.43 (1.23)
2005
0.56 (0.90)
-1.44 (1.24)
2006
-0.30 (0.91)
-1.92 (1.25)
2007
-0.36 (0.91)
0.32
-2.18 (1.25)*
2008
0.12
(0.91)
0.86
-3.42
(1.26)**
2009
Reduced Form Estimate
-0.43 (0.50)
-1.59 (0.85)*
2006-09
Mean 02-05

7.79

COPD

Joint
F-Test

0.59
0.62

1.95
0.10*

10.36

Joint
DehyF-Test
dration
Interactions Proportion Uninsured in 02-05 and Year
-0.99 (1.03)
0.16 (0.66)
2003
-0.49
(1.03)
0.55
0.23 (0.66)
2004
-1.21 (1.04)
0.65
0.14 (0.66)
2005
-2.16 (1.04)**
-0.89 (0.67)
2006
-2.13 (1.05)**
0.05 (0.67)
2007
-3.57 (1.06)**
3.25
-1.29 (0.67)*
2008
-2.92 (1.06)**
0.01**
-0.79 (0.68)
2009
Reduced Form Estimate
-1.96 (0.68)**
-0.83 (0.38)**
2006-09

Joint
F-Test

0.04
0.99

1.50
0.20

Atherosclerosis

-0.62 (1.57)
-0.48 (1.57)
1.16 (1.58)
-0.47 (1.59)
-1.18 (1.60)
-3.01 (1.61)*
-2.85 (1.62)*

Joint
F-Test

0.53
0.66

1.44
0.22

Stroke

0.03 (0.82)
-1.30 (0.82)
0.01 (0.82)
0.24 (0.83)
-0.12 (0.84)
0.27 (0.84)
-1.14 (0.84)

Joint
F-test

1.29
0.28

0.92
0.45

Cardiac
Dysrhythmias
-1.68 (1.15)
0.30 (1.15)
0.05 (1.15)
-0.58 (1.16)
-0.59 (1.17)
-0.55 (1.18)
-2.03 (1.18)*

Joint
F-Test

1.26
0.29

0.81
0.52

Pneum.

0.10 (1.04)
-0.38 (1.04)
1.79 (1.04)*
1.48 (1.05)
-0.38 (1.06)
1.36 (1.07)
-0.77 (1.07)

-1.92 (1.16)

0.12 (0.49)

-0.50 (0.70)

0.16 (0.63)

18.34

6.06

11.42

9.78

Osteoarthritis
-1.28 (1.39)
-2.05 (1.39)
-1.06 (1.39)
-1.37 (1.41)
-0.78 (1.42)
-0.41 (1.42)
-2.18 (1.43)
-0.15 (0.94)

Joint
F-Test

0.74
0.53

0.71
0.59

UTI

-0.23 (0.71)
0.20 (0.72)
0.06 (0.72)
0.46 (0.72)
0.10 (0.73)
0.58 (0.73)
-0.67 (0.74)
0.12 (0.50)

Joint
F-Test

0.12
0.95

0.87
0.48

Trauma

0.34 (1.34)
-0.88 (1.35)
-0.83 (1.35)
-0.80 (1.36)
-0.89 (1.38)
-0.48 (1.38)
-1.37 (1.39)
-0.50 (1.10)

Joint
F-Test

0.41
0.75

0.27
0.90

Joint
F-Test

Any Admit

-2.0 (8.3)
4.0 (8.3)
0.9 (8.4)
-6.8 (8.4)
-11.9 (8.5)
-21.7 (8.5)**
-22.1 (8.6)**

1.71
0.16

1.82
0.12

Joint
F-Test

0.18
0.91

2.50
0.04**

-16.2 (6.8)**

7.11
3.99
13.80
3.47
12.02
256.1
Mean 02-05
Notes: Unit of observation is the year-age-gender-region cell and there are 768 observations. All regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, year fixed
effects, region by year fixed effects, and age by gender by year fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05.

37

Appendix Table 2 Total Charge Amount
Difference-in-differences Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Expenditures
AMI

Joint
F-Test

CHF

Joint
F-Test

Interactions Proportion Uninsured in 02-05 and Year
-0.2 (56.4)
-27.2 (36.2)
2003
61.1 (56.5)
0.74
13.0 (36.3)
0.55
2004
-17.4 (56.7)
0.53
-22.9 (36.4)
0.65
2005
-20.2 (57.7)
-16.9 (37.1)
2007
-13.1 (58.0)
0.12
-57.5 (37.2)
2.61
2008
12.9 (58.1)
0.95
-95.5 (37.3)**
0.05**
2009
Reduced Form Estimate
-18.2 (33.0)
-46.3 (23.6)*
2007-09
Mean 02-05

328.7

COPD

177.0

Joint
DehyJoint
F-Test
dration
F-Test
Interactions Proportion Uninsured in 02-05 and Year
-42.4 (26.0)
4.7 (14.9)
2003
-7.2 (26.0)
1.38
11.0 (14.9)
0.19
2004
-38.7
(26.1)
0.25
7.0
(15.0)
0.90
2005
-59.5 (26.6)**
7.3 (15.2)
2007
-68.0 (26.7)**
2.69
-32.5 (15.3)**
2.55
2008
-53.1 (26.7)**
0.05**
-13.2 (15.4)
0.06*
2009
Reduced Form Estimate
-39.7 (16.9)**
-17.4 (8.7)*
2007-09

Atherosclerosis

-75.9 (86.6)
-57.7 (86.7)
18.0 (87.0)
-64.7 (88.6)
-145.2 (89.0)
-93.4 (89.2)

Joint
F-Test

0.54
0.66
0.93
0.43

Stroke

-5.8 (36.5)
-16.6 (36.5)
-12.7 (36.7)
-4.2 (37.3)
-2.1 (37.5)
-57.4 (37.6)

Joint
F-test

0.08
0.97
1.06
0.37

Cardiac
Dysrhythmias
-69.0 (47.5)
-10.9 (47.6)
38.3 (47.7)
19.1 (48.6)
-5.0 (48.8)
-52.0 (49.0)

Joint
F-Test

1.74
0.16
0.74
0.53

Pneum.

22.9 (32.2)
46.9 (32.2)
75.2 (32.4)**
8.6 (32.9)
48.2 (33.1)
-21.9 (33.2)

-69.9 (60.3)

-15.0 (22.4)

-4.0 (30.7)

-17.8 (21.1)

671.6

135.2

259.4

163.4

Osteoarthritis
-19.9 (61.5)
-36.4 (61.6)
2.6 (61.8)
17.9 (62.9)
61.6 (63.2)
-30.9 (63.4)
27.1 (50.5)

Joint
F-Test

0.18
0.91
0.73
0.54

UTI

2.9 (17.3)
20.3 (17.3)
7.1 (17.4)
9.4 (17.7)
35.3 (17.8)**
7.9 (17.8)
9.1 (14.0)

Joint
F-Test

0.54
0.66
1.46
0.22

Trauma

-3.3 (57.4)
-8.1 (57.5)
-9.2 (57.7)
-46.8 (58.7)
-59.1 (59.0)
-73.7 (59.2)
-58.9 (46.9)

Joint
F-Test

0.01
0.99
0.59
0.62

Joint
F-Test

Any
Admit

1.99
0.11
1.52
0.21

Joint
F-Test

-145 (369)
464 (369)
80 (370)
-304 (377)
-659 (379)*
-756 (380)**

0.99
0.40
1.67
0.17

-694 (336)**

107.0
50.6
413.1
45.3
280.8
6078
Mean 02-05
Notes: Unit of observation is the year-age-gender-region cell and there are 672 observations. All regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, year fixed
effects, region by year fixed effects, and age by gender by year fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05.

38

Appendix Table 3 Total Charge Amount
Placebo Tests: Reduced Form Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Hospital Expenditures
AMI

CHF

Atherosclerosis

Stroke

Pneum.

COPD

Dehydration

Osteoarthritis

UTI

Trauma

Any
Admit

-9.0
(21.3)

Cardiac
Dysrhythmias
47.2
(28.3)*

Placebo Reduced Form

21.0
(34.4)

4.0
(29.6)

13.4
(55.7)

44.4
(18.3)**

2.8
(18.4)

4.8
(10.2)

-5.2
(36.9)

12.0
(10.2)

1.2
(41.4)

336.8
(225.0)

Actual Reduced Form

-18.2
(33.0)

-46.3
(23.6)*

-69.9
(60.3)

-15.0
(22.4)

-4.0
(30.7)

-17.8
(21.1)

-39.7
(16.9)**

-17.4
(8.7)*

27.1
(50.5)

9.1
(14.0)

-58.9
(46.9)

-694
(336)**

328.7
177.0
671.6
135.2
259.4
163.4
107.0
50.6
413.1
45.3
280.8
6078
Weighted Mean 02-05
Observations
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
Notes: Unit of observation is the period-age-gender-region cell. For the placebo test, the pre-period is 2002-2003 and the post period is 2004-2005. All
regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, post, region by post fixed effects, and age by gender by post fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by cell
size. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05

39

Appendix Table 4
Difference-in-differences Estimates of the Effect of Prescription Drug Insurance on Mortality
Mortality
Interactions Proportion Uninsured in 02-05 and Year
2003
-2.34 (1.69)
2004
-1.92 (1.69)
2005
0.80 (1.70)
2007
-0.23 (1.73)
2008
-1.58 (1.74)
2009
-0.28 (1.74)
Reduced Form Estimate
2007-09
0.11 (1.02)
Mean 02-05

Joint
F-Test

1.58
0.19
0.33
0.80

31.01

Notes: Unit of observation is the year-age-gender-region cell and there are 672 observations. All regressions include HMO share, cell fixed effects, year fixed
effects, region by year fixed effects, and age by gender by year fixed effects. All regressions are weighted by cell size. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.*
p<0.10, ** p<0.05

40

