NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOAN PROSPECTING AND THE LOSS OF SOFT INFORMATION
Sumit Agarwal
Itzhak Ben-David
Working Paper 19945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19945

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2014, Revised July 2017

Previously circulated as "Do Loan Officers' Incentives Lead to Lax Lending Standards?" We are
grateful to Tobias Berg, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Harrison Hong, Naveen Khanna, Jose
Liberti, Evgeny Lyandres, Mitchell Petersen, Rich Rosen, Kasper Roszbach, Antoinette Schoar,
Amit Seru, René Stulz, Greg Udell, and Luigi Zingales for helpful comments. We wish to thank
seminar participants at the University of California at Berkeley, FIRS 2012, the Fisher College of
Business at The Ohio State University, the School of Public Affairs at The Ohio State University,
the National University of Singapore, the NBER Behavioral Economics meeting, the NBER Risk
of Financial Institutions meeting, the SIFR Conference on Real Estate and Mortgage Finance
(Stockholm), Indiana University, the University of Maryland, the Tel-Aviv University Finance
Conference, Dartmouth University, the University of Florida, the Wharton School of Business,
New York University, Cornell University, the CEPR EBC Conference, the Western Finance
Association meetings, the American Finance Association meetings, the ABFER Conference in
Singapore, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sumit Agarwal and Itzhak Ben-David. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Loan Prospecting and the Loss of Soft Information
Sumit Agarwal and Itzhak Ben-David
NBER Working Paper No. 19945
February 2014, Revised July 2017
JEL No. G01,G21
ABSTRACT
We study a controlled experiment in which a bank’s loan officers were incentivized based on
originated loan volume to encourage prospecting for new business. While treated loan officers
did attract new applications, both extensive and intensive margins of loan origination expanded
(+31% new loans; loan size +15%). We find that loan officers gave greater weight to hard
information in approval decisions. Despite no change in the observable characteristics of
approved loans, their default rate increased (+24%). Finally, the bank’s imputed credit-default
model lost its predictive power. Overall, loan-prospecting incentives led to unfavorable soft
information being overlooked in the origination process.

Sumit Agarwal
McDonough School of Business
Room 427
Georgetown University
3700 O Street NW
Washington, DC 20057
ushakri@yahoo.com
Itzhak Ben-David
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

1.

Introduction
In many financial institutions, loan officers are expected to source new loans (“loan

prospecting”) in addition to their traditional role of screening applications. Loan screening is a
passive role that involves analyzing the risk of existing applications. By contrast, loan prospecting
is an active role that requires loan officers to act as salespersons: they actively promote the bank’s
loan products. Banks typically reward loan officers for their efforts with a bonus that depends on
the volume of originated loans (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2012).
Previous studies have proposed that expanding the scope of the loan officer’s job may
affect a bank’s loan-origination process. Heider and Inderst (2012) study the theoretical effects of
compensation for loan prospecting. In equilibrium, the increased competition in the credit market
leads banks to rely primarily on hard information when approving loans. Because critical soft
information is ignored, the quantity of approved loans increases but their quality declines. In a
related study, Cole, Kanz, and Klapper (2015) investigate the effects of variable compensation on
loan officers’ approval decisions. They use an experimental setting implemented with a group of
loan officers at a commercial bank in India, which allows them to study loan-approval patterns in
response to different incentive schemes. They find that when origination volume is rewarded, loan
officers are more likely to approve applications, and loan quality declines. Although these studies
provide a broad view on the relation between compensation and the volume and quality of loans,
we have no empirical evidence showing how loan prospecting affects the approval process.
In this study, we provide novel empirical findings about how loan prospecting transforms
the bank’s use of hard and soft information and the characteristics of its book of business. We
analyze a controlled experiment conducted in the small business unit of one of the largest U.S.
commercial banks (“the Bank”). Following competitive pressures in the industry, the Bank’s
1

management decided to expand the scope of about half of its loan officers’ jobs to include loanprospecting activities, whereas the other half of the loan officers maintained a narrower scope of
screening activities only. As in Bénabou and Tirole’s (2016) “bonus culture” economy, loan
officers who were assigned to the loan-prospecting group were compensated with bonuses that
were based primarily on loan dollar volume. Our data include detailed information on both loan
applications and approved loans, which allows us to study the approval process in great detail.
The pilot program we study took place in 2005. For many years, loan officers in the Bank
focused on screening loans, and their compensation was based on a fixed salary. With the credit
expansion of the early 2000s, the Bank’s management decided in 2004 to encourage loan officers
to seek new business, and to compensate them according to loan volume. This compensation
arrangement was a common practice in the banking industry at the time (U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics 2012). The pilot for the program was implemented the following year in the Bank’s New
England division for about half of the loan officers. The assignment of loan officers to their groups
was determined by the legacy human resources computer system to which they belonged; loan
officers could not switch between systems. Although loan officers’ assignment was not random,
we show that no significant difference existed in any attribute of applications or approved loans in
the year preceding the experiment. Our data set contains loan details for more than 30,000 small
business loan applications processed by more than 130 loan officers during the 24-month window
around the change in the job scope of loan officers. We use a difference-in-differences design and
within-loan-officer variation to detect causal effects of loan-prospecting incentives on the approval
process.
The loan-prospecting program resulted in an expansion of 31% in the extensive margin
(new borrowers) and 15% in the intensive margin (larger loan amounts). We offer two hypotheses
2

for what led to this expansion. The first is that loan officers worked to seek new business and
therefore either increased the number of applications or increased their quality. Our tests, however,
detect no increase in the number of applications or any improvement in their characteristics. To
the detriment of the Bank’s management, loan officers did not source new applications by
accessing previously untapped pools of potential borrowers.
The second hypothesis is that the Bank changed the threshold at which credit was
advanced. A credit-approval decision involves two inputs: hard information (observable to the
econometrician) and soft information (unobservable) (Petersen 2004). In our analysis, we examine
both components. We detect no decline in the average credit quality as reflected by hard
information. In addition, the average internal risk rating (credit ranking assessed by loan officers)
and interest rates did not change.
We do find, however, significant evidence of a shift in the use of soft information. In
particular, although we do not observe a deterioration in the expected default rates (imputed using
observable information), we find the ex-post default rates of the treated group increased
significantly by 24%. In other words, applications were approved if they looked good on paper
(hard information), even though their soft information was not favorable. Both the expansion in
the extensive and intensive margins contributed to the increase in the likelihood of default. Hence,
ignoring critical soft information led to the lax credit approval.
Another important effect of the informational shift due to loan prospecting is the loss of
predictive power of the Bank’s imputed credit model. Whereas proxies of hard information (i.e.,
external credit scores) were good predictors of loans’ ex-post performance for the control sample,
they lost their predictive power for the treatment group. We observe a similar phenomenon when
we estimate a more elaborated predictive default model and apply it to both the control and
3

treatment groups. Why did ex-ante credit-quality variables lose their predictive power? We present
evidence suggesting these variables became obsolete because they were “fitted” over a historical
range of loan variables, such as amount. We show the imputed credit model still had good
predictive power for loans with amounts that fell in the “normative” range. By contrast, the relation
broke down for loans with amounts beyond this range. Because a credit model captures
correlations between default and loan characteristics for a specific range, loans outside that range
have different correlations the current model does not capture. This result is similar in spirit to
Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2015), who present evidence that the default models used in the residential
real estate industry lost predictive power with the move toward standardized underwriting.
In a final analysis, we explore the relation between loan-officer characteristics and
origination outcomes. We document that applications handled by more tenured loan officers and
by male loan officers were more likely to be approved. Also, conditional on approval, they were
approved for significantly larger loan amounts. We attribute these results to fewer career concerns
by tenured loan officers and by more competitive behavior by male loan officers. We also confirm
that these correlations translate into actual compensation that these loan officers received: indeed,
tenured loan officers and male loan officers receive larger compensation in the treatment group
but not in the control group.
Overall, our results show the loan-prospecting pilot did not expand the Bank’s reach to
previously untapped pools of potential borrowers. Instead, loan approval expanded on both the
extensive and intensive margins. The Bank relied more on hard information and less on soft
information, which led to ignoring critical credit information and to higher default rates. The
change in the information used in the approval process led also to a temporary breakdown in the
imputed predictive credit model of the bank.
4

This study contributes to several strands of the literature. The first strand relates to
incentives and moral hazard in banks. In particular, Udell (1989), Berger and Udell (2002), Inderst
(2008), and Heider and Inderst (2012) argue that when information asymmetry is present, loan
officers may approve too many risky loans if their incentives are misaligned with those of their
employer (the lender). An agency problem arises when the lending decision depends on
information collected by the loan officer that the lender can neither observe nor verify (Petersen
2004). Although realigning incentives can theoretically mitigate the problem (e.g., by giving loan
officers an equity stake in the transaction; see Sufi 2007), in practice, such realignment often does
not occur. More broadly, the experiment we analyze is an example of how compensation for shortrun performance can lead to an increase in the risk exposure of banks (Bebchuck and Spamann
2009; Acharya, Cooley, Richardson, and Walter 2010; Acharya, Litov, and Sepe 2013; Tzioumis
and Gee 2013).
This study also adds to the literature on information production in lending. Banks
traditionally use both hard and soft information in approval decisions (Petersen 2004; Agarwal,
Chomsisengphet, and Wang 2016). As physical distance between the bank and borrower increases,
banks rely more on hard information (Petersen and Rajan 2002, Agarwal and Hauswald 2010).
Finally, our study relates to the literature on the financial crisis of 2008. In particular, we
demonstrate the contribution of bonus-based loan-officer incentives to three phenomena that have
been documented previously. First, researchers have noted that in the early 2000s, the extensive
margin of mortgage lending expanded; that is, new borrowers with lower credit quality entered the
residential mortgage market (e.g., Mayer and Pence 2008). Second, several studies have found the
leverage ratio of mortgage borrowers increased; that is, the intensive margin expanded (e.g.,
Demyanyk and Van Hemert 2011). Third, researchers have proposed that during boom times,
5

lending criteria relax and loan officers ignore bad information, due to incentives or psychological
biases (e.g., Acharya and Naqvi 2012; Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2015; Thakor 2015).
Finally, researchers have noted that in the wake of the recession, imputed default models based on
historical defaults began to have poor predictive power going forward (Rajan, Seru, and Vig 2015).

2

The Loan-Approval Process and the Loan-Prospecting Experiment

2.1

The Loan-Approval Process
To better understand the impact of loan prospecting on the loan-approval process, one

needs to understand the approval process itself. The Bank’s branches offer retail services, and each
branch has a small number of loan officers (typically one per branch). The loan-application process
begins when a client—typically a small business owner—inquires about a potential business loan.
During our sample period, the Bank offered a standard product: a five-year amortizing adjustablerate mortgage. In most cases, the loan officer encourages the client to submit an application for
review on which the applicant states the requested amount, the collateral offered (either businessor self-owned collateral),1 and the purpose of the loan. The client also submits supporting
information such as financial and tax information, and a list of assets owned.
The loan officer, who relies on both hard and soft information, then processes the
application. The loan officer verifies the information provided by the borrower and gathers
additional data to assess the borrower’s creditworthiness and probability of repayment (e.g., the
borrower’s and business’s credit rating with an external credit agency, appraisal of the collateral).

Collateralized assets are typically accounts receivable (measured at their face value) or personal homes (measured
using an automatic valuation model (AVM)). Loan officers have little control over these valuations. Agarwal, BenDavid, and Yao (2015) show that AVM produces less biased valuations than human appraisers.

1

6

Then the loan officer conducts an in-depth interview with the client to understand why he or she
is applying for the loan, as well as potential risks and prospects for the client’s business. In some
cases, the branch will invite the applicant to follow up on open questions, review discrepancies in
credit-report information, discuss the prospects of the business, and so forth. Based on this
information, the loan officer determines an internal risk-rating score, which summarizes his or her
opinion of the potential borrower.2 Given the internal risk-rating score and additional information
such as leverage and requested loan size, the computer system provides broad guidelines for the
terms of the loan.
Each loan officer enjoys considerable autonomy in the assessment, approval, and pricing
of loans but has to justify any deviation from bank-wide practices. The loan officer can also adjust
the firm’s internal score should the applicant deserve credit in the officer’s opinion despite failing
to meet certain credit-score requirements. These subjective score revisions represent the softinformation component of the Bank’s internal credit assessment (see Agarwal and Hauswald
2011).
The local branches’ credit committees, which are composed of the branch manager3 and
the loan officer(s),4 make the credit decisions. They sketch the terms of the loan according to the
Bank’s lending guidelines and restrictions and can tailor those terms (including pricing) to the
specific circumstances of the application (the Bank’s risk-management staff closely monitor local
overrides). Upon approval by the credit committee, the loan officer prepares an offer letter for the

The Bank’s lending process resembles that described in Petersen (2004), Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein
(2005), and Agarwal and Hauswald (2010). The Bank makes a limited attempt to code soft information, thereby
transforming it into hard information.
3
The branch managers’ career prospects and remuneration are not tied to the compensation of loan officers but rather
depend on the success of their credit decisions.
4
Liberti and Mian (2009) find that greater hierarchical distance between the loan officers and the credit committee
leads to greater reliance on hard information. The hierarchy did not change during the pilot experiment explored here.
2

7

client with the details of the loan. Unlike residential loans, for which the lender approves or rejects
the requested amount, commercial loans can be approved with an amount smaller or larger than
that requested, subject to additional collateral.
Once an offer letter is received, the client may accept the loan, negotiate the terms, or
withdraw the application. In 2004, the Bank approved 43% of loan applications and rejected the
rest. Of the 43%, only 31% were originated, because 12% were withdrawn by applicants. All
originated small business loans were kept on the Bank’s balance sheet; none were sold or
securitized. The entire lending process, including the credit decision, typically takes several weeks
from the initial loan interview.
The loan officer does not have monitoring responsibilities over the loan. During the life of
the loan, the risk-management department monitors the loan. On the anniversary of the loan’s
origination, the borrower meets with the loan officer to discuss the business’s prospects and the
potential need for additional financing.

2.2

The Loan-Prospecting Pilot
In 2004, the management of the New England division of a large U.S. commercial bank,5

motivated by competitive pressure from other lenders, decided to explore a set of incentives for
small business loan officers to increase loan-prospecting efforts (consistent with the “bonus
culture” model of Bénabou and Tirole 2016). Other lenders in the area had initiated performancebased compensation, and the management thought introducing such a payment structure would

During the sample period, this lender ranked among the top five commercial banks and savings institutions, according
to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. All loan applications fall under the definition of small- and mediumsized enterprise lending in the Basel I Accord; thus, the total obligation of the applying firms is less than $1 million
and their sales are below $10 million.
5

8

improve the profitability of the unit. The program altered the compensation scheme from a fixed
salary to a commission-based system. Under the proposed program, loan officers would receive a
lower fixed salary (80% of their original salary) and a bonus that increased with the originated
volume and origination efficiency. The Bank intended to implement the commission-based scheme
for the entire portfolio of loan officers in stages to allow for evaluation of the effects of the new
system. The pilot program was announced around June 2004.
The bonus system worked as follows. The loan officers were given a performanceevaluation formula. The performance metric was based on three components: originated dollar
amount (50% weight), number of loans (25% weight), and the application decision time (25%
weight). Loan officers gained points on large loans, high origination volume, and quick decision
turnaround. This three-pronged compensation structure forced the loan officer to generate loan
volume efficiently and put more focus on larger loans. The incentive plan came with a quality
assessment. For loan officers to be eligible to participate in the incentive program, their total of
unsatisfactory underwriting could not exceed 5% of total approvals, assessed in a post-approval
review process.
In the first stage, beginning in January 2005, the new scheme was put into action in a subset
of branches that administered their human resources through one of the Bank’s legacy databases.
The Bank had evolved through several mergers and acquisitions, the most recent of which took
place in mid-2001. Since then, the Bank had maintained two legacy computer systems that were
used in administering human resources and compensation information. The incentive pilot,
therefore, was implemented in one computer system (of the acquiring bank) and applied to all loan
officers who were connected to that system. The remaining loan officers continued with their old
compensation structure. Loan officers were not allowed to switch between the two systems. We
9

call the group of branches that did not change their compensation structure Group A, and the group
that experienced the compensation modification Group B.
The assignment of loan officers to each of the databases was quasi-random in the sense
that it was unrelated to past performance or the prospects of loans or loan officers. Hence, the
portfolio of loan applications the two groups of loan officers received have identical expected
default rates, geographic focus, portfolio-management practices, and loss outcomes prior to the
modification of the compensation structure. We formally test this proposition in section 3.3.
In such an experiment, loan officers might behave strategically. For example, they could
approve bad loans so that management will retract the bonus-based compensation scheme.
Although this behavior is theoretically possible, we doubt our results stem from such behavior.
First, treated loan officers were located in different branches across different localities, and
therefore are not likely to have colluded. Second, during informal conversations with loan officers
and management, loan officers seemed enthusiastic about the new bonus system because it moved
them closer to the compensation scheme that was prevalent in many of the competing banks. In
section 3.4, we discuss additional potential Hawthorne effects.
The complete implementation of the commission-based scheme was supposed to take place
in 2006; however, the program was discontinued prematurely. The risk-management division was
monitoring this pilot on a monthly basis. At the beginning of 2006, the division advised the
management that default rates were higher than expected and it therefore recommended abolishing
the incentive program. The Bank’s management decided to roll back the compensation structure
to a fixed salary for all loan officers, as in the pre-2005 period.

10

3

Data and Identification
Our data set contains all loan applications submitted to the New England division of the

Bank in 2004 and 2005. Loan officer–years that were compensated with a fixed salary are defined
as the control group. This group includes loan officer–years with compensation that did not change
between 2004 and 2005 (Group A), as well as loan officer–months in 2004 from the group whose
pay was altered in 2005 (Group B). The treatment group consists of loan officer–years in Group B
in 2005, that is, loan officer–years with pay in 2005 that was based on the volume originated.
Unfortunately, we do not have access to loan applications made following the pilot in 2006.

3.1

Empirical Identification
In our empirical setting, the change in the scope of activities and compensation structure

applied to only one group of loan officers, whereas the other group continued to operate as before
and to be compensated at a fixed salary. The fact that the change occurred in one half of the
population allows us to identify the effect of compensation using a difference-in-differences (diffin-diffs) approach. In this method, one uses time fixed effects to control for any temporal
systematic shocks and loan-officer fixed effects to control for loan-officer average effects.6 Then
the interaction between the treatment time (the 2005 dummy in our case) and the treatment group
dummy (the group of loan officers who received incentive pay in 2005) captures the direct effect
of the treatment (called the “loan-prospecting” dummy in our analysis).
For the effect of the scope of activities to be properly identified based on the diff-in-diffs
setting, we need to ensure no confounding factors are present in the research design. In the current
Given that we have loan-officer fixed effects and that borrowers are typically from the county where the branch is
located, we do not include additional geographic fixed effects.

6

11

study, we are concerned with two issues. The first is the possibility that the assignment to treatment
and control groups was not random. Perhaps the group that was assigned to the treatment was
different from the untreated group in some ways. Our conversations with the team responsible for
the program’s implementation confirmed the only active consideration in choosing the group to be
treated was the ease with which the new scheme could be implemented in the computer system.
Furthermore, we use the pre-experiment period (2004) to compare a host of variables related to
both applications and credit decisions in the two groups. Our results show no significant difference
in any of the variables we explore. The detailed analysis is described in section 3.3.
Another concern is that the emphasis on prospecting is confounded with additional changes
to the lending process. Specifically, the expansion in the scope of the loan-officer role could be
tied to a change in the underwriting model; for example, instead of the Bank holding the loans on
its balance sheet, it may decide to start securitizing them. Such action might encourage loan
officers to approve loans of lower credit quality (see Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig 2010). We
discussed this possibility in depth with the managers of the program and were assured no additional
structural changes in the lending process occurred in parallel with the implementation of the pilot
program. A different form of this concern relates to the expected default rate. The Bank’s
management might have decided to lower the bar and thus accept applications with higher expected
default rates. We test for this possibility in Table 4 (see section 5). Our results show the imputed
expected default remained unchanged.
To summarize, we conclude that the diff-in-diffs identification strategy is appropriate for
studying the effects of loan prospecting on the behavior of loan officers. Our identification is
particularly strong because we control for loan-officer fixed effects, meaning the effects we
identify are within–loan-officer effects.
12

3.2

Summary Statistics
We begin our analysis by examining the summary statistics. Because of the large effects

and the diff-in-diffs research design, many of the effects reported in the paper can be observed
directly through the summary statistics. We split the data into a two-by-two matrix: 2004 versus
2005 and Group A versus Group B. The treatment group consists of loan officers from Group B
in 2005. The control group consists of loan officers from Group A in 2004 and 2005, as well as
loan officers from Group B in 2004.
The summary statistics for loan applications and originated loans are presented separately.
In Table 1, Panel A, we show summary statistics for loan applications (all variables are explained
in Appendix A). Requested loan amounts are approximately $445,000. About 26% of the
applicants propose using personal collateral (typically personal residence). Applicants are, on
average, of high credit quality, with an average business Experian credit score of around 198 (out
of a range of 100 to 250) and a personal Experian credit score around 728 (out of a range of 400
to 850). The average internal risk rating (determined by loan officers) is 5.8 (on a 1–10 range,
where 10 = very high risk).
The summary statistics in Table 1, Panels A and B, reveal sharp differences between the
control and treatment groups in regard to approved and originated loans. First, the approval rate is
44%–51% for the control group but is 59% for the treatment group (Panel A). Second, the
originated loan amount is 20% higher for the treatment group. Third, the leverage of the loans
originated by treated loan officers (i.e., originated LTV) is substantially higher than that of those
originated by the control group: 77% versus 75%. Fourth, even though the borrowers’ average
credit score is higher for the treated group, the default rate—measured as 90+ days past due within

13

12 months—is materially higher for the treatment groups (5.2 percentage points vs. 4.2 percentage
points). In the following subsections, we investigate these patterns in a diff-in-diffs setting.
Table 1, Panel C, presents summary statistics at the loan officer–month level for items in
the regressions that use aggregate data (Table 3, Panel A, and Table 2, Panel A).

3.3

Validating the Diff-in-Diffs Design
The assignment of loan officers to treatment and control in 2005 was based on their

association with the legacy or new human resources system. To draw conclusions from the
experiment, we need to verify that the assignment of loan officers was not associated with the
quality of the applications pretreatment or with the decisions loan officers made pretreatment.
We compare the characteristics of loan applications and originated loans of the control and
treatment groups in 2004, prior to the initiation of the incentive program. Appendix B, Panel A,
compares the control group and the to-be-treated group on several dimensions: the requested loan
size, requested LTV, personal collateral indicator, Experian business credit score, Experian
personal credit score, internal risk rating, time spent on applications, and withdrawal rate of
approved applications. The panel shows the conditional means of these variables are statistically
indistinguishable between the two groups. Panel B of Appendix B displays the results of a similar
test for the subset of originated loans, instead of applications, in 2004. The difference between
requested and originated logged loan sizes as well as between requested and originated LTV,
interest rate,7 Experian business credit score, Experian personal credit score, and internal risk

All loans are adjustable-rate loans. This fact should not be a concern, because all regressions include month fixed
effects.

7

14

rating are similar across groups. We intentionally omit loan-officer fixed effects from the
regressions; when we add these effects, the variables of interest remain statistically insignificant.
Overall, these results show no observable difference between the control and treatment
groups in 2004; therefore, we feel confident attributing the effects in the treated group in 2005 to
loan prospecting rather than to differences between the groups.

3.4

Potential Hawthorne Effects
The loan officers who participated in the pilot knew they were observed. This fact could

lead to potential Hawthorne effects (“observer effects”): participants reacting in a particular way
because they are being observed. Two effects are possible. First, the actions of loan officers may
have been exaggerated because the pilot was salient and new. The loan officers’ reactions may
have decayed over time, and thus our results are only an upper bound of the true results of the
experiment. To assess whether indeed there is a change in the magnitude of the effect over time,
we examine Figures 1 and 2. Figure 1 shows the average of the residual likelihood of approving
loans, by month.8 Figure 2 presents the average loan size, by month. Both figures show no decay
or trend in the magnitude of the effects during the first 12 months after the pilot was implemented.
The second potential effect is that loan officers could have behaved strategically to sway
the management to reach conclusions in one direction or another. To assess whether our results
are the effect of such behavior, we analyze the potential response of loan officers to the pilot. We
assume the objective of loan officers was to minimize effort and maximize personal earnings. To
do so, they would have milked the existing pool of applications in a way that (1) satisfied the

8

See section 5 for a complete description of the procedure generating this figure.

15

Bank’s credit criteria and (2) did not require much additional work. If indeed loan officers behaved
strategically, we can envision two potential cases, which lead to predictable patterns.
In the first case, loan officers may have liked the new compensation scheme and therefore
acted strategically so that the pilot would succeed and the program would be approved. In this
case, we would expect the loan officers to exert effort to bring new business to the bank (i.e., seek
new applications). Also, they would have been diligent in the approval process, so that quality
would not decline.
In the second case, loan officers did not like the new compensation scheme and acted
strategically so that the pilot would fail. In this case, the loan officers would have acted to show
the incentives did not work and that loan volume did not increase. Thus, the treated group would
have continued to act as before.
Now, let us contrast these predictions with what we observe in the data. First, we observe
no significant change in the behavior of the control group. Second, the behavior of the treated
group appears to be consistent with a “minimum effort and maximum compensation” strategy; that
is, loan officers did not seek new applications and the quality of the approved applications declined
(inconsistent with the first case above). Also, their actions did lead to a significant increase in loan
volume (inconsistent with the second case above).
Thus, our findings seem to be inconsistent with loan officers behaving in a reasonably
strategic manner. We observe that compensation levels increased with little evidence of additional
effort by loan officers. Specifically, we do not find evidence that the size of the application pool
increased, that is, no application sourcing from previously untapped pools. Loan officers increased
loan volume by using the easiest-to-execute methods: (1) ignoring negative soft information, and
(2) conditional on approval, approving larger loans.
16

4

Direct Effects of Loan Prospecting
We begin the analysis by diagnosing the first-order effects of loan prospecting. In

particular, we are interested in how the program affected the flow of applications, extensive margin
(approval rate), internal margin (loan size), and turnaround time. In all these dimensions, loan
officers could have an effect given their expanded job description and pecuniary incentives. Also,
the Bank’s management is likely to use these dimensions to measure the program’s success.

4.1

Flow of Applications
The objective of the pilot was to incentivize loan officers to seek new business; hence, they

might have improved the quantity or quality of the application flow. Loan officers could have
made such improvements in several ways. For example, they could have convinced the Bank’s
customers to apply for loans. They could have attracted loan applicants from other banks, for
example, by raising awareness about the Bank’s products and the quality of service. Finally, they
could have improved the quality of the application flow by discouraging weak potential applicants
from submitting applications (to save time down the line) and by encouraging strong but hesitant
potential applicants to apply.
We perform three tests that explore whether the loan-prospecting experiment had an effect
on the flow of applications. First, we test for a difference in the quantity of applications. In Table
2, Panel A, we analyze whether the application volume is statistically indistinguishable between
the treatment and control groups. For each loan officer–month, we calculate the average requested
loan amount across applications and count the number of applications. We regress the logged
amount on an indicator of whether the loan officer is prospecting for loans. The results show that

17

although the coefficients are positive for the average requested loan amount (an increase of up to
1.9%) and the number of applications (an increase of up to 0.7%), the effects are economically and
statistically insignificant.
Second, we examine whether the quality of the applications is higher for the treatment
group. To do so, we regress loan characteristics (requested amount, requested LTV, personal
collateral, credit scores, and internal risk rating) on the loan-prospecting dummy. The results,
presented in Table 2, Panel B, show no statistically significant difference in the quality of the
applications between the two groups.
Finally, we test whether treated loan officers attracted applications that were more likely
to be approved. To do so, we use pre-experiment (2004) data to estimate a model of loan approval
as a function of application characteristics. Then we predict the likelihood of approval for each
application in 2005 and test whether the treated group has loans that are more likely to be approved.
We present the results in Table 2, Panel C, which indicates no significant difference in the ex-ante
likelihood of approval in the treatment group.
Overall, the findings in Table 2 indicate prospecting loan officers did not attract new
applications to the Bank, nor did they improve the quality of the applications the Bank received.

4.2

Effects on the Extensive Margin
The Bank’s goal in proposing the loan-prospecting pilot was to increase the originated

volume and to compete more forcefully in the credit market. We examine the effects of the loanprospecting program on the extensive margin in Table 3, Panel A, columns (1) to (4). The
examined unit is loan officer–month, the dependent variable is the logged number of loans in a
18

month, per loan officer, and the variable of interest is the loan-prospecting dummy. The results
show the number of loans approved and originated increased by about 31% in the post-period,
when both calendar-month fixed effects and loan-officer fixed effects are included (columns (2)
and (4)).
We also present this effect in a graphical form. Figure 1 plots the residuals from a
regression of an application-approval dummy on controls and fixed effects for month, loan
officers, and industry (see Appendix C). We estimate the regression model using the control groups
in 2004 and 2005 only, and calculate the residuals for both the control and treatment groups for
2004 and 2005. The plot shows the observed characteristics do not explain the high approval rate
in the treatment group and that the dramatic increase occurred immediately after the pilot began.

4.3

Effects on the Intensive Margin
Next, we examine the intensive margin (loan amounts). In Table 3, Panel A, columns (5)

to (8), we regress the average logged loan size per loan officer–month on the loan-prospecting
dummy. The regressions show that for both the approved and originated loans, loan amounts
increased by about 15% (columns (6) and (8)). In fact, approved loan amounts in the treatment
group were often larger than the amounts applicants requested. Table 1, Panel B, shows that in the
treatment group, 17.4% of the approved amounts are larger than the amount originally requested,
compared with about 3.5% in the control group.
Figure 2 plots the average approved loan size over time. The chart shows the average loan
size increased around the beginning of 2005 in the treatment group and remained constant

19

throughout the year, supporting the idea that the change in loan size is a direct effect of loan
prospecting.

4.4

Additional Effects: Turnaround Time and Withdrawal Rate
The Bank was also interested in shortening turnaround times to help improve the quality

of service. To measure whether the program indeed improved turnaround times, we measure the
time from application to decision for two samples: all applications and approved applications. The
dependent variable is the time from the application date to the decision date, measured in months
(or month fractions). The variable of interest is an indicator for whether the application was
submitted to a treated loan officer. The independent variables include the following controls:
Experian business score, Experian personal score, logged requested loan amount, an indicator for
whether personal collateral was used, the requested LTV, and the requested LTV-squared.
The results of the analysis, presented in Table 3, Panel B, columns (1) to (4), show
turnaround time indeed declined for the treated group in 2005. For all applications, the average
turnaround times declined by about three days in the treated group (about 40 days in the control
group; see Table 1, Panel A). The decline in turnaround time is similar for the group of approved
applications.
We also explore the effect of loan prospecting on the rate of withdrawal of approved
applications. In Table 3, Panel B, columns (5) and (6), we use the sample of approved applications
and regress a withdrawal indicator on the treatment indicator and the usual controls. The results
show the withdrawal rate declines by 6.8% (column (6)), relative to a rate of about 13% in the
control (Table 1, Panel A). This effect is potentially due to a combination of factors: a greater

20

effort by loan officers to convince hesitant applicants to sign on the dotted line, improvement in
processing efficiency, and more aggressive loan terms.

5

Loan Prospecting and Information Processing
The fact that the pool of applications did not change in a material fashion, and yet credit

provision expanded on both the extensive and intensive margins, suggests the Bank changed its
risk tolerance (potentially inadvertently). One likely channel for this effect is through the
information used to approve loan applications. In general, two types of information drive loanapproval decisions: hard information (which is observable) and soft information (which is
unobservable) (Petersen 2004). Loan prospecting might have caused a change in how the Bank
processes the different types of information.

5.1

Hard Information Used in Approving Applications
In a first set of tests, we explore whether the observable characteristics of approved

applications are different across the two groups. To do so, we compare observable characteristics
between the treatment and control group in the post-period, including the variables of interest:
Experian business score, Experian personal score, internal risk rating, and interest rate. In the
empirical specification, we restrict the sample to approved applications only and regress the
variables of interest on the loan-prospecting dummy, in addition to logged approved loan amount,
a personal-collateral indicator, approved LTV, and approved LTV-squared.
The results in Table 4, Panel A, show that approved applications in the control and
treatment groups have statistically indistinguishable credit characteristics. Furthermore, they were
21

charged indistinguishable interest rates, conditional on observable risk characteristics. This finding
means that, observationally, loans in the control and the treatment groups have similar
characteristics.
Next, we examine the relative importance of hard information in the approval decisions of
the treatment and control groups. In Table 4, Panel B, we regress the approval indicator for all
applications on interactions of loan prospecting and credit scores—both external and internal.
Columns (1) and (2) present the base regressions, showing the applications were about 8% more
likely to be approved under the treatment. In columns (3) to (6), we interact the loan-prospecting
dummy with both hard-information measures (Experian business and personal scores) and a softinformation measure (internal risk rating).
The results show the weight on hard information (i.e., external credit scores) is greater for
the treatment group. Explicitly, the weight of external information is nearly double for the
treatment group relative to the control group (column (6)). By contrast, the weight on soft
information (proxied by internal risk rating) declines for the loan-prospecting group (recall that
the internal risk rating has high values for applications with poor credit quality). The weight of the
internal risk ratings in the treatment group is 67% lower than that of the control group ((0.016–
0.024) = –0.008 in the treatment relative to –0.024 in the control). Given that the standard error on
the coefficient of the internal risk rating is in the vicinity of 0.010, this weight of soft information
in the treatment group is not statistically different from zero.
We deepen the analysis and explore whether an imputed credit-default model based on
observable characteristics would detect an increase in the risk the bank takes. First, we investigate
whether the imputed ex-ante credit quality for approved applications is the same in the treatment
and control groups. We compute the imputed ex-ante credit quality as the likelihood of default
22

based on a predictive regression of actual default on observable characteristics using 2004 data. In
this regression, we predict default using the following characteristics: logged requested amount, a
dummy for personal collateral, Experian business score, Experian personal score, requested LTV,
and requested LTV-squared. In addition, we control for loan-officer and industry fixed effects.
Next, we use the default predictions (based on the 2004 data) in the 2005 segment of the data and
compare the predicted default probability of applications that were approved in the treatment and
control groups in 2005.
The results are presented in Table 4, Panel C. We first assess how the predicted default
probability affects the likelihood of approval, loan size, and interest rate. In all regressions, the
main effect of the predicted default probability is statistically significant and with the right sign:
applications with a higher predicted default probability are less likely to be approved, their loan
size is smaller (if approved), and their interest rate is higher (if approved). Column (1) shows the
predicted default probability has the same impact on the likelihood of approval in the treatment
and in the control groups. By contrast, columns (2) and (3) present evidence that, conditional on
approval, the bank approved larger loan sizes to riskier borrowers, but also charged them higher
interest rates.
Overall, these results indicate hard information became more important in the loanapproval process. Furthermore, we find little evidence that the imputed ex-ante credit quality of
approved applications changed. Yet the loans originated under the treatment group have more
aggressive terms.

23

5.2

Downplaying Soft Information
Soft information is by definition unobservable; however, we can study its role in the

approval process by exploring the default rate and its drivers. In particular, we know hard
information became a prominent factor in approving applications and that observable quality of
approved applications did not deteriorate. Hence, no change occurs in soft information, we expect
the ex-post default rate to stay the same. However, if the ex-post default rate increases, we can
conclude soft information that was critical in screening out bad applications is no longer used.
In a first pass, we explore whether the loans treated loan officers originated defaulted more
frequently than those the control group originated. We measure loan performance as the default
rate, defined as a delinquency of 90 days or more within one year of loan origination. The default
rate in the control group is 4.2 percentage points in 2004–2005. In the treated group in 2005, it is
higher: 5.2 percentage points (Table 1, Panel B). To test whether the univariate difference is
statistically significant, we regress a default indicator on the loan-prospecting dummy in addition
to loan-officer, industry, and month fixed effects. The results in Table 5, columns (1) and (2), show
the default rate of the treated group is 1.2 percentage points higher (a 27.9% relative increase
compared with the base default rate of 4.3% for the control group in 2005). In columns (3) and (4),
we also control for the interest rates charged to the loans. This control should capture the Bank’s
imputed ex-ante risk. The coefficient on the loan-prospecting dummy remains virtually unchanged
with this additional control, suggesting the increase in the default rate is not priced in the originated
loans. Relative to the base default rate, the default rate is 27.9% higher for the treated group
following the implementation of the loan-prospecting program. The interest rates charged to loans
do not appear to capture the increased default risk.

24

In the next step, we explore the determinants of the increase in default. We focus the
analysis on variables that are correlated with the expansion in both the extensive and intensive
margins, that is, new borrowers and aggressive lending terms.
We begin by exploring how new borrowers affect the default rate. We measure the new
borrowers by estimating a residual from a regression of application approval on observable
characteristics using the 2004 data (see Appendix C). A large residual from the application
regression indicates a loan was not accepted based on the weights that were used to approve
applications in the 2004. Table 6, column (1), shows the base regression with the usual controls
and fixed effects: loan officer, industry, and month. As seen before, the treatment group’s default
rate is 1.3 percentage points higher. In column (2), we regress the default indicator on the residuals
from the approval regression as well as on controls and fixed effects. The regression shows that
although a high approval residual is associated with a higher default rate (the main effect of the
loan-approval residual), the correlation is more than doubled for loans in the treated group. Hence,
this result suggests new borrowers were partly responsible for the increase in default.
Next, we explore the role of the expansion in the intensive margin (larger loan amounts)
on the increase in the default rate. In Table 6, column (3), the variable of interest is the interaction
between the loan-prospecting group and an indicator for whether the loan amount was larger than
what the borrower originally requested. The regression shows that loans with amounts greater than
requested are 2.8 percentage points more likely to default under the control (0.028 is the coefficient
on the main effect) and 4.6 percentage points more likely under the treatment (= 0.028 + 0.018).
In column (4), we examine a variable that reflects abnormal LTV, computed as the residual from
a regression of logged LTV on loan characteristics, which is based on a sample that includes only
observations from the control group (see Appendix C). The regression in column (4) shows that
25

loans with high residuals—that is, LTV is unusually high relative to the control group—are
significantly more likely to default. The sensitivity of default to abnormal LTV is almost double
that of the control sample.
Overall, these results show that under the pilot incentive program, the weight given to hard
information in the approval decision increased, and soft information was discounted. The decline
in the importance of soft information is asymmetrical; our results show negative soft information
was ignored, leading to a higher default rate.

6

Breakdown of the Credit Model
We have shown the change in the scope of the loan officers’ jobs and incentives

significantly affected the origination process and the composition of the loan portfolio. Throughout
the process, the Bank did not change its imputed approval criteria and credit model, but it did allow
significantly larger loan amounts. Thus, an important question is how the Bank’s predictive credit
model fared. In other words, could the Bank have predicted the increase in default? A parallel
could be drawn with the residential mortgage market during the early 2000s. There, old predictive
credit models were applied to a new population (subprime borrowers) with more aggressive
lending terms. Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2015) show the imputed predictive credit models that had
been fitted to borrowers with prime credit lost their predictive power once they were applied to the
subprime population.
The Bank’s old credit model may have become obsolete due to a combination of two
factors. First, as shown in section 5.1, the Bank’s approval process began to rely more heavily on
hard information. The combination of both types of information may have previously provided a

26

good screen for borrowers, whereas relying primarily on hard information may have missed crucial
details about applicants. Second, loan terms under the treatment group became significantly more
aggressive. The sensitivity of performance to factors such as loan amounts and leverage might not
be linear. Because the Bank was using a credit model that was fit on data with a certain range of
amounts and leverages, the model may not have been applicable to loans with more aggressive
terms.
To test the proposition that the Bank’s predictive model became defunct, and to explore
the reasons why, we conduct three tests. We have seen the Bank began to rely more heavily on
hard information in the approval decision. The first test (Table 7, Panel A), therefore, examines
how well observable information predicts ex-post default in the treatment versus the control
groups. The table shows the different types of information (Experian business and personal
information, as well as the internal risk rating) predict default for the entire sample. However, for
the treatment, these variables lose their predictive ability.
The second test offers a more elaborated specification of a default predictor. As in Table
4, we use the predicted default (based on the 2004 data) to explain ex-post default of loans
originated in 2005. For each originated loan in 2005, we compute the predicted default likelihood.
We regress the actual default dummy on the predicted default variable as well as on the internal
risk rating and interest rate. Table 7, Panel B, column (1), includes only the control sample in 2005.
It shows that for this sample, all three variables explain actual default well; in particular, the
predicted default predicts current ex-post default. The converse happens when we examine the
treatment sample in 2005 (column (2)). For this sample, we find no relation between actual default
and predicted default. Furthermore, loan officers’ opinions (internal risk raking) are unrelated to
actual default. Finally, the sensitivity of actual default to interest rates is about half the magnitude
27

of that in the control sample. Column (3) presents these effects in a combined sample of the control
and treatment groups in 2005.
In a final analysis, we explore why the Bank’s imputed predictive model stopped working.
Our hypothesis is that the fitted model is doing a good job for originated loans that are similar to
the loans in the sample in which it was estimated. However, we expect the fitted model to have
poor predictive power for loans with non-normative terms. In Table 7, Panel C, we repeat the
regressions of actual default on the predicted default probability. We split the data in two ways,
both of which attempt to approximate the aggressiveness of loan terms. The first split is by whether
loan officers approved loans larger than the amounts requested by applicants.9 Column (1) shows
the subset of loans equal to or below the original requested amount. The regression indicates the
interaction between the loan-prospecting dummy and the predicted default likelihood is
statistically indistinguishable from zero. By contrast, for the subset of aggressive loans (column
(2); loan amount is greater than requested), the interaction is negative and statistically significant.
The magnitude of the coefficient is as large as that in the main effect, suggesting default is not
predictable for this subset of loans based on the history of loans originated by the Bank in 2004.
In the second test, we split the sample by abnormal loan amount. We estimate which loans
have abnormal loan amounts, by regressing the logged loan amount on observable fundamentals
(using 2004 data; see Appendix C). We use the residual as a measure of abnormal loan size. Then
we categorize the 2005 originated loans as either less aggressive (column (3); residual is smaller
than one standard deviation) or more aggressive (column (4); residual is greater than one standard
deviation). Again, we repeat the regression specification from Panel B. For less aggressive loan

As reported earlier, in the treatment sample, the fraction of originated loans with amounts greater than requested is
17%, relative to a mere 3% in the control sample.

9

28

terms (column (3)) the coefficient on the interaction of the loan-prospecting indicator and the
predicted default likelihood is indistinguishable from zero, meaning the default of loans with less
aggressive terms is predictable using 2004 data. Conversely, for more aggressive terms (column
(4)), the performance of loans with aggressive amounts cannot be predicted using a predictor based
on 2004 performance data.
Overall, our results show the Bank’s imputed original credit model was fragile.
Furthermore, the loans whose performance is the least predictable appear to be the loans whose
amounts are outside the normative range of the Bank. Thus, changes in the approval process caused
the imputed credit model to lose its predictive power.

7

Loan-Officer Characteristics
Our final analysis examines loan-officer characteristics and outcomes of the loan-

origination process. We focus on two main characteristics: loan-officer tenure and gender. Loan
officers who have been on the job longer have greater familiarity with the loan-origination process,
as well as fewer career concerns. Hence, we expect loan officers who have been with the Bank for
longer periods to exhibit higher approval rates than other loan officers following the loanprospecting experiment. We test this hypothesis in Table 8, Panel A. Using the sample of all
applications, we regress the approval indicator on an interaction of the treatment dummy with a
dummy for whether the loan officer has above-median tenure at the Bank. The results show that
longer-tenured loan officers have approval rates that are 2.5 percentage points higher than those
of their peers (compared with a 51.2% approval rate in the control group in 2005). In column (6),
we test the relation between logged loan amount and loan officers’ tenure for the sample of

29

approved loans. After controlling for application characteristics, we find that loans originated by
tenured loan officers are 5 percentage points larger than those handled by less tenured peers.
We are also interested in the effect of loan officers’ gender on loan outcome. Male loan
officers may exhibit stronger competitive behavior (Gneezy, Niederle, and Rustichini 2003;
Gneezy and Rustichini 2004) and may therefore be more willing to push loans more aggressively
through the system. We test this hypothesis in column (3). Indeed, we find that applications
handled by male loan officers in the treatment group are 2.0 percentage points more likely to be
approved. Also, column (7) shows that applications handled by treated male loan officers have
loan amounts that are 7.0 percentage points larger than loans originated by treated female loan
officers.
Finally, we confirm that loan-officer characteristics indeed translate to larger salaries. We
use a data set of loan officer–months to test this proposition. In Table 8, Panel B, we regress logged
compensation on the treatment dummy interacted with loan-officer characteristics. The panel
presents evidence that tenured loan officers and male loan officers earn higher salaries relative to
their peers in the treatment group, but not in the control group.
Overall, our findings indicate tenure within the organization (potentially indicating lower
career concerns) and gender may amplify the effects of loan prospecting.

8

Conclusion
In this paper, we present evidence that when a large commercial U.S. bank expanded the

role of the loan officer from traditional loan screening to include a loan-prospecting component,
the expansion resulted in dramatic changes to the origination process. In the corporate pilot
30

program we study, the Bank provided incentives to loan officers to bring new business to the Bank
(“loan prospecting”). The expected default of approved applications did not change, yet granted
loan amounts rose. At a first glance, the pilot appears to have had some success: the Bank expanded
its book of business through a greater number of approved loans at larger amounts. A caveat to
this apparent success is the high default rate.
Our analysis shows the move to loan prospecting led to several striking changes in the loanorigination process. Despite the fact that loan officers did not bring new business to the Bank as
expected, loan origination expanded on both the extensive margin (new borrowers) and the
intensive margin (larger loan amounts). The bank relied more heavily on hard information in the
approval process and discounted negative soft information. These policy changes led to material
changes in the composition of borrower and loan characteristics. We show that due to these
changes, the Bank’s imputed credit model broke down and lost its predictive power.
These results highlight the importance of unintended consequences of changing business
models. The management’s effort to refocus loan officers to generate new business and compete
better in the marketplace resulted in the dramatic loss of critical soft information, larger loans, and
poor credit quality. In other words, the incentives to loan officers created a chain reaction that
eventually led to a riskier loan portfolio.

31

References
Acharya, Viral V., Thomas Cooley, Matthew Richardson, and Ingo Walter, 2010, Manufacturing Tail
Risk: A Perspective on the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009, Foundations and Trends 4(4), 247-325.
Acharya, Viral V., Lubomir V. Litov, and Simone M. Sepe, 2013, Non-Executive Incentives and Bank
Risk-Taking, Working Paper, New-York University.
Acharya, Viral, and Hassan Naqvi, 2012, The Seeds of a Crisis: A Theory of Bank Liquidity and Risk
Taking Over the Business Cycle, Journal of Financial Economics 106(2), 349-366.
Agarwal, Sumit, Itzhak Ben-David, and Vincent Yao, 2015, Collateral Valuation and Institutional
Pressures: Evidence from the Residential Real-Estate Market, Management Science, 61(9), 2220-2240.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Qing Wang, 2016, Strategic Information Disclosure and
Bank Lending, NUS Working Paper
Agarwal, Sumit, and Robert Hauswald, 2010, Distance and Private Information in Lending, Review of
Financial Studies 23(7), 2757-2788.
Agarwal, Sumit, and Robert Hauswald, 2011, Authority and Information, Working Paper, Chicago
Federal Reserve Bank.
Bebchuck, Lucian A., and Holger Spamann, 2009, Regulating Bankers’ Pay, Georgetown Law Journal
98(2), 247-287.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, 2016, Bonus Culture: Competitive Pay, Screening, and Multitasking,
Journal of Political Economy 124(2), 305-370.
Berger, Allen N., Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein,
2005, Does Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and
Small Banks, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 237-269.
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 2002, Small Business Credit Availability and Relationship
Lending: The Importance of Bank Organizational Structure, Economic Journal 112, 32-53.
Cole, Shawn, Martin Kanz, and Leora Klapper, 2015, Incentivizing Calculated Risk Taking: Evidence
from an Experiment with Commercial Bank Loan Officers, Journal of Finance 70(2), 537-575.
Demyanyk, Yuliya, and Otto Van Hemert, 2011, Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis, Review of
Financial Studies 24(6), 1848-1880.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2015, Neglected Risks: The Psychology of
Financial Crises, American Economic Review 105(5), 310-314.
Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini, 2003, Performance in Competitive Environments:
Gender Differences, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3), 1049-1074.
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini, 2004, Gender and Competition at a Young Age, American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings (May 2004), 377-381.
Heider, Florian, and Roman Inderst, 2012, Loan Prospecting, Review of Financial Studies 25(8), 23812415.
32

Inderst, Roman, 2008, Loan Origination under Soft- and Hard-Information Lending, Working Paper,
University of Frankfurt.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did Securitization Lead to
Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1), 307-362.
Liberti, Jose M., and Atif Mian, 2009, Estimating the Impact of Hierarchies on Information Use, Review
of Financial Studies 22(10), 4057-4090.
Mayer, Christopher, and Kaen Pence, 2008, Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom? Working
Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Petersen, Mitchell A., 2004, Information: Hard and Soft, Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2002, Does Distance Still Matter? The Information
Revolution in Small Business Lending, Journal of Finance 57(6), 2533-2570.
Rajan, Uday, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2015, The Failure of Models that Predict Failure: Distance,
Incentives and Defaults, Journal of Financial Economics 115(2), 237-260.
Sufi, Amir, 2007, Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evidence from Syndicated
Loans, Journal of Finance 62(2), 629-668.
Thakor, Anjan, 2015, Lending Booms, Smart Bankers, and Financial Crises, American Economic Review
105(5), 305-309.
Tzioumis, Konstantinos, and Matthew Gee, 2013, Nonlinear Incentives and Mortgage Officers’
Decisions, Journal of Financial Economics 107(2), 436-453.
Udell, Gregory F., 1989, Loan Quality, Commercial Loan Review and Loan Officer Contracting, Journal
of Banking and Finance 13(3), 367-382.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012, Loan Officers, in Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2012-13
Edition, U.S. Department of Labor, http://www.bls.gov/ooh/Business-and-Financial/Loan-officers.htm.

33

Appendix A. Variable Definitions
Variable

Description

Default within 12 months

An indicator of whether the loan became delinquent (90 days or
more past due) within 12 months of origination.

Experian business score

Applicant’s Experian business credit score. Scores range from
100 to 250. A higher score means higher credit quality.

Experian personal score

Applicant’s Experian personal credit score. Scores range from
400 to 850. A higher score means higher credit quality.

Interest rate

The interest rate paid on the loan.

Internal risk rating

Applicant’s risk rating as computed by the loan officer. Scores
range from 1 to 10. Unlike Experian scores, a low internal risk
rating reflects higher credit quality.

Loan originated

An indicator of whether a loan application was originated by the
Bank.

Loan prospecting

An indicator of whether (1) the loan application was handled by
a loan officer who is part of Group B (loan prospecting treatment
in 2005) and (2) the year of the loan application is 2005.

Loan-to-value (LTV)

The loan amount divided by the value of the collateral.

Originated amount

The dollar amount originated by the Bank.

Personal collateral

An indicator variable as to whether the loan applicant proposes
collateralizing a personal asset (=1) or a business asset (=0).

Requested amount

The dollar amount requested by the loan applicant.

Residual from internal risk-rating regression

Residual from a regression of the internal risk-rating variable on
loan characteristics (see Appendix C).

Residual from loan-originating regression

Residual from a regression of the loan-originated variable on loan
characteristics (see Appendix C).

Residual from log(Originated amount) regression

Residual from a regression of the log(originated amount) variable
on loan characteristics (see Appendix C).

Residual from LTV regression

Residual from a regression of the LTV variable on loan
characteristics (see Appendix C).

Time spent

Time interval between application submission and decision.
Measured in months.

Withdrawn

An indicator of whether a loan application was withdrawn before
or after the Bank made a decision.

34

Appendix B. Comparing Groups A and B in 2004
The table compares the characteristics of applications and originated loans of Groups A and B in 2004. Panel A tests
whether loan applications received by Group A (control) and Group B (to be treated in 2005) are different in the pretreatment period (2004). Panel B does the same for originated loans. All regressions are ordinary least squares
regressions. Variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the loan-officer level. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Panel A: Loan Applications in Groups A and B in 2004
Personal
collateral
(2)
-0.041
(0.125)

Requested
LTV
(3)
0.001
(0.014)

0.046

0.022

0.036***
(0.011)
-0.027

-0.013
(0.010)
0.033

(0.046)

(0.075)

Dependent variable: log(Req'd amount)
(1)
Group B (to be treated in 2005) (0/1)
-0.035
(0.050)
log(Requested amount)
Personal collateral (0/1)
Requested LTV
Requested LTV2
Experian business score
Experian personal score

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R2

Experian
Experian
business score personal score
(4)
(5)
-3.169
-4.176
(3.298)
(5.623)

Internal
risk rating
(6)
0.004
(0.007)

Time
spent
(7)
0.001
(0.048)

-0.006
(0.014)
0.021

0.004
(0.018)
-0.007

0.007
(0.026)
-0.009

Application Loan officer
withdrawn salary ($k)
(8)
(9)
0.003
0.343
(0.009)
(0.579)
0.135
(0.057)
0.030*

0.773
(0.818)
0.260

(0.026)

(0.022)

(0.028)

(0.041)

(0.055)

(0.015)

(0.176)

0.018***
(0.006)

0.037
(0.037)

0.001**
(0.000)

0.002
(0.008)

0.002
(0.010)

0.070***
(0.019)

0.028
(0.021)

-0.043**
(0.021)

-0.004***
(0.001)
0.030***
(0.008)

0.004
(0.038)
-0.007***
(0.003)
-0.035***
(0.004)

0.005
(0.055)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.045***
(0.004)

0.0407*
(0.021)
-0.141***
(0.050)
-0.091*
(0.048)

0.008
(0.007)
0.265
(0.420)
0.182
(0.136)

0.028***
(0.008)
0.0368
(0.058)

0.047***
(0.008)
0.057***
(0.018)

0.038***
(0.005)
-0.064***
(0.015)
-0.020
(0.034)

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
No
Yes

14,916

14,916

14,916

14,916

14,916

14,916

14,916

14,916

14,916

0.05

0.07

0.19

0.11

0.10

0.73

0.20

0.07

0.06

0.029*
(0.017)

35

Appendix B. Comparing Groups A and B in 2004 (Cont.)
Panel B: Originated Loans in Groups A and B in 2004
log(Originated amount)
Dependent variable:-log(Requested amount)
(1)
Group B (to be treated in 2005) (0/1)
-0.020
(0.050)
log(Requested amount)
Personal collateral

0.053

Personal
collateral
(2)
0.325
(0.568)

Originated LTV
Experian
Experian
-Requested LTV (%) Interest rate business score personal score
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.038
0.001
1.070
1.586
(0.061)
(0.016)
(2.204)
(2.431)

0.481
(0.439)

0.042

(0.045)

-0.010
(0.009)
0.032

-0.006
(0.012)
0.018

0.003
(0.015)
-0.006

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.019)

(0.037)

0.024
(0.021)

0.016***
(0.005)

0.033
(0.035)

0.001**
(0.000)

0.002
(0.007)

0.024***
(0.008)
0.041
(0.087)

0.006
(0.004)
0.198
(0.242)
0.167*
(0.089)

0.034***
(0.008)
0.037***
(0.007)

0.037***
(0.005)
-0.055***
(0.012)
-0.018
(0.029)

-0.035***
(0.022)

-0.004***
(0.001)
0.024***
(0.007)

0.004
(0.032)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.032***
(0.004)

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Observations

4,740

4,740

4,740

4,740

4,740

4,740

4,740

Adj. R2

0.07

0.05

0.11

0.21

0.12

0.10

0.69

Requested LTV
Requested LTV2
Experian business score
Experian personal score

(0.065)

0.034***
(0.010)
-0.023

Internal
risk rating
(7)
0.003
(0.009)

36

0.022*
(0.013)

Appendix C. Calculating Residuals
The table presents analysis used to calculate abnormal application approval, as well as abnormal leverage and loan
amount. The sample contains only applications (column (1)) and approved loans (columns (2) and (3)) from the control
group: Group A in 2004 and 2005, and Group B in 2004. All regressions are ordinary least squares regressions.
Variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the loan-officer level. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Sample:
Dependent variable:
log(Requested amount)
Personal collateral (0/1)
Experian business score
Experian personal score
LTV (Requested)
LTV2 (Requested)

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

Applications (Control only)
Loan approved (0/1)
(1)
-0.3007**
(0.0700)
0.0215***
(0.0077)
-0.1397***
(0.0481)
-0.1295***
(0.0391)
0.0471***
(0.0139)

Approved loans (Control only)
LTV
log(Loan amount)
(2)
(3)
0.0256
-0.0164
(0.0224)
(0.0122)
-0.0395***
0.0818**
(0.0070)
(0.0344)
-0.0063***
0.0032***
(0.0004)
(0.0008)
-0.0052***
0.0093***
(0.0012)
(0.0003)
-0.6075***
-0.8142***
(0.0838)
(0.2224)

-0.0796***
(0.0162)

-0.7031***
(0.0774)

0.6948***
(0.1485)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

22,480

10,470

10,470

0.17

0.14

0.10

37

Table 1. Summary Statistics
The table presents summary statistics for the data used in the study. Panel A presents summary statistics for loan
applications. Panel B presents summary statistics for the originated loans. Panel C presents summary statistics for data
aggregated at the loan officer–month level. Variables are defined in Appendix A.

Panel A: Loan Applications

Group A (Control)
# Applications:
6,920
Mean
St Dev
Requested amount ($)
455,240 336,805
Personal collateral (0/1)
0.255
0.436
Requested LTV (%)
61.283
43.001
Experian business score (100-250)
200.863
72.228
Experian personal score (400-850)
731.847
70.305
Internal risk rating (1-10)
5.819
1.734
Time spent (months)
1.380
0.850
Application approved (0/1)
0.449
0.497
Withdrawn after being approved (0/1)
0.132
0.338

2004

Group B (Control)
7,996
Mean
St Dev
426,480 378,698
0.261
0.439
65.301
44.029
195.884
75.868
725.405
68.063
5.813
1.537
1.350
0.700
0.436
0.496
0.118
0.322

Group A (Control)
7,564
Mean
St Dev
454,141 369,635
0.280
0.449
65.161
46.873
195.988
75.273
725.908
74.394
5.940
1.313
1.320
0.750
0.512
0.500
0.150
0.357

2005
Group B (Treatment)
7,788
Mean
St Dev
444,137 381,829
0.239
0.427
63.049
43.483
200.359
68.471
728.057
76.723
5.958
1.470
1.060
0.530
0.592
0.491
0.119
0.324

Group B (Control)
2,548
Mean
St Dev
0.322
0.467
302,966 301,933
216,048 229,403
0.032
0.028
0.280
0.403
78.440
19.280
76.237
30.899
186.115
78.924
718.897
88.580
1.282
0.858
5.380
1.520
9.850
4.890
107
0.042
0.201
-0.146
-0.117
-0.022
0.116
0.003
0.033
0.003
0.040

Group A (Control)
2,744
Mean
St Dev
0.357
0.499
303,082 306,939
253,219 257,801
0.032
0.027
0.300
0.420
79.030
17.040
74.901
33.105
185.500
93.091
719.537
98.245
1.275
0.799
5.440
1.300
9.580
4.880
119
0.043
0.204
-0.077
-0.075
-0.041
0.158
0.004
0.032
0.004
0.042

2005
Group B (Treatment)
3,680
Mean
St Dev
0.466
0.476
302,224 317,073
301,004 299,013
0.174
0.073
0.250
0.404
78.520
18.400
77.033
26.049
196.095
87.015
725.765
66.510
1.020
0.540
4.930
1.530
9.650
4.930
192
0.052
0.222
0.014
0.104
0.007
0.080
0.007
0.032
0.071
0.039

Panel B: Originated Loans

Group A (Control)
# Originated loans:
2,192
Mean
St Dev
Loan originated (0/1)
0.306
0.461
Requested amount ($)
302,074 305,891
Originated amount ($)
224,614 279,361
I(Amount approved > Amount requested)
0.035
0.025
Personal collateral (originated) (0/1)
0.270
0.409
Requested LTV (%)
79.060
20.930
Originated LTV (%)
72.986
31.477
Experian business score (100-250)
184.870
68.946
Experian personal score (400-850)
716.692
87.439
Time spent (months)
1.270
0.880
Internal risk rating (1-10)
5.230
1.840
Interest rate (%)
9.910
5.020
# Defaults
91
Defaulted within 12 months (0/1)
0.042
0.199
log(Originated amount)-log(Requested amount)
-0.129
-0.039
Originated LTV-Requested LTV
-0.060
0.104
Residual from leverage regression
0.003
0.034
Residual from loan size regression
0.004
0.038

2004

38

Table 1. Summary Statistics (Cont.)
Panel C: Loan Officer–Month Data

Group A (Control)
# Loan officers:
68
Mean
St Dev
log(Application avg amount ($k))
5.582
5.336
log(Approved avg amount ($k))
5.293
5.562
log(Originated avg amount ($k))
5.281
5.394
log(# Applications)
3.794
1.885
log(# Approved loans)
3.378
1.858
log(# Originated loans)
3.373
1.861
Salary ($)
43,292
32,941
log(Salary ($))
4.567
4.555
Tenure (years)
3.1
2.6
Male (%)
62.9
N(loan officer-month) = 3,192

2004

39

Group B (Control)
65
Mean
St Dev
5.382
5.352
5.296
5.485
5.299
5.307
3.795
1.884
3.399
1.878
3.396
1.861
43,023
32,114
4.583
4.544
3.1
2.6
68.0

Group A (Control)
65
Mean
St Dev
5.587
5.349
5.290
5.433
5.294
5.374
3.799
1.865
3.381
1.840
3.391
1.834
43,139
32,327
4.608
4.601
3.0
2.6
64.5

2005
Group B (Treatment)
65
Mean
St Dev
5.399
5.534
5.525
5.661
5.551
5.446
3.812
1.842
3.705
1.819
3.816
1.840
47,305
32,672
4.660
4.521
3.1
2.6
66.9

Table 2. Volume and Quality of Applications
The table presents an analysis of the loan-application volume and characteristics. Panel A uses a sample at the loan
officer–month level and explores whether the dollar volume and the number of applications are different for
applications made to loan officers who engaged in loan prospecting. Panel B tests whether the characteristics of loan
applications are different for applications made to loan officers who engage in loan prospecting. Panel C tests whether
loan applications received by the loan-prospecting group were more likely to be approved based on characteristics.
All regressions are ordinary least squares regressions. Variables are defined in Appendix A. In Panel A, standard
errors are clustered at the month level. In Panels B and C, standard errors are clustered at the loan-officer level.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

Panel A: Loan-Application Volume in Treated and Control Groups
Dependent variable:
Denoted in:

All applications (loan officer-month)
log(Avg requested amount ($))
log(# Applications)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.019
0.013
0.001
0.007
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.013)
(0.025)

Loan prospecting (0/1)

Loan officer fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

No
No

No
Yes

No
No

No
Yes

3,192

3,192

3,192

3,192

0.07

0.13

0.06

0.08

Panel B: Characteristics of Loan Applications

Dependent variable:
Loan prospecting (0/1)

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R2

log(Requested amount)
(1)
0.016
(0.064)

Requested LTV
(2)
0.026
(0.183)

Personal
collateral
(3)
0.014
(0.056)

Experian
business score
(4)
7.146
(5.871)

Experian
personal score
(5)
3.976
(5.068)

Internal
risk rating
(6)
0.043
(0.138)

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

30,268

30,268

30,268

30,268

30,268

30,268

0.07

0.06

0.09

0.06

0.05

0.07

40

Table 2. Volume and Quality of Applications (Cont.)
Panel C: Are Loan Applications in the Treated Group More Likely to Be Approved?
Sample:
Dependent variable:
Loan prospecting (0/1)

2005 Applications
Application ex ante probability of apporval
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.008
-0.007
0.004
0.001
(0.018)
(0.019)
(0.019)
(0.019)

Experian business score
Experian personal score
Internal risk rating
log(Requested amount)
Personal collateral (0/1)
Requested LTV
Requested LTV2

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

0.071***
(0.019)
0.063***

0.076***
(0.020)
0.094***

(0.016)

(0.016)

-0.103**
(0.026)
-0.049***
(0.008)
0.070
(0.086)
-0.026***
(0.003)

-0.084**
(0.025)
-0.030***
(0.008)
0.050
(0.087)
-0.028***
(0.004)

-0.120***
(0.019)

-0.117***
(0.018)

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

15,352

15,352

15,352

15,352

0.14

0.17

0.15

0.17

41

Table 3. Direct Effects of Loan Prospecting
The table presents an analysis of the effects of loan prospecting: loan-approval and -origination rates, and average
loan size (Panel A), turnaround time and withdrawal rate (Panel B), and default rate (Panel C). All regressions are
ordinary least squares regressions. Variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
clustered at the month level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Effects on the Extensive and Intensive Margins of Loan Approval and Origination
Dependent variable:
Sample:
Loan prospecting (0/1)

log(#Loans)
log(Avg amount ($))
Approved
Originated
Approved
Originated
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.282*** 0.313*** 0.276*** 0.305*** 0.147*** 0.149*** 0.144*** 0.145***
(0.058) (0.051)
(0.046) (0.038)
(0.048) (0.040)
(0.046) (0.043)

Loan officer fixed effects
Month fixed effects

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Observations

3,192

3,192

3,192

3,192

3,192

3,192

3,192

3,192

0.15

0.17

0.19

0.20

0.13

0.15

0.16

0.17

Adj. R

2

42

Table 3. Direct Effects of Loan Prospecting (Cont.)
Panel B: Turnaround Time and Withdrawal Rate
Dependent variable:
Sample:
Loan prospecting (0/1)

Experian business score
Experian personal score
log(Requested amount)
Personal collateral (0/1)
Requested LTV
Requested LTV2

Loan officer fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

#Months between application and decision
Applications
Approved loans
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.104* -0.100**
-0.157** 0.166***
(0.056)
(0.050)
(0.062)
(0.064)

I(Application withdrawn)
Approved loans
(5)
(6)
-0.057**
-0.068**
(0.028)
(0.031)

-0.048*** -0.042***
(0.017)
(0.016)
-0.042*** -0.037**
(0.014)
(0.014)

-0.051*** -0.049***
(0.019)
(0.017)
-0.046*** -0.043***
(0.016)
(0.014)

0.048***
(0.016)
0.039***
(0.011)

0.039**
(0.016)
0.028**
(0.014)

0.019*** 0.017***
(0.007)
(0.006)
-0.032
-0.030
(0.063)
(0.060)
0.016*** 0.016***
(0.003)
(0.003)

0.021*** 0.020***
(0.007)
(0.007)
-0.038
-0.034
(0.066)
(0.065)
0.019*** 0.017***
(0.003)
(0.003)

-0.017***
(0.005)
0.031
(0.062)
-0.014***
(0.002)

-0.020***
(0.004)
0.025
(0.057)
-0.014***
(0.002)

0.068*** 0.068***
(0.016)
(0.014)

0.079*** 0.070***
(0.016)
(0.016)

-0.062***
(0.013)

-0.042***
(0.014)

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

30,268

30,268

14,359

14,359

14,359

14,359

0.18

0.19

0.21

0.22

0.07

0.09

43

Table 4. Did the Bank Approve Applications of Lower Observed Credit Quality?
The table presents regressions testing whether the lending standards of the Bank changed along with the change in the
scope of loan-officer activities. Panel A tests whether a significant difference exists in the credit quality of loans that
were approved in the treatment and control groups. Panel A uses only 2005 data, because the calculation of expected
default uses 2004 data. Panel B presents an analysis of the effects of loan prospecting on the approval of loans with
respect to credit quality. Panel C tests whether a difference exists in the imputed expected default likelihood of loans
that were approved by the treatment and control groups. Imputed predicted default probability is the predicted value
from a regression of the default indicator on observable characteristics using the 2004 applications data. Panels B and
C use a sample of all applications. All regressions are ordinary least square regressions. Variables are defined in
Appendix A. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the loan-officer level. ***, **, and * denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Characteristics of Approved Applications in the Treatment and Control Groups
Sample:
Dependent variable:

Loan prospecting (0/1)

log(Approved amount)
Personal collateral (0/1)
Approved LTV
Approved LTV2

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

All approved applications
Experian
Experian
Internal
business score personal score
risk rating
(1)
(2)
(3)
5.333
3.129
0.045
(5.880)
(5.286)
(0.139)

Interest rate
(4)
0.007
(0.047)

0.041**
(0.016)
0.018***
(0.006)
0.037***
(0.012)

0.045**
(0.020)
0.020***
(0.006)
0.040***
(0.015)

0.041***
(0.016)
0.014***
(0.005)
0.029**
(0.012)

0.049***
(0.019)
0.022***
(0.007)
0.041**
(0.016)

0.007***
(0.002)

0.008***
(0.002)

0.006***
(0.002)

0.007***
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

14,359

14,359

14,359

14,359

0.36

0.28

0.27

0.18

44

Table 4. Did the Bank Approve Applications of Lower Observed Credit Quality? (Cont.)
Panel B: Focusing on Hard Information
Sample:
Dependent variable:
Loan prospecting (0/1)
× Experian business score
× Experian personal score
× Internal risk rating

All applications
Application approved (0/1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.074*** 0.084*** 0.049*** 0.038** 0.037**
(0.019)
(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.017)
0.019*** 0.015*** 0.014***
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.005)
0.005
0.008** 0.004***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.001)
0.016
0.015
0.016
(0.014)
(0.011)
(0.012)

Experian business score

0.003
0.016***
(0.010)
(0.006)
0.006** 0.013***
(0.003)
(0.003)
-0.026*** -0.024***
(0.006)
(0.005)
0.005***
0.004
(0.001)
(0.004)
0.011
0.008
(0.037)
(0.015)
-0.008*** -0.002
(0.000)
(0.002)

Experian personal score
Internal risk rating
log(Requested amount)
Personal collateral (0/1)
Requested LTV
Requested LTV2

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

(6)
0.040**
(0.019)
0.013**
(0.005)
0.008
(0.005)
0.016
(0.011)

-0.032*** -0.018***
(0.005)
(0.003)
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

30,268

30,268

30,268

30,268

30,268

30,268

0.14

0.14

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.15

45

Table 4. Did the Bank Approve Applications of Lower Observed Credit Quality? (Cont.)
Panel C: Predicted Default Probability in the Treatment and Control Groups in 2005
Sample:
Dependent variable:

All 2005 applications
Application approved (0/1)
(1)
Imputed predicted default likelihood
-0.024**
(0.011)
× Loan prospecting (0/1)
0.003
(0.009)
Loan prospecting (0/1)

All 2005 approved loans
log(Loan amount)
Interest rate
(2)
(3)
-0.027**
0.047**
(0.011)
(0.022)
0.056**
0.054**
(0.025)
(0.025)

0.027**
(0.012)

0.017
(0.013)

0.037*
(0.023)

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

Month fixed effects

No

No

No

15,352

8,485

8,485

0.21

0.07

0.14

Observations
Adj. R

2

46

Table 5. Default Rates
The table presents an analysis of the default rates following the loan-prospecting experiment. All regressions are
ordinary least squares regressions. Variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
clustered at the month level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Sample:
Dependent variable:
Loan prospecting (0/1)
Interest rate (%)

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

All originated loans
Defaulted within 12 months (0/1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.012***
0.012***
0.012***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
0.039***
(0.014)

(4)
0.011***
(0.003)
0.035**
(0.014)

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

11,164

11,164

11,164

11,164

0.21

0.21

0.23

0.23

47

Table 6. Default Drivers: Extensive and Intensive Margins
The table explores the relation between loan amount and loan performance. All regressions are ordinary least square
regressions. Variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the loanofficer level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Sample:
Dependent variable:
Loan prospecting (0/1)
× Loan approved (residual)

(1)
0.013***
(0.004)

× I(Amount approved > Amount requested)
× Originated LTV (residual)

Loan approved (residual)

All originated loans
Defaulted within 12 months (0/1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.067*** 0.055*** 0.066***
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.040***
(0.015)
0.038***
(0.010)
0.034**
(0.013)
0.027**
(0.014)

I(Amount approved > Amount requested)
Originated LTV (residual)
log(Originated loan amount)

0.028**
(0.012)

0.037**
(0.015)
0.078***
(0.025)
-0.045
(0.035)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

(5)
0.030***
(0.002)
0.036***
(0.014)
0.034***
(0.011)
0.034**
(0.015)
0.026*
(0.015)
0.026**
(0.012)
0.035**
(0.014)
0.007
(0.019)
-0.043
(0.028)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.004)

0.077***
(0.022)
-0.038
(0.033)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.014**
(0.006)

0.082***
(0.027)
-0.059
(0.043)
-0.001*
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.013**
(0.006)

0.029
(0.022)
-0.055
(0.034)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.016**
(0.007)

0.035***
(0.002)
0.038***
(0.013)

0.036***
(0.002)
0.051***
(0.012)

0.033***
(0.002)
0.048***
(0.014)

0.039***
(0.012)

0.031***
(0.002)
0.044***
(0.019)

Loan officer fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

11,164

11,164

11,164

11,164

11,164

0.21

0.23

0.21

0.23

0.26

Personal collateral (0/1)
Experian business score
Experian personal score
Originated LTV
Originated LTV2
Interest rate (%)

Observations
Adj. R

2

48

Table 7. Performance Driver: Breakdown of the Credit Model
The table tests the hypothesis that the Bank’s credit model broke down during the loan-prospecting experiment. Panel
A tests whether default is correlated with different information types. Panel B tests whether default is correlated with
predicted default in the control and in the treatment groups. All regressions are ordinary least square regressions.
Variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the loan-officer level.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Information Types and Default

Sample:
Dependent variable:

All originated loans
Defaulted within 12 months (0/1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Loan prospecting (0/1)
0.014*** 0.012*** 0.012** 0.012** 0.049*** 0.006**
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
× Experian business score
0.030*** 0.021*** 0.029*** 0.017*
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.010)
× Experian personal score
0.011
0.014*** 0.009*
0.011
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.009)
× Internal risk rating
0.026*** 0.019** 0.031*** 0.032***
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
Experian business score
Experian personal score
Internal risk rating

-0.020
(0.015)
-0.016**
(0.008)

-0.018
(0.014)
-0.017*
(0.010)

-0.020
(0.016)
-0.017**
(0.008)

-0.019
(0.014)
-0.018*
(0.010)

0.037***

0.032

0.039***

0.033

(0.014)

(0.020)

Personal collateral (0/1)

(0.014)
(0.021)
0.014*** 0.016***
(0.003)
(0.005)
-0.021
-0.024

Requested LTV

(0.048)
(0.042)
0.010*** 0.010***

log(Requested amount)

(0.002)
Requested LTV

2

(0.002)

0.050*** 0.047***
(0.009)
(0.008)

Loan officer fixed effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

11,164

11,164

11,164

11,164

11,164

11,164

0.21

0.21

0.23

0.25

0.26

0.27

Observations
Adj. R

2

49

Table 7. Performance Driver: Breakdown of the Credit Model (Cont.)
Panel B: Predicted Default Likelihood and Actual Default

Sample:

2005 Originated loans
(Group A)
Default (0/1)
(1)

2005 Originated loans
(Group B)
Default (0/1)
(2)

0.022**
(0.009)
-0.015*
(0.008)

0.003
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)

0.022**
(0.009)
-0.014*
(0.008)

0.043***

0.024***

0.046***

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.003)

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

2,744

3,680

6,424

0.09

0.09

0.10

Dependent variable:
Loan prospecting (0/1)
× Predicted default likelihood
× Internal risk rating
× Interest rate

Predicted default likelihood
Internal risk rating
Interest rate

Adj. R

2

50

All 2005 Originated loans
Default (0/1)
(3)
0.010***
(0.004)
-0.015***
(0.006)
0.010**
(0.005)
-0.019***
(0.003)

Table 7. Breakdown of the Credit Model (Cont.)
Panel C: Predicted Default Likelihood and Non-“normative” Lending

Sample:

2005 Originated loans, where…

Residual(log(loan amount))
I($ Approved ≤ $ Requested) I($ Approved > $ Requested)
≤ 1 StDev
> 1 StDev
(Less aggressive)
(Aggressive)
(Less aggressive) (Aggressive)
Dependent variable:
Default (0/1)
Default (0/1)
Default (0/1) Default (0/1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Loan prospecting (0/1)
0.010**
0.008
0.009
0.012
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.008)
× Predicted default likelihood
-0.007
-0.016**
-0.004
-0.015**
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.007)
× Internal risk rating
0.007
0.008
0.004
0.008
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.013)
× Interest rate
-0.014
-0.013
-0.008
-0.019*
(0.019)
(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.011)
Predicted default likelihood

0.019**
(0.009)

0.015*
(0.008)

0.015**
(0.006)

0.018***
(0.005)

Internal risk rating

-0.013*

-0.015**

-0.009

-0.016**

(0.007)
0.046***
(0.003)

(0.007)
0.038***
(0.008)

(0.007)
0.035***
(0.003)

(0.007)
0.045***
(0.003)

Loan officer fixed effects
Industry fixed effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

5,525

899

3,195

3,229

0.09

0.07

0.07

0.06

Interest rate

Adj. R

2

51

Table 8. Loan-Officer Characteristics and Loan Origination
The table tests the relation between loan-officer characteristics (tenure, gender) and the loan-origination process. Panel
A tests the relation between the likelihood of loan approval and loan-officer characteristics (columns (1) to (4)), and
the relation between loan amounts and loan-officer characteristics (columns (5) to (8)). Panel B tests the relation
between loan officers’ compensation and loan-officer characteristics. All regressions are ordinary least square
regressions. Variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the loanofficer level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Loan-Officer Characteristics and Decision-Making

Dependent variable:

Approved loan (0/1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Loan prospecting (0/1)
0.054*** 0.033*** 0.041***
(0.018) (0.006) (0.002)
× Tenure above median (0/1)
0.025**
(0.009)
× Male (0/1)
0.020***
(0.001)
Tenure above median (0/1)
Male (0/1)
Experian business score
Experian personal score
Internal risk rating
log(Requested amount)
Personal collateral (0/1)
Requested LTV
Requested LTV2

Industry fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Observations
Adj. R

2

(4)
0.052***
(0.006)
0.005*
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)

log(Loan amount)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.103*** 0.058*** 0.032***
(0.010) (0.010) (0.011)
0.051**
(0.025)
0.070***
(0.023)

0.003
(0.002)

0.004
(0.013)
0.002
0.005**
(0.002) (0.002)
0.003
0.003
0.004 0.006***
(0.002) (0.005) (0.004) (0.002)
0.005*** 0.008*** 0.010*** 0.008***
(0.000) (0.001) (0.002) (0.000)

0.001
0.002
(0.002) (0.003)
0.003*** 0.001
(0.001) (0.001)

0.008***
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.026)
-0.000
(0.000)

0.006
(0.007)
0.877***
(0.123)
0.010
(0.018)
-0.006***
(0.000)

0.004
0.005
0.003
(0.008) (0.008) (0.007)
0.001
0.001
0.001
(0.004) (0.001) (0.004)
0.005
0.001
0.005
(0.004) (0.025) (0.014)
-0.002 -0.001*** -0.002***
(0.001) (0.000) (0.000)

-0.001 -0.006*** -0.003 -0.008***
(0.002) (0.002) (0.004) (0.002)

0.002
(0.012)

0.004***
(0.000)
0.857***
(0.122)
0.005
(0.008)
-0.000*
(0.000)

-0.002*** -0.003
(0.000) (0.003)

(8)
0.023**
(0.010)
0.054***
(0.017)
0.050**
(0.018)

0.003
(0.002)
0.005**
0.001
(0.002) (0.004)
0.004 0.007***
(0.009) (0.000)
0.004** 0.006***
(0.002) (0.000)
0.002
(0.009)
0.878***
(0.121)
0.007
(0.028)
-0.005***
(0.000)

0.001
(0.002)
0.860***
(0.120)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.002***
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.001)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

30,268

30,268

30,268

30,268

14,916

14,916

14,916

14,916

0.28

0.28

0.29

0.29

0.41

0.41

0.42

0.42

52

Table 8. Loan-Officer Characteristics and Loan Origination (Cont.)

Panel B: Loan-Officer Characteristics and Compensation

Dependent variable:
Loan prospecting (0/1)
× Tenure above median (0/1)

(1)
0.082***
(0.020)

× Male (0/1)

Tenure above median (0/1)

log(Compensation ($))
(2)
(3)
0.075*** 0.066***
(0.014)
(0.016)
0.025**
(0.011)
0.036***
(0.011)
0.006
(0.014)

Male (0/1)

(4)
0.060***
(0.015)
0.021**
(0.011)
0.038***
(0.010)

0.007
(0.012)

0.005
(0.014)
0.006
(0.011)

Month fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

3,192

3,192

3,192

3,192

0.54

0.57

0.69

0.70

Adj. R

2

53

Figure 1. Approval Rate (Residual) over Time and across Groups

The chart shows the average residual from the approval regression (see Appendix C). The residuals are averaged
within group (Groups A and B) and month. Note that whereas the regression uses only the control sample, the residuals
are calculated for the entire sample and therefore do not have a mean of zero.

54

Figure 2. Average Originated Loan Amount over Time and across Groups

The chart shows the average loan size. Loan sizes are averaged within group (Groups A and B) and month.

55

