                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TRAPPED FACTORS AND CHINA'S IMPACT ON GLOBAL GROWTH

                                           Nicholas Bloom
                                           Paul M. Romer
                                           Stephen J. Terry
                                          John Van Reenen

                                        Working Paper 19951
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19951


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




We thank the ESRC for financial support through the Centre for Economic Performance and the National
Science Foundation. A portion of this paper was written while Stephen Terry was a visitor at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond. This paper does not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve
System or the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. We would like to thank our formal discussants,
Chad Jones and Michael Sposi as well as Steve Redding and participants in seminars at Harvard, LSE,
Philadelphia, San Diego, WEAI Seattle, West Coast Trade Workshop, and Stanford. A summarized
version of this paper is available as Bloom, Romer, Terry and Van Reenen (2013). All of the data and
code used to produce the quantitative results in this paper, as well as an Online Appendix, can be found
at Nicholas Bloom's website: http://www.stanford.edu/nbloom/. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19951.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Nicholas Bloom, Paul M. Romer, Stephen J. Terry, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trapped Factors and China's Impact on Global Growth
Nicholas Bloom, Paul M. Romer, Stephen J. Terry, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 19951
March 2014
JEL No. E0

                                              ABSTRACT

In a general equilibrium product-cycle model, lower trade barriers increase Southern purchasing power,
which lifts long-run growth by increasing the profit from innovation. In the short run, factors of production
must be reallocated inside firms, which lowers the opportunity cost of innovation, generating an additional
trapped factor effect. Starting from a baseline OECD growth rate of 2% we find that trade integration
with low-wage countries in the decade around China’s WTO accession could have increased long-run
growth to 2.4%. There is an additional short-run trapped factors effect, raising growth to 2.7%. China
accounts for about half of these growth increases.


Nicholas Bloom                                        Stephen J. Terry
Stanford University                                   Stanford University
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall                                        579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                               Stanford CA 94305
and NBER                                              stephenjamesterry@gmail.com
nbloom@stanford.edu
                                                      John Van Reenen
Paul M. Romer                                         Department of Economics
Stern School of Business                              London School of Economics
New York University                                   Centre for Economic Performance
44 West Fourth Street                                 Houghton Street
New York, NY 10012                                    London WC2A 2AE
and NBER                                              UNITED KINGDOM
paul@paulromer.net                                    and NBER
                                                      j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19951
    1    Introduction
        Ever since Adam Smith published The Wealth of Nations, economists have
    debated the sign and magnitude of the gains from trade. Participants in these
    debates have long recognized that the static gains could be dwarfed by dynamic
    e¤ects. Recent evidence from the empirical micro-literature suggests that trade
    can indeed have a large positive impact on innovation and productivity.1 Likewise,
    some reduced form macro-empirical estimates also suggest that trade can have a
    large impact on the level of national income or its rate of growth.2 One puzzle,
    however, is that in calibrated general equilibrium models the quantitative estimates
    of the welfare e¤ects of trade still appear so small. A typical calculation suggests
    that for a nation like the United States, a move from autarky to current levels of
    trade implies a gain of a few percentage points of GDP.3 A possible reason for this is
    that the calibrations are based on static models that do not allow for the dynamic
    e¤ects of endogenous innovation.4
        In this paper, we craft a model to match recent evidence showing that the …rms
    in Europe that faced more direct competition from China’s low-wage exports un-
    dertook bigger increases in product innovation.5 To match this response, the model
    lets …rms choose how much to invest in developing new products and processes. In
    the spirit of models of endogenous growth,6 the model requires that all increases in
    productivity come from these …rm-level investments in innovation. As a result, it
1
  See for example Pavcnik (2002) on Chile, Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006) for the US, Amiti
  and Konings (2006) on Indonesia, Goldberg et al. (2010) looking at imports in India, Lileeva and
  Tre‡er (2010) on export induced upgrading in Canada, Aw, Roberts and Xu (2011) on Taiwan,
  de Loecker (2011) on Belgium and Bustos (2011) on Argentina.
2
  See, for example, Frenkel and Romer (1999), or case studies such as Romer (1992) on the e¤ect
  of an EPZ in Mauritius, Bernhofen, and Brown (2004, 2005) on post-Meiji Japan, Tre‡er (2004)
  on CAFTA, Feyrer (2013) on the Suez Canal or Irwin (2005) on the Je¤erson embargo.
3
  For example, Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2013, Table 1) calculate that moving the US from
  current levels of trade to autarky would cause only a small loss of welfare of about 2% of GDP.
  Moving to a multi-sector model increases these to about 4% (Eaton and Kortum, 2012, have an
  estimate of 5%). The welfare caclulations in Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2013) are based on
  the trade elasticity combined with the import share of GDP (see also Arkolakis, Costinot and
  Rodriguez-Clare, 2012). Melitz and Redding (2013a) show that in a heterogeneous …rm model,
  these are not su¢ cient statistics for calculating welfare gains. They …nd that reducing trade costs
  from current US levels, has larger welfare e¤ects in their more structural approach.
4
  Larger welfare e¤ects of trade can be generated by allowing for traded intermediates or by focusing
  on more open economies than the US.
5
  Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2012).
6
  See for example, Romer (1990), Aghion and Howitt (1992), and Grossman and Helpman (1991).
    makes it possible to trace the e¤ects that a modest change in trade policy has on
    innovation through to the implied change in the aggregate rate of growth, taking
    full account of general equilibrium interactions. The model con…rms the intuition
    that the dynamic gains from trade can be large, substantially larger than other
    comparable exercises suggest.
        The challenge in capturing the micro-evidence is to explain why a …rm that
    is more exposed to competition from imports from China has a bigger incentive
    to develop new goods when imports are liberalized. The model shows that this is
    precisely what one would expect if factors of production are temporarily “trapped”
    within …rms due to moving costs. If, for example, the skilled engineers at a …rm
    are expensive to train and then lay-o¤, a negative demand shock to a good they
    helped produce leaves them in the …rm but reduces their opportunity cost. Under
    this scenario, the …rm innovates after the trade shock not just because the value
    of a newly designed product has gone up, but also because the opportunity cost
    of designing and producing it have gone down. This interpretation is consistent
    with the evidence that …rms shift resources out of activities that compete with
    imports from low wage countries.7 The idea is also born out in many case studies
    of international trade in which …rms respond to import competition from a low-
    wage nation by developing an entirely new type of good that will be less vulnerable
    to this type of competition.8
        In addition to this trapped-factor e¤ect of trade on innovation, the model allows
    for the independent e¤ect that a more integrated world market has on the steady-
    state growth rate (a “market size” e¤ect). A reduction in trade barriers increases
    purchasing power in the South, which increases the pro…t that a Northern …rm can
    earn from sales there. In contrast to the e¤ect of trapped-factors on innovation,
    which arises only at …rms that face direct competition from low-wage imports, this
7
    See for example, Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006).
8
    For example, Freeman and Kleiner (2005) report that when a large American shoe …rm was faced
    with rising imports of cheap shoes from China it abandoned production of mass-market mens’
    shoes. But, rather than simply close its factory the …rm introduced new types of shoes for smaller
    niche markets, using its newly idle engineers to help develop these and its idle production line
    to produce these. For example, one new product was a batch of boots with metal hoops in the
    soles that made it easier for workers to rapidly climb ladders, ordered by a local construction
    …rm. The design for these boots earned a patent. All of this occurred because the abandonment
    of the production line for mass market shoes in response to Chinese competition, which left its
    engineers temporarily free to innovate new shoes.



                                                    2
    increase in potential pro…ts causes an increase in the rate of innovation at all North-
    ern …rms, and is therefore harder to identify from micro-data. It is an incremental
    version of the scale e¤ect on growth that has been examined in models of trade
    with endogenous growth by comparing two isolated economies with a single fully
    integrated economy.9 This mechanism has not, to our knowledge, been investigated
    in a model that is rich enough to be used in a calibration. At a minimum, such
    a model must allow a comparison across equilibria with a continuum of degrees of
    openness. In a sensitivity analysis, we also verify that over a time horizon of roughly
    a century, the conclusions from our endogenous growth model are very similar to
    alternative calibrations based on a model of semi-endogenous growth (like that of
    Jones, 1995a,b) in which a policy change can have a prolonged e¤ect on the growth
    rate that eventually converges back to zero.
        In our product-cycle model, innovation in the North produces new intermediate
    inputs that are used by …rms in both the North and the South. In a balanced growth
    equilibrium, trade barriers prevent factor-price equalization, so goods produced in
    the South have an absolute cost advantage. We calibrate the model to match both
    the baseline rate of growth and the …rm-level decisions about innovation from the
    micro literature. We …nd that the increased global integration of the OECD with
    all low-wage countries that took place during the decade around China’s accession
    to the WTO increases the long-run rate of growth in the OECD from 2.0% per year
    to almost 2.4% per year. Of this increase, approximately one half, or 0.2%, can be
    attributed to China by alone.
        Of course, small increases in growth can generate substantial improvements in
    welfare. This increase in the rate of growth from trade with the South has a welfare
    e¤ect that would be equivalent to increasing consumption by 16%. Of this increase
    in consumption, 14% is from the increased pro…tability of innovation and 2% is
    from the trapped-factor e¤ect. But although the trapped-factors mechanism has a
    smaller long-run welfare e¤ect it is front-loaded, so over the …rst decade after the
    trade shock its e¤ect on the rate of growth is similar in magnitude to the market-
    size e¤ect and might therefore be of comparable interest in policy debates. For
    trade with all low wage countries, the trapped-factor e¤ect increases the rate of
    growth by an additional 0.3% per year (i.e. the combined e¤ect of the market size
9
    See for example, Grossman and Helpman, (1990) and Romer and Rivera-Batiz (1991).



                                                3
     and trapped factors e¤ects raises the growth rate from 2.0% to 2.7% per year) in
     the …rst decade after the liberalization, with about one third being due to China
     alone.
         Our results connect to several other lines of work. To simplify the analysis,
     the model allows for heterogeneity among …rms only in the degree of import com-
     petition that they face. One natural extension would allow for other dimensions
     of heterogeneity (e.g. Melitz and Redding, 2013b).10 We also assume that …rms
     operate in only one region, so another natural extension would allow for multina-
     tional …rms that manage R&D and production in both the North and South (see
     Antras and Yeaple, 2013 for an overview of the evidence and theory in this area).
     In a model of growth based on di¤usion of heterogeneous stocks of existing knowl-
     edge that is complementary to our model based on innovation, Perla, Tonetti, and
     Waugh (2012) …nd that trade liberalization can encourage more …rms with low pro-
     ductivity to seek out interaction with high productivity …rms from whom they can
     learn. Because the gains from di¤usion are never exhausted, faster di¤usion in this
     setting can also, at least in some cases, lead to a permanently faster rate of growth.
     Recent papers have also considered the interaction between di¤usion and hetero-
     geneity.11 Our estimates are conservative in the sense that all these extensions are
     likely to generate additional gains from trade.
         Our paper connects not just to the general literature cited above on the welfare
     e¤ects of trade, but also on those papers that look speci…cally at the impact of
     trade with China (e.g. Ossa and Hsieh, 2010). Because of concern about increased
     inequality, an older literature on the distributional e¤ects of trade that arise when
     labor is industry-speci…c (e.g. Mussa, 1974) is generating renewed interest (Autor,
     Dorn and Hanson, 2013). In such models, the gains from trade for some groups
     are o¤set by welfare losses for others. As we note below, the optimistic conclusions
     from our analysis of the gains from trade need to be tempered if such e¤ects are
     large. In contrast to this literature, where speci…city has no social bene…ts, in our
10
   Atkeson and Burstein (2010) consider a heterogeneous …rm trade model with endogenous process
   innovation. They …nd that reductions in trade costs lead to no greater increases in welfare in
   such models compared to homogeneous …rm models. Like Atkeson and Burstein (2010) we also
   …nd that the steady state increase in welfare determined by the insight from the older literature
   that larger market size increases the returns to product innovation. Unlike them, however, we
   generate more growth in the transition to the new steady state due to our new “trapped factor”
   e¤ect.
11
   See for example Sampson (2014) or Constantini and Melitz (2008).

                                                  4
second-best model, trapped factors generate additional welfare gains when there
are unexpected increases in trade.
    The model of innovation spurred by a reduction in the opportunity cost of the
inputs used in innovation is reminiscent of the old idea that trade competition can
e¤ect X-ine¢ ciency without following the type of principal-agent structure (e.g.
Schmidt, 1997) that de Loecker and Goldberg (2014) have recently questioned.
Finally, our structure, in which …rms take advantage of a negative shock by investing
in innovation, is similar in spirit to business cycle theories about the “virtues of
bad times”described by Aghion and Saint-Paul (1998), who build on Hall (1991).
    The road map to the rest of the paper is as follows. We start with the closed
economy model in Section 2. Section 3 extends this to the open economy, and
Section 4 looks at trade shocks in the open economy in the fully mobile and trapped
factor case. Section 5 moves on to the quantitative exercise, and Section 6 o¤ers
some extensions and robustness tests. Section 7 concludes. The Appendices contain
many technical details of the theoretical proofs (A), calibration (B), solutions (C),
an extension to a semi-endogenous growth approach (D), and an extension to an
alternative R&D cost function (E).

2     Closed Economy Model
    We introduce the basic structure of the model for a closed economy. This lets us
describe the technology and highlight the key equation in the model. It character-
izes the rate of growth of the variety of inputs, which can also be interpreted as the
rate of growth of patents or new designs. Note that in this initial closed-economy
equilibrium derivation, we omit discussion of the costs that can trap factors in
…rms. We bring them in after introducing trade.
2.1    Technology
    There are two types of inputs in all types of production, human capital and a
variety of produced intermediate inputs. At any date, these inputs can be used in
three di¤erent productive activities: producing …nal consumption goods, producing
new physical units of the intermediate inputs that will be used in production in the
next period, and producing new designs or patents. We assume that the two types
of inputs are used with the same factor intensities in these three activities, so we
can use the simplifying device of speaking of the production …rst of …nal output,
and then the allocation of …nal output to the production of consumption goods,

                                          5
intermediate inputs, or new patented designs. We can also speak of …nal output as
the numeraire, with the understanding that it is in fact the bundle of inputs that
produces one unit of …nal output that is actually the numeraire good.
    With this convention, we can write …nal output Yt in period t; as the following
function of human capital H and intermediate goods xjt; where j is drawn from
the range of intermediate inputs that have already been invented, j 2 [0; At ] :
                                         ZAt
                                Yt = H      x1jt dj
                                             0
Using the convention noted above, we can speak of …rms in period t devoting a
total quantity Zt of …nal output to the production of new patented designs that
will increase the existing stock of designs At to the value that will be available next
period, At+1 : If we let Ct denote …nal consumption goods, …nal output is divided
as follows:
                              Yt = Ct + Kt+1 + Zt
                                         Zt+1
                                         A

                                = Ct +           xjt+1 dj + Zt
                                         0
The intermediate inputs are like capital that fully depreciates after one period of
use, an assumption that is made more palatable by our choice of period that is 10
years long.
    The key equation for the dynamics of the model describes the conversion of
foregone output or R&D expenditures Zt into new patents. In period t, each of a
larger number N of intermediate goods …rms indexed by f can use …nal goods (or
more explicitly, the inputs that could produce …nal output) to discover new types
of intermediate goods that can then be produced for use in t + 1. Let Mt+1 denote
the aggregate measure of new goods discovered in period t, and let Mf t+1 be the
measure of these new goods produced at …rm f . Here, the letter M is a mnemonic
for “monopoly” because goods patented in period t will be subject to monopoly
pricing in period t+1. Because our patents, like our capital, last for only one period,
only the new designs produced in period t will be subject to monopoly pricing in
period t + 1: At a formal level, it simpli…es the analysis considerably to assume that
capital lasts for only one period and that innovators need to look ahead only one
period to calculate their monopoly pro…ts. In particular, these assumptions imply
that the model converges in very few periods to a new steady state growth rate

                                             6
after any policy change, as we shall see.
    To allow for the problem that …rms face in coordinating search and innovation
in larger teams, we allow for a form of diminishing marginal productivity for the
inputs to innovation in any given period. Let Zf t denote the resources devoted to
R&D or innovation at …rm f at time t. We assume that the output of new designs
will also depend on the availability of all the ideas represented by the entire stock
of existing innovations, At : Hence we can write the number of new designs at …rm
f as:
                                Mf t+1 = (Zf t ) A1t ;                            (1)
where 0 < < 1:
    The exponent on At is crucial to the long-term dynamics of the model. The
choice here, 1    , makes it possible for an economy with a …xed quantity of human
capital H to grow at a constant rate that will depend on other parameters in the
model. As an alternative, we could follow the suggestion in Jones (1995b) and use
a smaller value for this exponent, in which case we could generate a steady state
by allowing for growth in the quantity of H. In either approach, the model has to
match the baseline rate of growth that prevails prior to the trade shock. For a given
value of , they will respond in qualitatively similar ways to a trade shock. As a
result, the two types of model o¤er di¤erent very long-run (100+ year) predictions
about the e¤ect that the trade shock on growth, but are similar for the …rst 100
years, which because of discounting is e¤ectively all that matters for our results.
We formally detail and calibrate an extension of our model with semi-endogenous
growth and show the results are very similar (see Appendix D).
    Another way to characterize the production process for new designs is to convert
the innovation production function in equation (1) to a cost function that exhibits
increasing marginal costs of innovation in period t,
                                 Zf t = Mf t+1 A1t ;                              (2)
             1
where = > 1.
    Finally, we note that the parameter is a constant which we have introduced to
the innovation cost function and will adjust so that di¤erent choices of the number
of intermediate goods …rms N and the innovation cost function curvature generate
the same balanced growth rate. (See Appendix A or Section 2.3 for details.)
    Given the innovation cost function for a single intermediate goods …rm f , we


                                         7
                                                                               P
     have that the aggregate R&D expenditure is immediately given by Zt = N      f =1 Zf t .
     In most cases, symmetry will allow for substantial simpli…cation of this expression.
     2.2     Preferences
        A representative household in this economy consumes the …nal good in the
     amount Ct each period, inelastically supplies labor input H, and has preferences
     over consumption streams given by
                                            X1      1
                                                t Ct
                                                       :
                                            t=0
                                                  1
     The representative household receives labor income, owns all the …rms, and trades
     a one-period bond with zero net supply. As usual, if consumption grows at a
     constant rate g = Ct+1Ct Ct ; and if r denotes the one period interest rate on loans of
     consumption goods, these preferences imply the result
                                                 1
                                        1 + r = (1 + g) :                                (3)
     Because the price of consumption goods is always one unit of the numeraire good,
     r is also the one period interest rate on loans denominated in the numeraire.
     2.3     Equilibrium
         To characterize the equilibrium in this closed economy, we can assume that …nal
     goods are produced by a single competitive constant returns to scale …rm which
     demands as inputs intermediate goods and human capital. We also assume that
     the labor market is competitive.
         It simpli…es the exposition to imagine that the intermediate inputs in production
     are produced by N …rms for some large number N: These …rms design new goods
     and produce the intermediate inputs that the new designs make possible. Newly
     discovered goods are protected by a one-period monopoly patent. After the patent
     expires, it is convenient and harmless to assume that the …rm f that developed a
     good will continue to produce it. Hence, at any date t; the range of goods [0; At ] can
     be divided up in to N disjoint subsets of goods produced by each …rm f . Roughly
     speaking, we would like to assume that any intermediate good j is equally likely
     to be assigned to any one of the N …rms.12 Finally, we assume that there is a set
     of potential entrants, that we refer to as “fast copiers”, who act as a competitive
     fringe and force the …rms that produce o¤-patent goods to price them at marginal
12
     This concept is di¢ cult to formalize precisely with a continuum of goods but can be made precise
     with a large but …nite set of goods taken together with a limit argument that lets the number of
     goods go to in…nity.


                                                    8
     cost.13
         The equilibrium in this model takes a familiar form, with perfect competition in
     markets other than for the goods that are protected by patents, and by monopolistic
     competition with a zero marginal pro…t condition for …rms that develop new designs
     that will be protected by patents. The full de…nition of the equilibrium for this
     model is given in Appendix A.
         The fundamental equation for the dynamics of the model balances the cost
     of developing a new patented design against the pro…t that can be earned from
     the temporary ex post monopoly that it confers. This pro…t can be calculated as
     follows. In period t + 1; the inverse demand for any input will be the derivative of
     the aggregate production function, which implies the inverse demand curve
                                      p = (1     )H x :
     The usual markup rule for a constant elasticity demand curve implies that the
     monopoly price pM will be marked up by a factor 1=(1            ) above its marginal
     cost. One unit of output today can be converted into one unit of the intermediate
     that is available for sale tomorrow, so marginal cost in units of output tomorrow,
     is (1 + r) and the monopoly price tomorrow can be written as
                                                1+r
                                          pM =       :
                                                1
     Together, these two equations imply monopoly output
                                                       !1=
                                              (1    )2
                                   xM = H                   :                          (4)
                                                1+r
      Because pro…t takes the form
                                     p M xM
                                   =           xM =        xM ;
                                      1+r            1
     this yields
                                                     1
                                        = (1 + r) H;
                           2
     where = (1           ) :
         One easy way to see why pro…t increases linearly in H is to note that the price
     the monopolist sets is a …xed markup over marginal cost. This means that pro…t
     increases linearly with the quantity the monopolist sells. As in any constant returns
     to scale production function, at constant prices, an increase in the use of one input
     such as H will lead to an increase by the same factor in the quantity demanded of
     all complementary intermediate inputs xj :
13
     This formalism is not needed for the closed economy, but becomes important when the economy
     is opened for trade and some goods are protected by trade restrictions.

                                                 9
         The zero marginal pro…t condition for developing new goods implies that this
     expression for must be equal to the marginal cost of producing the last innovation
     at each …rm. To express this cost, it helps to de…ne a “pseudo-growth rate”14 for an
                       f    M
     individual …rm, gt+1  = Af t+1 : We denote the economy-wide growth rate of varieties
                                 t
                                             P
     as gt+1 = At and note that gt+1 = N
               Mt+1                                  f
                                               f =1 gt+1 : Di¤erentiation of the cost function
     for innovation yields
                                      @Zf t+1           f
                                                               1
                                              =        gt+1
                                      @Mf t+1
     On a balanced growth path, gt+1 will be equal to a constant g; which will also be
     equal to the rate of growth of output and of consumption. By symmetry among
                                          f
     the N …rms, we also have that gt+1       = N1 g: As a result, the cost of a new design
     reduces to
                                                             ( 1)
                                    @Zf t+1           1
                                             =           g
                                    @Mf t+1          N
                                               =     N (1   )
                                                                g   1

     If we de…ne     so that
                                            N (1 ) = 1
     the cost of a new patent reduces to g 1 : Equating this marginal cost with the
     marginal bene…t (ex post pro…t) yields:
                                                        1
                                     g 1 = (1 + r) H                                   (5)
                           2
     where = (1          )    is a constant.
        Finally, using the fact that in a balanced growth equilibrium, consumption,
     patents, and total output will all grow at the same rate g; we can substitute in the
     expression for the interest rate equation (3) into equation (5) to generate the basic
     equation relating g and H:

     Proposition 1 Closed-Economy Balanced Growth Path

        The closed economy has a unique balanced growth path with a common constant
     growth rate g for varieties, output, and consumption, that satis…es the innovation
     optimality condition
                                             1
                                   g 1=        (1 + g) H:
        Proof in Appendix A.
14
     This is a pseudo-growth rate because we have divided by the economy-wide stock of patents rather
     than the …rm’s own stock of patents. All other growth rates are true growth rates.


                                                   10
         In the closed economy, this proposition says that the marginal cost of a patent
     must be equal to the appropriately discounted ex post pro…t that it will generate,
     and that this pro…t is proportional to the stock of human capital, H. When we
     extend this to the open economy setting, the same kind of expression in which g
     is an increasing function of H will still hold except that H will be replaced by an
     expression that depends on both H in the North, H in the South, and the extent
     of restrictions that limit trade between the two regions.

     3     Open Economy
         Suppose next that there are two regions or countries, North and South. We treat
     North as the home country so variables associated with the South are indicated
     with an asterisk. There are identical representative households in the North and
     South. The …nal goods technologies of the two regions are identical, but only
     Northern intermediate goods …rms have access to the innovation technology that
     produces new patents or designs. A …rm in the South can subsequently produce
     any intermediate good as soon is it is o¤ patent. A lack of Southern innovation is
     a realistic approximation to the data, if we identify the North with OECD nations
     empirically. As shown in Appendix Figure B1, patents granted in the USPTO are
     overwhelmingly from OECD nations. Although non-OECD innovation as measured
     by patenting is increasing rapidly, the increase is from an extremely low base. For
     example, China in particular accounts for an average of 0.06% of US patents during
     1977-2006.15
         To allow for a continuum of possible levels of trade restriction, we assume that
     the government in the North imposes a trade restriction which allows only a pro-
     portion of o¤-patent intermediate goods varieties produced in the South to be
     imported into the North. If we make the simplifying assumption that the goods
     with the lowest index values are the ones that are allowed to trade, Figure 1 de-
     scribes the goods that are used in production in the North and the South. The
     goods with the lowest index values are called I goods to signal that they are im-
     ported into the North. In terms of production in period t; the range of the I goods
     is from 0 to At 1 : These goods are produced in the South for use in the South
15
     Chinese and non-OECD patenting rates remain extremely low relative to the OECD. Note, how-
     ever, that Puga and Tre‡er (2010) raise the possibility that low-wage countries may be increasingly
     participating in “incremental innovation" abstracted from in this paper.



                                                     11
and also produced in the South and imported into the North. Next come the R
(for restricted) goods. These are produced in the North for use in the North and
produced in the South for use in the South. Finally, we have the M (for monopoly)
goods, which are produced in the North and used in production in both the North
and the South. Hence, Mt represents the new goods developed in period t 1 for
sale in period t; Rt represents the trade-restricted but o¤-patent goods available
for use in production in period t; It represents the o¤ patent goods that can be
imported into the North for use in period t. In a small abuse of the notation, we
will use the symbols I, R, and M to denote both the set of goods and its measure.
    In this two economy model, we can consider a unit of …nal output (or equiva-
lently the bundle of inputs that produces it) in both the South and the North. We
will use output in the North as the numeraire and de…ne the Southern terms of
trade qt as the price in units of …nal output in the North of one unit of …nal output
produced in the South. We impose trade balance in each period so there is no bor-
rowing between North and South. Along any balanced growth path, the interest
rates in the North and South will be the same, but the restriction on borrowing is
binding during the short transition to the new balanced growth rate that follows a
policy change. The terms of trade q adjust to achieve trade balance in each period,
which requires that the value of imports into the North, qt pIt It xI , is equal to the
value of the goods that the North sells to the South, pM Mt xM :
    As in the usual product cycle model, we are interested only in the case in which
the South has a cost advantage in producing goods that it can export, due to its
lower wages. On the balanced growth path, this is equivalent to having qt < 1: In
our analysis, we restrict attention to the case of values of the trade policy parameter
   that are low enough to ensure that this restriction holds.
    It is important for the operation of the model that in this case, trade balance
does not lead to factor price equalization. Identical workers in the North and the
South earn wages that when converted at the terms of trade q are higher in the
North and lower in the South. Restricted intermediate inputs that are produced
and used only in the South are less expensive there than the same goods produced
and used in the North. However, because consumption goods in the South are also
less expensive, the di¤erence in the wages is much smaller after a PPP correction.
    Although the formal assumptions imply that all intermediate goods could be


                                          12
tradeable if all trade restrictions were removed, the model can easily accommodate
the possibility that a portion of them are intrinsically non-tradeable. All that
matters is that the restriction imposed by is binding in the sense that it arti…cially
forces some goods that could be tradeable to be non-traded.
      To describe the equilibrium for the open economy, it helps to de…ne a second
                                       1
(irrelevant) constant = (1          ) 2 that is analogous to the constant = (1
    2
  )      for the closed economy. For any given value of the trade parameter ;
a straightforward extension of the analysis for the closed economy yields a two
equation characterization of the balanced growth rate and the associated terms of
trade:

Proposition 2 Open-Economy Balanced Growth Path

    For low enough values of the trade parameter , the world economy follows a
balanced growth path with a common, constant growth rate of varieties, worldwide
output, and consumption in each region. The growth rate g( ) and the terms of
trade q( ) are determined by the zero marginal pro…t condition for innovation
                                   1                           1
                    g( ) 1 =         (1 + g( ))     H + q( ) H                       (6)
and the balanced trade condition
                                             H     2
                               q( ) =                                                (7)
                                         g( )H
and q( ) < 1:
    Proof in Appendix A.
    After substitution of equation (7) into equation (6), the growth rate g( ) can
be seen to be determined by the intersection of a downward sloping innovation
marginal pro…t curve with an upward sloping innovation marginal cost curve. For
clarity, see Figure 2 which plots a stylized version of the equilibrium innovation
optimality condition and the result in Proposition 2. The marginal pro…t of in-
novation is strictly increasing in the trade openness parameter , so the the open
economy balanced growth rate is strictly increasing in . This implies that the
terms of trade q( ) is also strictly increasing in .
    Proposition 2 is an important result as it establishes that trade liberalization will
increase growth rates as it increases the incentive to invest in innovation. Essentially
this is because the e¤ective size of the market has expanded and this increases the



                                           13
pro…tability for new goods. R&D investments increase until at the margin ex ante
expected pro…ts are again zero, but this will be at a higher growth rate.
    Revealingly, the innovation optimality condition (6) is quite similar to the one
in the closed-economy version of Proposition 1. Except in place of H; the term
          1
H + q( ) H now determines the extent of the demand for any input and the
pro…t that it will generate. The reason is all innovation takes place in the North.
And the worldwide demand for newly invented goods in the North depends on
demand in the North, which is proportional to H and on demand from the South,
which is proportional to H but with a downward adjustment induced by the terms
of trade.
    A trade liberalization caused by an increase in leads to an increased ‡ow of
imported I goods from North to South. The elasticity of demand for all inputs is
 1
   > 1; so revenue increases when prices fall. This means that in response to the
increase in imports into the North, the prices of the goods that the North imports
must go up and the prices that it receives for goods that it sells to the South
must go down. Both changes imply an increase in q: Lower prices in the South for
the exported monopoly goods increase the returns to innovation. In equilibrium,
the rate of innovation, hence the rate of growth must increase, which increases
the marginal cost of innovation and re-establishes the zero pro…t condition at the
margin.

4     Trade Shocks
    The open economy analysis in the last section calculated the constant perfect
foresight growth rate and interest rate associated with a constant value of the
parameter . Next, we start from a balanced growth path trade at an initial level
   and consider the e¤ects of an unanticipated and permanent trade shock to a
more liberal trade regime with 0 > . To carry this exercise out, we must be more
explicit about the timing of decisions relative to the announcement of the change
in :
4.1    Timing with a Trade Shock
   To specify the timing, it helps to return to the underlying model with three
di¤erent productive activities. Recall that there is a group of consumption good
producing …rms that acquire H and intermediate inputs xj and use them to produce



                                        14
…nal consumption goods using the basic production function
                                       ZAt
                              Ct = H      x1jt dj:
                                             0
We now want to be more precise about a second group of intermediate input pro-
ducing …rms that demand types of inputs in the same factor proportions and that
devote these inputs either to the production of new designs or to the production of
physical quantities of its intermediate inputs. For a speci…c …rm f , let inputs with
an overbar denote the inputs of a particular intermediate input producing …rm f
that are allocated to the production of new designs. In this case, the number of
new patents that result can be written as
                            Mf t+1 = (Zf t ) A1t
                                     0                 1
                                            ZAt
                                   = @H        x1jt dj A A1t
                                         0
In parallel, denote the inputs that …rm f devotes to the production of physical units
of intermediate inputs with a tilde. Let Af denote the set of goods that …rm f can
produce at time t at a positive pro…t (if it is still under patent) or at zero pro…t.
Note that there may be some goods that the …rm used to produce that are no longer
in Af because they are now imported from the South and would be unpro…table to
produce. Then we can characterize the production of the intermediate goods that
this …rm will produce in this period that will be sold in the next period as
                             Z                 ZAt
                                            e
                                 xjt+1 dj = H     e1jt dj:
                                                  x
                              Af
                                                 0
The total quantity of an input such as H that is controlled by …rm f is the sum
of H, which it devotes to innovation, and H;    e which it devotes to production of
physical units of intermediate goods for sale in the next period. In the same way,
the total quantity of any intermediate input that it has available for production
can also be split between these same two activities.
    This means that we can think of inputs being allocated between the three pro-
ductive activities in two steps. First, inputs are allocated between the consumption
good producing …rms and the intermediate input producing …rms. Next, the in-
termediate input producing …rms make an internal allocation decision, dividing
up their inputs between innovation and the production of physical units of the
intermediate inputs that will be for sale in the next period.

                                         15
     When is constant, a constant fraction of the o¤-patent goods that each inter-
mediate input …rm in the North had previously produced under trade protection are
now exposed to import competition. In the aggregate, the total stock of goods that
are available as imports in period t is equal to times the o¤-patent goods in period
t; or At 1 : For simplicity, we assume that this process of exposure is evenly dis-
tributed across all intermediate input producing …rms. For …rm f; this means that
if it had a set of goods Af that it produced last period with measure m(Af );in the
current period, it will produce a measure of goods equal to (1      )m(Af ) + m(Mf )
where Mf is the set of new goods that it invents. Firms can take account of the
predictable shrinkage in the goods that they can produce when they make their
decisions about how much of each type of input to acquire.
     In contrast, if a government mandates in period 1 an unanticipated increase in
   to 0 , there will be a jump in the number of goods that are subject to import com-
petition. At the aggregate level, the measure of goods in the goods unexpectedly
become unpro…table for Northern …rms is A0 ( 0         ).
     To match the micro data, which has some …rms that are exposed to larger trade
shocks than others, we want to allow for the possibility that this range of goods
A0 ( 0      ) is not equally distributed among all …rms. To do this, we split the set
of intermediate input producing …rms in the North into two groups of equal size.
We refer to these as the “Shocked”and “No Shock”…rms. We assume that all the
goods that are unexpectedly exposed to competition from imports are goods that
were previously manufactured by the Shocked …rms.
4.1.1 Timing with Fully Mobile Inputs
     With these de…nitions in mind, we can describe two di¤erent assumptions about
the mobility of factors. Consider …rst the case that we refer to as “Fully Mobile”
because all allocation decisions are made after the shock is announced.

  1. Intermediate goods …rms enter period 0 with completed intermediate goods.

  2. The government in the North announces a new level of the trade restriction 0
     that will be in e¤ect in period 1, together with the speci…c goods that will no
     longer be protected, which thereby determines which …rms are in the shock
     group and which are in the no shock group.

  3. Workers are hired by …rms. Intermediate goods …rms sell their goods at

                                         16
      the market clearing prices anticipated in period 1 to both domestic and
      foreign consumption and intermediate input producing …rms. Consumption
      producing …rms and intermediate input …rms thereby acquire the inputs that
      they will use to produce.

  4. Intermediate goods …rms in the North then allocate inputs between innovation
     and the production of units of intermediate goods that will be available for
     sale in the next period.

  5. The decisions that intermediate input producing …rms in both the South and
     the North make about quantities of inputs of each type to produce are publicly
     observed. For o¤-patent goods, the competitive fringe of fast copiers in the
     North stands ready to enter if these quantities are too low to yield a market
     price equal to marginal cost for the R goods that will be sold in the North.

   In this case, the trade shock of an increase from to 0 will be public information
before any inputs are allocated to any …rms. In particular, any intermediate input
producing …rm knows about the trade shock and knows if it is a shock …rm or a
no-shock …rm. If the intermediate input producing …rms as a group want to reduce
their input demands, inputs can freely move into the production of consumption
goods.
4.2    Trapped Factors Case
    We also consider a “Trapped Factors” case with less mobility in response to
a trade shock. We do so because of evidence on the impact of Chinese trade
on European …rms from Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen (2012). They …nd that
exposure to Chinese import competition leads to increases in innovative activity,
but much of the increase in innovation occurs within incumbent …rms. Even though
the prices and pro…ts of a¤ected …rms were falling, those that did not exit increased
their rates of innovation.
    Relatedly, Freeman and Kleiner (2005) showed in a case study that US shoe
manufacturers switched from making low-cost mass market shoes to innovative
niche products when faced with rising Chinese competition. In Italy Bugamelli et
al. (2010) show a range of manufacturers from ceramic tiles to women’s clothing
switched to more innovative high-end products in response to rising low-wage com-
petition. With less mobility across …rms, trapped factors within …rms may move

                                         17
     into innovation after increased import competition.16 In particular, in the trapped
     factors case we assume that the announcement of the change in comes after in-
     puts have already been allocated to the intermediate input producing …rms. This
     reverses the timing of steps 2 and 3 above. The new sequence has new steps 20 and
     30 given by:

       20 . Workers are hired by …rms. Intermediate goods …rms sell their goods at
            the market clearing prices anticipated in period 1 to both domestic and
            foreign consumption and intermediate input producing …rms. Consumption
            producing …rms and intermediate input …rms thereby acquire the inputs that
            they will use to produce.

       30. The new level of the trade restriction 0 that will be in e¤ect in period 1 is
           announced, together with the speci…c goods that will no longer be protected,
           which thereby determines which …rms are in the shocked group and which
           are in the no shock group.

         The announcement of the increase in induces three types of adjustments that
     can in‡uence the demand that an intermediate input producing …rm has for inputs.
     First, faster growth changes equilibrium interest rates and the desired split between
     saving and consumption, which has to be mirrored by a split of inputs between
     …rms that produce consumption goods and …rms that produce intermediate inputs.
     Second, an intermediate input producing …rm will want to allocate relatively more
     resources to innovation. Third, an intermediate input producing …rm in the Shock
     group that has lost some of its potential output markets will want to release inputs
     that can be taken up and used by other …rms.
         To calculate the full general equilibrium e¤ects of the shock, we must take
     into account not only these impact e¤ects on input demands but also any induced
     changes in interest rates and the terms of trade. The full equilibrium de…nitions
     for the closed economy, the open economy, and the trapped-factors trade shock
16
     Note also that to …t this evidence, and the evidence from Bernard, Jensen, Schott (2006) that
     …rms shift toward the production of new goods, sometimes even goods in new industries, we
     have developed a model in which innovation leads to new goods (Romer, 1987, 1990) rather than
     quality improvements (Aghion and Howitt, 1992.) A model of quality improvement based on
     “escape competition”as in Aghion, et al. (2005) would be more applicable to trade liberalization
     between countries with similar factor prices than the case we consider of liberalization with a
     South that has a pure cost advantage in any goods it can export production.

                                                   18
economy can be found in Appendix A. Factors will be trapped in a …rm in the
Shock group if ex post it wishes that had not taken on so many inputs. In this
case, the shadow value of its inputs will be lower that it was before the shock hit.
    Before moving to the quantitative analysis, we note one …nal technical detail.
For factors of production to be trapped in a …rm that has lost lines of production,
we have to make an assumption which ensures that it can not simply steal lines
of production from other …rms. If it could, then there would be no net e¤ect of
having trapped factors. Instead of having factors move to the production opportu-
nities, production opportunities can move to the factors. To give the assumption
of trapped factors some bite, we make the additional assumption that the cost of
producing a unit of any intermediate good is substantially lower for a …rm that de-
veloped the good and produced it in the past than it would be for an intermediate
input producing …rm that does not have this kind of experience.
    Having made this assumption, we then have to make a further simplifying as-
sumption to ensure that incumbent producers of the protected goods do not have
market power. This is where we rely on the existence of a second potential type of
intermediate input producing …rm, a “fast copier," which has been mentioned be-
fore. This means that there are two distinct types of intermediate input producing
…rms, innovators or fast copiers. Innovators, the type of …rm we have been describ-
ing so far, can develop new goods but they can’t copy the goods developed by other
…rms. In contrast, fast copiers can produce intermediate inputs developed by other
…rms at the same cost as the other …rm but they are not capable of innovation. We
can now be more precise and say that all the intermediate input producing …rms
in the South are fast copiers. All the intermediate input producing …rms that are
active in the North are innovators. In equilibrium, fast copiers never produce any-
thing in the North. Nevertheless, their presence limits the pricing decisions of the
intermediate input producing …rms in the North and forces them to sell o¤-patent
goods at marginal cost.

5    Quantitative Analysis: OECD Trade Liberal-
     ization with Non-OECD Countries
    We can now calibrate and perform a quantitative exercise with the model, con-
sidering the impact of a trade shock over a full transition path. Appendices B and


                                        19
     C give more details on the calibration and solution.
         First, we assume a model period of 10 years. Then, we calibrate the model
     economy to match long-run growth rates, and movements in trade ‡ows between the
     OECD and non-OECD countries from 1997-2006, the ten-year window surrounding
     Chinese WTO accession in 2001. As plotted in Appendix Figure B2, imports from
     non-OECD countries into the OECD almost doubled as a proportion of GDP over
     this period. China in particular accounts for almost half of the increase in low-wage
     imports. To match this pattern from the data, the model experiment we consider
     is an unanticipated, permanent trade shock moving from the balanced growth path
     from trade policy to a new liberalized policy 0 , as detailed in the theory section
     above.
     5.1     Calibration
         We started by specifying the basic parameters about which we have some prior
     information. Following Jones (1995a) and King and Rebelo (1999) we consider the
     case of log utility with = 1 and a labor share in production of = 32 .17 Balanced
     growth path real interest rates of approximately 4% require       = (0:98)10 . We
     also estimated the ratio HH    3 from international schooling data on educational
     attainment in the OECD and non-OECD countries in the year 2000: Therefore, we
     identify the OECD nations in our sample with the North and non-OECD nations
     with the South. We …x the parameter to the baseline value of = 0:5 based
     on Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen (2013). Appendix B contains more
     information over the calculation of H=H , and a later section checks robustness to
     di¤erent values of most of the parameters above.
         We must also choose the …nal three parameters H, , and 0 which jointly
     govern the model’s long-run balanced growth path growth rates and imports to
     output ratios. We compute the ratio of non-OECD imports to OECD GDP in 1997
     (3:9%) and 2006 (7:0%), requiring that the model reproduce these import ratios in
     the pre- and post-shock balanced growth paths, respectively. In other words, we
     require that the model reproduce the endpoints of the non-OECD imports series
17
     In our model the price of M goods is equal to 1 1 = 3 times cost given = 23 , so the markup
     on new varieties is substantial. Importantly, however, the average markup in our calibration
     is much lower, since all o¤-patent varieties of I and R goods are perfectly competitive. In our
     pre-trade shock baseline balanced growth path calibration described below, the average markup
     is approximately 40%.



                                                   20
     plotted in Appendix Figure B2. These import ratios are heavily in‡uenced by our
     choice of and 0 , leaving us still to determine the model’s scale through the choice
     of H to match growth rates from the data.
         We note that the model’s concept of growth is most closely aligned with frontier
     per capita GDP growth. We therefore prefer to calibrate long-run frontier growth
     to the per capita GDP growth of the United States rather than the entire OECD.
     We choose a wide sample window of 1960-2010, yielding a calibration of H to match
     a pre-shock average annual growth rate of 2:0%. 18
     5.2     The Long-Term Impact of a Trade Shock
         We summarize the long-term impacts of trade liberalization in our model in
     Table 1. To reproduce the changes in the OECD imports to GDP ratio observed in
     the data requires an exogenous increase in trade policy from 9:7% to 20:7%, and
     this exogenous change produces, through the e¤ective market size e¤ect discussed
     in Section 3, a movement in the long-term growth rate from its pre-shock calibrated
     value of 2:0% to a new value of 2:37%.

                       Table 1: Long-Run Impact of Liberalization
                                 %          Pre-Shock Post-Shock
                                                             9:7            20:7
                           Imports to GDP                    3:9             7:0
                            Growth Rate                     2:00            2:37
                       Southern Terms of Trade               0:5             0:7
                            Interest Rate                    4:0             4:4
         Note: The table above displays pre- and post-shock values of the main quantities
     within the model. The values re‡ect the long run or the balanced growth path associated
     with the indicated value of the trade policy parameter . All quantities are in annualized
     percentages except for the Southern terms of trade which is equivalent to the model
     relative price q .

18
     We take two steps to examine the robustness of our results to this calibration strategy. First, in a
     robustness check discussed further in a later section we consider an alternative calibration window
     ending at Chinese WTO accession in 2001 for the pre-shock growth rate, and second we also solve
     a version of the model with “semi-endogenous growth”and therefore only level rather than growth
     e¤ects on output from changes in trade policy. Details on the semi-endogenous growth version of
     the model can be found in Appendix D.




                                                     21
     5.3    Transition Dynamics in the Fully Mobile Economy
         Next we consider the transition dynamics of the fully mobile economy, starting
     from the balanced growth path associated with trade policy and allowing an
     unanticipated and permanent trade policy shock          ! 0 that is announced in
     period 0, to become e¤ective in period 1.
         In Figure 3, we plot the aggregate transition dynamics of the fully mobile econ-
     omy for aggregate variety growth, the terms of trade, and output growth in the
     North and South. Consumption growth, and interest rates, follow the pattern for
     output growth.
         The full transition to the new balanced growth path is complete in approxi-
     mately 6 periods (60 years). Given the trade liberalization shock, the Southern
     terms of trade increases rapidly to maintain balanced trade, leading to an associ-
     ated increase in the returns to innovation and hence the aggregate variety growth
     rate. Consumption smoothing dictates a slower, smooth transition of consumption
     growth rates, output growth rates, and interest rates in both economies to their
     long-run values.19
         We can also compute the long-run welfare gains from trade in the fully mobile
     environment, taking the transition path into account (see Table 2). The North gains
     by a consumption equivalent of 14:2%, while the South gains by a consumption
     equivalent of 13:3%. In other words, we would have to increase the consumption
     of the Northern household without trade liberalization by 14:2% in every period to
     make it as well o¤ is it would be in the equilibrium with the trade liberalization.
     The details of the welfare calculations are available in Appendix C.20
         These welfare gains from trade are large compared to current state-of-the-art
     quantitative analysis of the welfare gains from trade relative to autarky in static
     trade models. A recent example of this static type of analysis, done in Melitz and
     Redding (2013a) and relying primarily upon love of variety gains from liberalization,
     suggests that welfare gains from all trade for the US around the year 2000 are
     approximately 2:5%. It is clear that the higher rate of growth induced by the
19
   The slight overshooting of variety growth in period 1 is due to the fact that Northern interest
   rates are initially lower than their new long-run levels, decreasing the marginal cost of innovation
   and raising the return to innovation for Northern …rms in the short run.
20
   Note that although both economies can utilize new goods and therefore bene…t from the increase
   in long-run growth rates, the terms of trade ensure that the North uses these new goods with
   higher intensity and therefore bene…ts slightly more from liberalization.


                                                   22
     liberalization could be powerful source of welfare improvement from trade.
     5.4     Transition Dynamics in the Trapped Factors Economy
         In Figure 4 we plot the path of some selected aggregates over a trapped factors
     transition path. Comparing the trapped factors transition with the fully mobile
     transition in Figure 3 above, we immediately note that the variety growth rate is
     higher upon impact of the trade shock. Instead of a growth rate of about 2:4%
     in the shock period as seen in the fully mobile transition, the trapped factors
     variety growth rate on impact is 2:7%. The increased Northern innovation and
     ‡ow of M goods from North to South in the shock period slows the appreciation
     in the Southern terms of trade, and output growth in the North and South both
     overshoot their long-run levels after the trade shock. Although the transition path
     is again complete in approximately 6 periods (60 years), the path of innovation
     is clearly signi…cantly higher in the presence of short-run adjustment costs and
     trapped factors.
         Recall that we assume that there are two industries with half of the …rms each.
     One of these industries (Shocked) contains all the shocked …rms and bears the
     brunt of the direct e¤ects of liberalization in that all of the liberalized R goods
     varieties which lose protection are in this industry. The other industry (No Shock)
     has no liberalized R goods. In Figure 5; we plot three separate patent ‡ows. In
     the solid black bar on the left labeled “Pre-Shock,” we present period 0 or pre-
     shock patent ‡ows for the “Shocked” and “No-Shock” industries, which are ex-
     ante identical. These patent ‡ows are arbitrarily normalized to 1; 000 for ease of
     reference. The blue middle bar with upward-sloping lines and the red right bar
     with downward sloping lines, by contrast, plot the patent ‡ows for industry “No-
     Shock” and for industry “Shocked” during period 1, the period in which policy
     liberalization becomes e¤ective. Although both industries increase patenting during
     the shock period due to terms of trade movements, industry “Shocked” patents
     approximately 28:8% more in the period after the shock. The cross-sectional link
     between industry patenting and exposure to low-cost import competition in the
     model is consistent with the increased innovation documented by Bloom, Draca,
     and Van Reenen (2012) in European …rms exposed to Chinese import competition
     relative to their una¤ected peers.21
21
     For example, in European textiles and clothing, a 10% increase in the share of imports from China


                                                    23
    The stark increase in innovation or patenting at …rms in the shocked industry
is directly linked to a surplus of resources useful for R&D at those …rms, which
unexpectedly lose 24% of their R goods varieties to import competition. In Figure
6 we expand the set of variables included in the trapped factors transition path.
In the top two panels we can see the shadow value of resources in each industry,
which in normal times without trade shocks is normalized to 100%. Since the lost
R goods opportunities imply a surplus of inputs which must be allocated to the
unanticipated use of innovation, on the top left panel we see an opportunity cost or
resource shadow value decline of 25:5% in period 1 for …rms in the shocked industry.
    In the upper right panel of Figure 6 we also see a much more moderate decline
in opportunity costs by around 9:8% at …rms in the no-shock industry. This is less
intuitive and operates entirely through general equilibrium channels. To understand
this, we must examine the movements in interest rates also recorded in Figure
6. The sudden increase in variety growth in the Northern economy in the shock
period induces an increase in consumption growth rates and hence interest rates.
Therefore, even though this does not represent an increases in resources within the
no-shock …rms, the higher interest rates and hence changed marginal valuations
of their Northern owners require a fall in these …rms’ shadow values to deliver
consistency with their value-maximization problem.
    Turning again to welfare measures, the total consumption equivalent welfare
increases from the trade shock with trapped factors are 16:3% for the North, com-
pared to the 14:2% dynamic gains in the fully mobile case discussed above. To
understand this larger welfare gain from trapped factors, note that the externali-
ties in the innovation process through which previous ideas at one …rm assist later
innovation by all …rms are not taken into account in the …rm’s innovation optimality
conditions. Hence, there is “too little”R&D from a social welfare perspective, as is
typical in endogenous growth models. The initial increase in variety growth due to
the trapped factors mechanism helps to moderate this social ine¢ ciency and leads
to a welfare increase from our model. Compared to the aggregate welfare gains of
14:2% from trade liberalization in the fully mobile case, the marginal impact of the
trapped factors mechanism is approximately a tenth of the total gains from trade
liberalization (2.1%). However, while this is small overall, in the …rst period (10
within a particularly industry and country is estimated to lead to an approximately 19% increase
in patenting in that industry. See Table II in Panel A and Column 3.

                                              24
     years in our simulation) trapped factors roughly doubles the impact of the trade
     shock on innovation. So the short-run impact of this mechanism is potentially
     large, and will thus be important for policy (for which a 10 year time frame is the
     long-term) and empirical work.
     5.5     What is the Contribution of China to OECD Growth?
         Our model suggests that there was a large scale e¤ect and smaller trapped
     factors e¤ect from the expansion of low-wage country trade from 1997 to 2006.
     Given the intense policy interest and recent academic literature in the area22 we
     now consider what was the incremental e¤ect of the increased trade with China
     alone? To do this, we scale back the trade shock by assuming that from 1997 to
     2006, exports from other countries grew as they did but that exports from China
     remained constant as a fraction of OECD GDP. With the resulting admittedly
     stark “No China”counterfactual, maintaining our trapped factors assumption, we
     can calculate by how much growth and welfare increase in our baseline because of
     the e¤ect of China alone.

           Table 2: The Contribution of China to Northern Growth and Welfare
              %         Data Import Ratio YI Short-Run Growth g Model Welfare Gain
         Pre-Shock                  3:9                      2:0
        Fully Mobile                7:0                      2:4                    14:2
      Trapped Factors,
          Baseline                   7:0                     2:7                    16:3
         No China                   5:39                     2:4                     7:2
         Note: The …rst column represents the ratio of non-OECD to OECD imports relative
     to OECD GDP in the pre-shock period (1997), and the post-shock period (2006). The
     No China …gures represent imports from the non-OECD excluding China, while the
     Baseline …gures represent imports from the entire non-OECD. Imports data comes from
     the OECD-STAN database, with Chinese data available directly and non-OECD data
     imputed as the di¤erence between world and OECD imports into OECD member states.
     The normalizing GDP measure for the OECD is computed using Version 7.1 of the Penn
     World Tables. The second column presents the pre-shock calibrated growth rate as well
     as trapped factors transition path growth rates in period 1 (the period after a trade
     shock). The third Welfare Gain column represents, for the Fully Mobile and Trapped
     Factors, Baseline cases, the Northern consumption equivalent gain from observed levels
     of trade liberalization relative to a world with no trade shock. For the No China row,
     the welfare gain is the consumption equivalent gain from the Trapped Factors, Baseline
     case relative to the No China transition path.
22
     For example, Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), Manova and Zhang (2012), Khandelwal, et al.
     (2011), and Pierce and Schott, (2012).


                                               25
    Over the period 1997 2006, Chinese exports as a share of OECD GDP increased
by 1.6 percentage points from 0:79% to 2:4%. So of the 3.1 percentage point
increase in non-OECD import shares, over half was from China. Table 2 summarizes
the results of this counterfactual exercise, and Figure 7 plots the trapped-factors
transition path in the baseline and No China cases. The growth and terms of trade
e¤ects of liberalization are dampened considerably.
    In the North, the consumption equivalent welfare gain for the North of the
baseline transition path relative to the No China case is approximately 7:2%, and
approximately 6:8% in the South. Compared to the baseline gains from trade
liberalization considered above of 16:3%, this implies that the Chinese contribution
to the gains from liberalization are approximately 44%. The long-run growth e¤ects
of China are similarly substantial, with post-liberalization balanced growth rates
in the No China case of 2:2% rather than the baseline 2:4%, a contribution of
approximately 0:2%. We conclude that understanding the OECD and Chinese
policies which contributed to the increased trade with China is a crucial avenue to
consider when quantifying dynamic gains from liberalization over this period.
    A caveat to this strategy is that it assumes a counterfactual world in which
policy-makers do not “make up the gap” by relaxing restrictions on non-Chinese
low wage imports. If such a relaxation did take place this would reduce the marginal
contribution of China to welfare. In a robustness check in Appendix B, we compute
the marginal impact of China with half of all Chinese import growth allowed in
as imports from the non-OECD non-Chinese countries. As expected, these results
essentially halve the Chinese contribution to innovation and welfare.
5.6    Price and Variety E¤ects
   A useful exercise is to decompose the impact of liberalization on output into
dynamic variety e¤ects, which require an endogenous growth structure, and price
e¤ects that are the focus of more traditional quantitative trade models. The relative
contributions of price and variety e¤ects may di¤er in the short run and the long
run, so we will consider both. We …nd that price e¤ects are responsible for about
one-third of Northern output gains in the period of trade liberalization, but that
in a typical period along the model’s balanced growth path, variety e¤ects are
dominant, accounting for approximately 95% of output gains.
   More precisely, we …rst compute Northern output in the shock period shutting


                                         26
     down any unexpected conversion of protected R goods varieties into imported I
     goods (Y1noprice ).23 Since imported goods are cheaper than domestic goods, the
     di¤erence in output relative to the baseline level Y1 can be interpreted as due to
     a traditional price e¤ect. We then compute the value of Northern output if we
     shut down not just the unexpected price e¤ects but also hold back the creation
     of additional newly innovated M goods varieties at its pre-shock level (Y1novariety ).
                                                                          Y Y1noprice
     The ratio of price to total output gains in the shock period is Y 1 Y novariety   = 0:37,
                                                                          1 1
     so slightly more than one third of the output gains from liberalization in the shock
     period arise from the price e¤ect.24
         The price e¤ects are substantial in the shock period when a large number of
     cheaper goods are unexpectedly allowed into the North as new imports. By con-
     trast, the contribution of price e¤ects decreases to a miniscule level in the long run.
     In particular, let Northern output along the pre-shock balanced growth path in an
     arbitrary period be Yss : Then, compute output if the ongoing conversion of goods
     from domestic to lower-price imported varieties is shut down for one period (coun-
     terfactual level Yssnoprice ). Finally, compute output if the newly innovated varieties
     in that period are further removed, (counterfactual level Yssnovariety ). The ratio of
                                                                               noprice
     price to total output gains along the balanced growth path is YYss YYnovariety
                                                                              ss
                                                                                       = 0:05.
                                                                         ss ss
     Therefore in the long run we see that dynamic variety e¤ects, large in endogenous
     growth structures such as ours, are the dominant factor in output growth, about
     95% of the total Northern output gains.

     6     Extensions and Robustness
         In this section we discuss some extensions and the robustness of our results.
     6.1     Robustness of Calibration
         The qualitative e¤ect of trade liberalization on growth, and the boost of innova-
     tion from the trapped factors mechanism, are quite robust to alternative parame-
     trizations. To demonstrate this we vary parameter values and consider the impact
     upon the variety growth rate in the trapped factors transition in Figure 8. In none
23
     Further details on all the counterfactual decompositions in this section are in Appendix C.
24
     Note that trade liberalization does not change the price of o¤-patent goods in the South, so we
     focus only on Northern output in these calculations. Also, on the fully mobile transition path,
     a similar calculation yields an output contribution of approximately 45% from price e¤ects and
     55% from dynamic e¤ects, with the di¤erence from the trapped factors case, discussed in the text,
     due to slightly di¤erent terms of trade in the shock period between the two cases.



                                                    27
     of these cases is the pattern or magnitude qualitatively changed. Finally, in an
     unreported robustness check, we used an alternative calibration window of the pre-
     shock growth rate to the US per capita real GDP growth rate from 1960-2001, with
     qualitatively similar dynamics starting from a di¤erent growth level.
     6.2     Semi-endogenous growth
         As discussed above, Jones (1995b) argues for an alternative innovation produc-
     tion function. We have been using Mf t+1 = (Zf t ) A1t ; but an alternative is to use
     an exponent less than 1      on A1t following Jones’“semi-endogenous”approach.
     In such models steady state growth no longer depends on the level of human cap-
     ital but on the growth of human capital. In Appendix D, we fully re-derive all
     the implications for long-term growth from such a model and numerically compute
     transition paths in this case, allowing for growth in human capital. Reasonably
     calibrated transition dynamics are extremely persistent, and long-run di¤erences
     between our baseline model and the semi-endogenous growth model are heavily dis-
     counted into the future. The two model assumptions therefore deliver remarkably
     similar quantitative welfare results.
     6.3     R&D congestion e¤ects
         Another concern with our baseline model is that R&D could have cross-…rm
     congestion e¤ects - from research duplication or patent race type e¤ects. In an
     extension discussed in detail in Appendix E, we also introduce a model parameter
       which allows for R&D congestion externalities. ‡exibly nests our baseline case
     of no congestion externalities, ( = 1), but also allows for intermediate degrees
     of congestion all the way to the extreme case of full externalization of R&D costs
     ( = 0).
         Empirical evidence suggests that these congestion e¤ects are not large in the
     economy as a whole. Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen (2013) estimate con-
     gestion e¤ects from a large sample of US …rms and …nd them to be statistically
     insigni…cant (i.e. = 1).25 Consequently, we have chosen to omit R&D cost ex-
     ternalities from the baseline model. For completeness, however, we also consider
     the intermediate case of = 0:5 in Figure 8. In this case, congestion externalities
25
     Table IV of Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013) shows how R&D undertaken by …rms’
     product rivals has no negative congestion e¤ects on rates of innovation, and R&D done by …rms’
     technology markets rivals generates the usual large positive knowledge spillovers.



                                                  28
dampen the magnitude of the short-term growth boost from trade. The dampening
e¤ect is not quantitatively large, however, and the long-run growth e¤ect remains
the same.
6.4    Other channels through which China in‡uences welfare
     Trade between OECD countries and low-wage countries like China can have a
large number of e¤ects in addition to the ones considered in this paper. We focus on
its impact on the incentives for developing new goods because of the sheer potential
scale of the dynamic gains from trade that it o¤ers.
     The most important potential o¤set to these gains, however, might come from
the labor market. Our model, like many others in trade, abstracts away from the
unemployment and wage losses that may arise as workers are reallocated. Recent
work by Pierce and Schott (2012), Autor and Dorn (2013) and Autor, Dorn, and
Hanson (2013) suggests that these dislocation e¤ects can be substantial. There may
be long-run e¤ects on inequality through Heckscher-Ohlin factor price equalization
e¤ects or imperfect labor markets. Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010) show
how trade may increase steady state unemployment and wage inequality by mak-
ing the exporting sector more attractive in a search theoretic context, with some
evidence for the theory in Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler, and Redding (2012).
     When our single adjustment cost traps factors of production inside a …rm, an
unexpected increase in low-wage imports will cause losses that must be shared
between the workers and the equity holders of an a¤ected …rm. We do not model
how these losses are shared, so that in e¤ect our approach is equivalent to making
the assumption that there is a perfect insurance market among all residents in
the North. To be sure, other types of adjustment costs could reduce welfare by
making unemployment worse or exposing people to new uninsured risks. But as
our analysis shows, in endogenous models of growth, it does not immediately follow
that adjustment costs necessarily reduces gain from trade.
6.5    Anticipation E¤ects
   We have modeled the trade shock as being unexpected to …rms. Although
events such as China’s WTO accession were of course partially anticipated, there
was some surprise as negotiations were fraught. Moreover, in the entire European
Union the liberalizations with China were temporarily reversed due to a political
backlash.


                                        29
         To the extent that a shift from to 0 is announced in anticipated, agents
     will change their behavior.26 In particular there will be a disincentive to invest
     in trapped factors because the …rm anticipates the liberalization. Hence, North-
     ern …rms will start shifting into more innovation activities prior to the liberaliza-
     tion. The transition dynamics will change even though the long-run post-transition
     growth rates will remain the same. These considerations also demonstrate why a
     policy maker cannot engineer a larger short-run e¤ect from trade by increasing
     adjustment costs. Increasing …ring costs, for example, will certainly made factors
     more trapped, but it would itself signal impending liberalization and undue the
     desired innovative e¤ect.
     6.6    Patent Length vs. Adjustment Cost Horizon
         Embedded within our analysis is an assumption that the model period, 10 years
     in our calibration, represents both monopoly protection period and the period over
     which factors are trapped. While this is not an unreasonable assumption given
     large empirical estimates of adjustment costs27 - it is clearly very stark and worth
     exploring.
         Allowing asset and monopoly lengths to di¤er would considerably complicate
     our analysis. However, we can consider the impacts qualitatively by examining the
     two potential cases arising from delinking the monopoly horizon (T M ) years, from
     the adjustment cost horizon (T A ). First, if T A > T M , then adjustment-cost induced
     periods of immobility are longer than monopoly protection. Trapped inputs would
     be used for the innovation of multiple cohorts of new varieties, which would likely
     not change the results qualitatively.
         In the alternative case of T A < T M , preexisting cohorts of on-patent varieties
     may exist within …rms at the time of a trade shock. These preexisting monopoly
     varieties would o¤er an alternative substitution possibility into which trapped re-
     sources could be directed instead of innovation. This would reduce the innovation
     boost induced by our trapped factors mechanism, but on the other hand it would
26
   See Costantini and Melitz (2008) for similar points in the context of technology adoption and
   trade.
27
   Capital and labor adjustment costs are typically estimated at between 10% to 50% of the lifetime
   cost of the assets (Bloom, 2009) making these long–term investment similar to intellectual property
   protection. Also, while patent lengths vary between 15 to 20 years, e¤ective patent lengths are
   typically shorter due to imitation, processing lags, and imperfections in enforcement. As such, a
   10 year patent life is quite reasonable in our theoretical structure.


                                                  30
also reduce the welfare loss from monopoly mark-ups. Hence, the net impact on
welfare is ambiguous.

7     Conclusion
    In this paper we present a new general equilibrium model of trade with en-
dogenous growth that allows factors of production to be temporarily “trapped”in
…rms due, for example, to speci…c capital. This trapped factors model allows us to
rationalize why in the face of an import shock from a low-wage country like China,
incumbent …rms in the a¤ected industry may innovate more, as the …rm-level micro-
data suggest (Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen 2012; Freeman and Kleiner, 2005).
The mechanism behind this e¤ect is a fall in the opportunity cost of R&D caused
by a fall in the shadow cost of these trapped factors. The model also contains
the more standard theoretical mechanism from the literature on trade and growth,
whereby integration increases the pro…ts from innovation.
    We calibrate a model and quantify the e¤ects of a trade liberalization of the mag-
nitude we observed in the decade around China’s accession to the WTO 1997-2006.
Empirically, we …nd a substantial increase in welfare from such trade integration:
a consumption equivalent increase of the order of 16% and a permanent increase
in growth of around 0.4%. This leads to welfare e¤ects that are much larger than
conventional calibrations of static trade models which ignore the dynamic e¤ects of
trade on growth because they do not allow for the possibility that more innovation
by …rms can lead to more productivity growth for the economy as a whole. About
a tenth (2% out of a 16% consumption equivalent increase) of the overall welfare
gains are due to our trapped factor mechanism, a small but non-trivial proportion.
Moreover, these trapped factor gains from growth come in the immediate aftermath
of the a trade-liberalization, and so will be important to policymakers.
    These large dynamic gains from trade depend on increased pro…ts that innova-
tors in the North can earn from sales in the South. In this sense, the model rati…es
the increasing attention that trade negotiators are devoting to non-tari¤ barriers
that might limit a foreign …rm’s ability to earn pro…ts from a newly developed good.
We have seen this already in the TRIPS agreement under the WTO, and better
protection of intellectual property rights is also reported to be a central goal in the
US approach to the negotiations leading up to the Trans Paci…c Partnership. If this
is where the largest welfare gains lie, this is where trade agreements can have their

                                          31
biggest e¤ects.
    As noted in the Introduction, there are many ways in which the modeling frame-
work could be extended and made more realistic. First, we have abstracted from
“catch-up”in which growth rates in the South are higher than in North due to im-
itation. We did this in order to focus on welfare bene…ts in the North from a faster
opening up of trade restrictions with the South. Second, we focus on the impact of
North-South integration rather than North-North integration. This was motivated
by evidence that the pro-innovation e¤ects in the North were far stronger when
trade barriers against the South were relaxed compared to richer countries, but an
extended framework along say the lines of Aghion et al. (2005) could allow for
Schumpeterian and “escape competition”e¤ects. Third, a more careful analysis of
the labor market and uninsured risk could o¤er an important o¤set to the e¤ects
that we identify. Although we have gone beyond steady states to look at transition
dynamics we have, as is standard, abstracted away from the distributional changes
as workers may su¤er wage losses and unemployment when we introduce frictions
in the labor market. These do seem to matter empirically so more work needs to be
done to also incorporate such e¤ects in quantitative theory models (e.g. Harrison,
McLaren, and McMillan, 2011).
    The main message of our paper is that liberalized trade with the South can
have substantial bene…ts in for the North and the entire world because it induces
more innovation. This increase arises mainly through long-run increases in the
pro…ts that a new …rm can earn from a newly developed good, but also because of
a temporary contribution from trapped factors that reduces the opportunity cost
of innovation. China alone accounts for almost half of the increase in welfare we
identify.
    Because these bene…ts are less visible than the losses that …rms and workers
can face from an unexpected increase in trade, and because these e¤ects can take
decades to be realized, it is as important as ever for economists to understand why
it may be so important to pursue and protect the gains from trade.



References
    Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt (1992) “A model of growth through creative
destruction,” Econometrica, 60(2), 323-351.


                                        32
Aghion, Philippe, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Gri¢ th, and Peter Howitt
(2005) “Competition and innovation: an inverted-U relationship,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(2), 701-728.
    Aghion, Philippe, and Gilles Saint-Paul (1998) “Virtues of bad times,” Macroeco-
nomic Dynamics, 2(3), 322-344.
    Amiti, Mary, and Jozef Konings (2006) “Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs and
productivity: evidence from Indonesia,”American Economic Review, 97(5), 1611-1638.
    Antras, Pol and Stephen R. Yeaple (2013) “Multinational Firms and the Structure of
International Trade,” Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4, forthcoming.
    Arkolakis,Costas, Arnaud Costinot and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2012) “New Trade
Models, Same old gains” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94-130
    Atkeson, Andrew, and Ariel Burstein (2010) “Innovation, …rm dynamics, and inter-
national trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(3), 433-484.
Autor, David H., and David Dorn (2013) “The growth of low skill service jobs and the
polarization of the US labor market,” forthcoming American Economic Review.
    Autor, David H., Dorn, David and Gordon H. Hanson (2013) “The China syndrome:
local labor e¤ects of import competition in the United States,” forthcoming American
Economic Review
    Aw, Bee Yan, Mark Roberts and Daniel Xu (2011) “R&D, exporting and productivity
dynamics” American Economic Review 101 1312-1344
Barro, Robert, and Jong-Wha Lee (2010) “A new data set of educational attainment in
the world, 1950-2010," NBER working paper 15902.
    Bernard, Andrew, Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott (2006) “Survival of the best …t:
exposure to low-wage countries and the (uneven) growth of US manufacturing establish-
ments,” Journal of International Economics, 68(1), 219-237.
    Bernhofen, D. and J. Brown (2005) “An Empirical Assessment of the Comparative
Advantage Gains from Trade: Evidence from Japan,” American Economic Review, 208-
225.
Bloom, Nicholas (2009) “The impact of uncertainty shocks,” Econometrica, 77(3), 623-
685.
    Bloom, Nicholas , Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen (2012) “Trade induced techni-
cal change? The impact of Chinese imports on innovation, IT and productivity,” Centre
for Economic Performance Discussion Paper 1000.
    Bloom, Nicholas , Paul M. Romer, Stephen J. Terry and John Van Reenen (2013) “A
Trapped Factors Model of Innovation: short version”American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings 103(3): 208-13
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen (2013) “Identifying technol-
ogy spillovers and product market rivalry,” Econometrica, 81 (4) 1347–1393
    Bugamelli, Matteo, Fabiano Schivardi, and Roberta Zizza (2010) “The Euro and …rm
restructuring” Center for Labor and Economic Growth working paper 01.
    Bustos, Paula (2011) “Trade liberalization, exports, and technology upgrading: evi-
dence on the impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian …rms,”American Economic Review,
101(1), 304-340.
    Costantini, James and Marc Melitz (2008) “The dynamics of …rm-level adjustment
to trade liberalization”in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin and Thierry Verdier (eds) The
organization of …rms in a global economy, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
    Costinot, Arnaud and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare (2013) “Trade theory with numbers:


                                          33
quantifying the consequences of globalization,” NBER working paper 18896.
     De Loecker, Jan (2011) “Product di¤erentiation, multi-product …rms and estimating
the impact of trade liberalization on productivity” Econometrica, 79(5), 1407–1451.
     De Loecker, Jan and Penelopi Goldberg (2014) “Firm Performance in a Global Mar-
ket” forthcoming, Annual Review
     Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2012) “Putting Ricardo to Work” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 26(2) 65-90.
     Freeman, Richard and Morris Kleiner (2005) “The last American shoe manufacturer”
Industrial Relations, 44(2), 307-342.
     Feyrer, James (2013) “Distance, Trade, and Income – The 1967 to 1975 Closing of
the Suez Canal as a Natural Experiment”, NBER working paper 15557.
     Frankel, Je¤rey and David Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” (1999) American
Economic Review, 1999, 89 (3), 379–99.
     Goldberg, Pinelopi, Amit Khandewal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova (2010) “Im-
ported intermediate inputs and domestic product growth: evidence from India,”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 125(4), 1727-1767.
     Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1990) “Comparative advantage and long-run
growth” American Economic Review, 80(4), 796-815.
     Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1991) Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
     Hall, Robert E. (1991) “Recessions as reorganizations” NBER Macroeconomics An-
nual.
     Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg (2001) “The NBER patent
citations data …le: lessons, insights, and methodological tools,” NBER working paper
8498.
     Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999) “Why do some countries produce so much
more output per worker than others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83-116.
     Harrison, Ann, John McLaren, and Margaret McMillan (2011) “Recent perspectives
on trade and inequality,” Annual Review of Economics, 3(1), 261-289.
     Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding (2010) “Inequality and un-
employment in a global economy,” Econometrica, 78(4), 1239-1283.
     Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc Muendler and Stephen Redding (2012) “Trade
and inequality: from theory to estimation,” NBER working paper 17991.
     Irwin, Douglas (2005) “The Welfare Costs of Autarky: Evidence from the Je¤ersonian
Embargo, 1807-1809” Review of International Economics, 13 631-45.
     Jones, Charles I. (1995a) “Time series tests of endogenous growth models,”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 110(2), 495-525.
     Jones, Charles I. (1995b) “R&D-based models of economic growth,” Journal of Po-
litical Economy, 103(4), 759-784.
     Khandelwal, Amit K., Peter K. Schott, and Shan-Jin Wei (2011) “Trade liberalization
and embedded institutional reform: evidence from Chinese exporters,” NBER working
paper 17524.
     King, Robert G. and Sergio T. Rebelo (1999) “Resuscitating real business cycles,”
NBER working paper 7534.
     Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Tre‡er (2010). Improved access to foreign markets raises
plant-level productivity ... for some plants. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125


                                          34
(3), 1051–1099.
    Manova, Kalina, and Zhiwei Zhang (2012) “Export prices across …rms and destina-
tions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 379-436.
    Melitz, Marc and Stephen Redding (2013a) “Firm heterogeneity and aggregate wel-
fare,” Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper 1200.
    Melitz, Marc and Stephen Redding (2013b) “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade,”Hand-
book of International Trade, vol. 4, forthcoming
    Mussa, Michael (1974) “Tari¤s and the distribution of income: the importance of
factor speci…city, substitutability, and intensity in the short and long run,” Journal of
Political Economy, 82(6), 1191-1203.
    Ossa, Ralph and Chang-Tai Hsieh (2010) “A global view of productivity growth in
China,” University of Chicago working paper.
    Pavcnik, Nina (2002) “Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements:
evidence from Chilean establishments,”Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 245-276.
    Perla, Jesse, Christopher Tonetti, and Michael E. Waugh (2012) “Equilibrium tech-
nology di¤usion, trade, and growth,” NYU working paper.
    Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott (2012) “The surprisingly swift decline of U.S.
manufacturing employment,” NBER working paper 18655.
    Puga, Diego, and Daniel Tre‡er (2010) “Wake up and smell the ginseng: The rise
of incremental innovation in low-wage countries,” Journal of Development Economics,
91(1), 64-76..
    Romer, Paul M. (1987) “Growth based on increasing returns due to specialization,”
American Economic Review, 77 (2), 56-62.
    Romer, Paul M. (1990). "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 98. No 5, S71-S102..
    Romer, Paul M. (1992). "Two Strategies for Economic Development: Using Ideas vs.
Producing Ideas", in World Bank Conference on Development Economics, The World
Bank (Washington DC). 1992.
    Rivera-Batiz, Luis, and Paul M. Romer (1991) “Economic integration and endogenous
growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2), 531-555.
    Sampson, Thomas (2014) “Dynamic Selection: An Idea Flows Theory of Entry, Trade,
and Growth.” LSE working paper.
    Schoellman, Todd (2011) “Education quality and development accounting,” Arizona
State working paper.
    Schmidt, Klaus (1997) “Managerial incentives and product market competition,”Re-
view of Economic Studies, 64(2), 191-213.
    Tre‡er, Daniel (2004) “The Long and Short of the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement,”
American Economic Review, 94(4), 870-895.




                                           35
                                             1RUWK
                  I goods                     R goods                  M goods                                                                                                           
               
               
                  
                     
                                                                                                                                                                                        



                                                                                                                                                               
                              φA                                                    At
                                   t-1                                  At-1


                                                6RXWK

                  I goods                     R goods                   M goods
               
               
                  
                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                           



                              φA                                                    At
                                    t-1                                 At-1
                                                                                                                                            Figure 2: Balanced Growth Path Equilibrium
                                                                                                                      Note: The ﬁgure plots the equilibrium innovation optimality condition for Northern intermediate goods ﬁrms in the
                          Figure 1: A Product Cycle in the Model                                                      balanced growth path of the open-economy model. The innovation optimality condition pins down balanced growth path
                                                                                                                      growth rates in this framework, and as implied by in Proposition 2 increases in the returns to innovation induced by
                                                                                                                      increases in φ lead to strictly higher long-run growth rates.
Note: The ﬁgure plots the product cycle for intermediate goods in the open-economy model. In the open-economy
equilibrium deﬁned and analyzed in the paper, goods in each period will display the above decomposition, into newly
innovated M goods produced solely in the North, perfectly competitive but non-traded R goods produced in the North
and the South, and perfectly competitive, traded I goods produced solely in the South.
                             A: Variety Growth                                  B: Southern Terms of Trade                                                A: Variety Growth                                 B: Southern Terms of Trade

                                      ●       Transition




                2.8
                                                                                                                                             2.8
                                                                                                                                                                    ●




                                                                             0.70
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.70
                                              Pre−Shock BGP                                        ●   ●   ●   ●   ●                                                                                                                   ●   ●   ●   ●

                                              Post−Shock BGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●




                                                                             0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.60
                                          ●




                2.4
                                                                                                                                             2.4
                                               ●   ●   ●   ●                                                                                                            ●   ●   ●   ●

                                                                                    ●    ●    ●                                                                                                                 ●    ●    ●




    Annual %
                                                                                                                                  Annual %




                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                               North/South
                                                                                                                                                                                           North/South
                        ●    ●    ●                                                                                                                  ●    ●    ●




                2.0
                                                                                                                                             2.0




                                                                             0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.40



                        −2   −1   0       1    2   3   4   5                        −2   −1   0    1   2   3   4   5                                 −2   −1   0    1   2   3   4   5                           −2   −1   0       1    2   3   4   5

                                      Period                                                      Period                                                           Period                                                     Period


                      C: Northern Output Growth                                 D: Southern Output Growth                                          C: Northern Output Growth                                D: Southern Output Growth

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●       Transition




                2.8
                                                                             2.8
                                                                                                                                             2.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pre−Shock BGP
                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Post−Shock BGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●




                2.4
                                                                             2.4
                                                                                                                                             2.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.4




                                                   ●   ●   ●                                               ●   ●   ●                                                        ●   ●   ●                                             ●            ●   ●
                                               ●                                                       ●                                                                ●
                                          ●                                                        ●




    Annual %
                                                               Annual %
                                                                                                                                  Annual %
                                                                                                                                                                                           Annual %




                        ●    ●    ●                                                 ●    ●    ●                                                      ●    ●    ●                                                ●    ●    ●




                2.0
                                                                             2.0
                                                                                                                                             2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.0




                        −2   −1   0       1    2   3   4   5                        −2   −1   0    1   2   3   4   5                                 −2   −1   0    1   2   3   4   5                           −2   −1   0       1    2   3   4   5

                                      Period                                                      Period                                                           Period                                                     Period

               Figure 3: Liberalization Boosts Growth in Fully Mobile Model                                                                         Figure 4: Trapped Factors Increase Short-Run Growth
Note: The ﬁgure displays the benchmark transition path in response to a permanent, unanticipated trade liberalization         Note: The ﬁgure displays the trapped-factors transition path in response to a permanent, unanticipated trade liberaliza-
from policy parameter φ to φ > φ, which is announced in period 0 to become eﬀective in period 1. The plotted transition      tion from policy parameter φ to φ > φ, which is announced in period 0 to become eﬀective in period 1. Since the plotted
is computed in the fully mobile economy, in which intermediate goods ﬁrms may respond to the information about trade          transition is computed in the trapped-factors economy, adjustment costs prevent the movement of resources outside of
liberalization without short-term adjustment costs. The solid black line is the transition path, the upper horizontal solid   intermediate goods ﬁrms within the period of the shock. The solid black line is the transition path, the upper horizontal
blue line is the post-shock balanced growth path, and the lower horizontal dashed red line is the pre-shock balanced          solid blue line is the post-shock balanced growth path, and the lower horizontal dashed red line is the pre-shock balanced
growth path.                                                                                                                  growth path.
                                                                                                                                                A: Shocked Shadow Value                              B: Unshocked Shadow Value

                                                                                                                                                     ●        Transition




                                                                                                                                          120
                                                                                                                                                                                                    120
                                                                                                                                                              Pre− and Post−Shock BGP

                                                                                                                                                 ●       ●     ●         ●   ●   ●   ●                     ●       ●     ●        ●   ●   ●   ●




                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                         Post−Shock Period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ●




                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                               Annual %
                                                                                                                                                                                         Annual %
                                                                                                                                                                     ●




                       2000
                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                    60



                                                                                                                                                 −2      −1     0    1   2   3   4   5                     −2      −1    0    1   2   3   4   5
                                                         28.8%
                                                                                                                                                                    Period                                                   Period




                       1600
                                                                                                                                                C: Northern Interest Rate                                 D: Southern Interest Rate




                       1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●        Transition




    New Patent Flows
                                                                                                                                          4.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pre−Shock BGP
                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Post−Shock BGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                 ●   ●                                        ●       ●   ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                             ●


                                                                                                                                          4.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.4




                                                                                                                                                                         ●




                                                                                                                               Annual %
                                                                                                                                                                                         Annual %




                       800
                                                                                                                                                 ●       ●     ●                                           ●       ●     ●
                                                                                                                                          4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.0




                                Pre−Shock                No Shock                      Shocked
                                                                                                                                                 −2      −1     0    1   2   3   4   5                     −2      −1    0    1   2   3   4   5
                                                       Industry                                                                                                     Period                                                   Period

                              Figure 5: A Shocked Industry Patents More                                                                   Figure 6: Trapped Factors Interest Rates and Shadow Values
Note: The solid black bar on the left displays the level of industry patenting in the period before a permanent and        Note: The ﬁgure displays the trapped-factors transition path in response to a permanent, unanticipated trade liberaliza-
unanticipated trade liberalization from policy parameter φ to φ > φ. Patent ﬂows in the pre-shock period are normalized   tion from policy parameter φ to φ > φ, which is announced in period 0 to become eﬀective in period 1. Since the plotted
to equal 1000. The middle blue bar with downward sloping lines and right red bar with upward sloping lines represent the   transition is computed in the trapped-factors economy, adjustment costs prevent the movement of resources outside of
response of the unshocked and shocked industries, respectively, to the trade liberalization in an economy with trapped     intermediate goods ﬁrms within the period of the shock. The solid black line is the transition path, the upper horizontal
factors. The shocked industry loses 24.2% of its previously protected R goods production opportunities when these are      solid blue line is the post-shock balanced growth path, and the lower horizontal dashed red line is the pre-shock balanced
converted to imported I goods from the South, and the no shock industry does not lose any unanticipated R goods to         growth path. For the two shadow value ﬁgures, shadow values are normalized to equal 100% in non-shock periods.
Southern competition.
                                                    A: Variety Growth                                                                                                            Variety Growth




                   3.5
                          ●    Baseline
                               No China
                                                                                                                                                          β = 1/1.04




                                                                                                                                             3.2




                   3.0
                               Pre−Shock BGP                                                                                                              β = 1/1.01
                               Baseline Post−Shock BGP   ●
                                                                                                                                                          η = 0.5




                   2.5
                                                                      ●            ●           ●            ●




                                                                                                                                             3.0




    Annual %
                                                                                                                                                          σ = 2.0
                          ●          ●         ●




                   2.0
                                                                                                                                                          σ = 1.5
                                                                                                                                                          ρ = 0.6




                                                                                                                                             2.8
                          −2        −1         0         1            2            3           4            5                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                          ρ = 0.4
                                                             Period                                                                                       α = 0.5




                                                                                                                                             2.6
                                                                                                                                                    ●     α = 0.7




                                                                                                                                  Annual %
                                                                                                                                                    ●     Baseline
                                             B: Southern Terms of Trade
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●           ●            ●           ●




                                                                                                                                             2.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●           ●            ●           ●




                   0.70
                                                                      ●            ●           ●            ●




                                                                                                                                             2.2
                                                         ●




                   0.60
                          ●          ●         ●                                                                                                   ●          ●           ●

                                                                                                                                             2.0




                   0.50

    North/South
                   0.40
                          −2        −1         0         1            2            3           4            5                                      −2       −1            0           1            2           3           4            5
                                                             Period                                                                                                                       Period

                  Figure 7: Trade Liberalization without Chinese Import Growth                                                                Figure 8: Trapped Factors Transition Dynamics are Robust
Note: The ﬁgure displays the transition path in response to trade liberalization in two scenarios. The ﬁrst transition        Note: The ﬁgure displays the trapped-factors transition path in response to a permanent, unanticipated trade liberal-
path, in solid black, “Baseline,” replicates the trapped factors transition path displayed in Figure 4 above. A permanent     ization from policy parameter φ to φ > φ, which is announced in period 0 to become eﬀective in period 1. All plotted
and unanticipated trade liberalization from φ to φ > φ is announced in period 0 to become eﬀective in period 1. The          parametrizations of the model vary only the parameter indicated in the legend, starting from the baseline trapped factors
second transition path in green with triangle symbols, “No China,” plots the trapped factors transition path, starting        calibration described in the text.
with the same initial conditions as “Baseline,” but instead considering a counterfactual increase of φ to a level between φ
and φ which matches post-liberalization imports to GDP ratios, assuming no growth in Chinese imports into the OECD.
The upper horizontal solid blue line is the post-shock balanced growth path, and the lower horizontal dashed red line is
the pre-shock balanced growth path.
