NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTING OUT OF GOOD GOVERNANCE
C. Fritz Foley
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Jonathan Greenstein
Eric Zwick
Working Paper 19953
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19953
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

We thank Ed Glaeser, Andrei Shleifer, and seminar participants at Harvard and MIT for helpful comments
and suggestions. Foley thanks the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by C. Fritz Foley, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Jonathan Greenstein, and Eric Zwick. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Opting Out of Good Governance
C. Fritz Foley, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Jonathan Greenstein, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 19953
March 2014
JEL No. F21,G3,K22
ABSTRACT
Cross-listing on a U.S. exchange does not bond foreign firms to follow the corporate governance rules
of that exchange. Hand-collected data show that 80% of cross-listed firms opt out of at least one exchange
governance rule, instead committing to observe the rules of their home country. Relative to firms
that comply, firms that opt out have weaker governance practices in that they have a smaller share
of independent directors. The decision to opt out reflects the relative costs and benefits of doing so.
Cross-listed firms opt out more when coming from countries with weak corporate governance rules,
but if firms based in such countries are growing and have a need for external finance, they are more
likely to comply. Finally, opting out affects the value of cash holdings. For cross-listed firms based
in countries with weak governance rules, a dollar of cash held inside the firm is worth $1.52 if the
firm fully complies with U.S. exchange rules but just $0.32 if it is non-compliant.
C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu
Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
paulgp@gmail.com

Jonathan Greenstein
Yale Law School
127 Wall Street
New Haven, CT 06511
jonathan.greenstein@yale.edu
Eric Zwick
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
zwick@fas.harvard.edu

I.

Introduction
Corporate governance mechanisms provide tools for suppliers of capital to control

managers. However, investor powers and protections vary widely across countries. In some
jurisdictions, corporate governance practices are weak, and insiders can enjoy private benefits at
the expense of external capital providers. As a result, outsiders discount financial claims on firms
and make it costly for firms to raise funds to pursue growth opportunities.
Firms that conduct business within a single country are typically tied to the corporate
governance practices established by their country’s legal and regulatory environment. However,
firms that cross-list shares on foreign exchanges expose themselves to alternative legal and
regulatory environments. This fact forms the basis of one prominent hypothesis for why firms
cross-list: the legal bonding hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, managers from countries
with weak corporate governance can bond themselves from extracting private benefits at the
expense of capital providers by cross-listing into a legal and regulatory environment offering
greater investor protections. For firms that have a cross-listing in the U.S., some of these
protections are a consequence of needing to comply with SEC regulations concerning disclosures
and corporate actions. Others are exchange-specific, and each of the major U.S. exchanges has
detailed listing requirements.
This paper documents the extent to which cross-listed firms choose to opt out of
exchange-specific governance regulations and explores the consequences of opting out. Existing
literature has paid little attention to the possibility that firms can opt out of governance rules,
typically assuming that foreign firms agree to comply with the same rules as U.S. firms when
they cross-list on a U.S. exchange.1 In reality, cross-listed firms can decide not to comply with
1

For instance, Reese and Weisbach (2002) state: “One way to accomplish this bonding is to cross-list on an
exchange (NYSE or Nasdaq) in the United States, whose legal system protects minority shareholder interests as well

1

exchange governance rules. Historically, these compliance choices were not well publicized, but
this changed in September 2008, when the SEC mandated that foreign firms listed on U.S.
exchanges disclose opt out choices in consolidated and concise form in their 20-F annual filings.
Exchange governance rules are organized in this paper into six categories relating to board
requirements, auditing, stock issuance, and business practices. This paper presents and analyzes
the opt out decisions disclosed in 20-F filings immediately after the SEC rule change.
Four main findings emerge. First, opting out is very common. Figure 1 displays the share
of firms that opt out of different numbers of exchange governance requirements. 80.2% of crosslisted firms opt out of at least one category of requirements. A large fraction of firms opt out of
many types as well; 47.2% of firms opt out of three or more categories of requirements. Second,
opting out of exchange governance requirements is correlated with weaker governance practices.
While many governance practices are hard to observe directly, it is possible to measure features
of a firm’s board of directors. Analysis of the board composition of cross-listed firms reveals that
firms opting out of board independence rules, board committee rules, and audit committee rules
have significantly fewer independent board members.
Third, the decision to opt out of exchange governance requirements seems to reflect the
incentives created by insiders’ ability to consume private benefits when governance remains
weak and by managers’ desire to raise capital when growth opportunities are attractive.
Managers of firms based in countries where corporate governance is weak typically give up
larger private benefits by complying fully with U.S. exchange requirements. Consistent with this
notion, tests reveal that firms are more likely to opt out of U.S. exchange requirements if they are
as any in the world. Such a cross-listing obligates the firm to conform to generally accepted accounting principles
(US GAAP), to file reports with the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), to comply with the
requirements of the exchange on which it lists, and at least to some extent conform to US securities laws. It thus
provides a mechanism by which foreign firms can voluntarily subject themselves to some shareholders’ protections
under US securities laws.”

2

based in civil law countries and countries with lower measures of the Anti-Self-Dealing Index
created by Djankov, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008). However, managers of
firms based in countries with weak governance appear to be more willing to comply with U.S.
exchange requirements if they need capital to fund growth of their firm. In particular, firms
based in countries with weak corporate governance are less likely to opt out if they are small, are
experiencing higher levels of growth in property, plant, and equipment, or are engaging in equity
issuances.
The fourth main finding is that opting out has value consequences. Simple analysis of the
relationship between opting out and Tobin’s q is confounded by unobservable determinants of
the value of cross-listed firms, such as the extent of growth opportunities in different countries.
However, methods developed by Faulkender and Wang (2006), Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith
(2007), and Frésard and Salva (2010) enable a study of the value of cash inside cross-listed firms
that are based in countries with weak corporate governance. For cross-listed firms based in civil
law countries that are fully compliant with U.S. exchange governance requirements, a dollar
inside the firm is worth $1.52. However, if such a firm opts out of all six types of requirements,
a dollar inside the firm is worth only $0.32.
These findings have implications for several strands of the finance literature. The most
direct contributions are to the literature on cross-listing. Karolyi (1998) and Karolyi (2006)
survey this literature and discuss the motives for and effects of cross-listing. In characterizing
the incentives to cross-list, earlier work emphasized a variety of considerations, including market
risk exposures and liquidity. Stulz (1999) and Coffee (1999) raise the possibility that corporate
governance issues are central to explaining cross-listing and that managers decide to list on U.S.
exchanges in order to commit to abide by certain legal and regulatory practices, thereby limiting

3

opportunities for insiders to expropriate capital providers. These themes have received
significant empirical support, as noted in Karolyi (2012).2 Although this literature has pointed
out differences between exchange-listed and non-exchange listed ADRs, it has not documented
that managers usually opt out of U.S. exchange requirements when they cross-list.3
In the literature on cross-listings, the insights in Doidge, Karolyi, Lins, Miller, and Stulz
(2009) (DKLMS) and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004) (DKS) are particularly relevant to the
study of opting out. DKLMS present evidence that when managers have the opportunity to
enjoy private benefits, they are less likely to cross-list their firms on U.S. exchanges. DKLMS
also find that managers of firms with better investment opportunities are more likely to cross-list
because, by reducing the extraction of private benefits, cross-listing lowers the cost of raising
external capital. These same considerations motivating the decision to cross-list help explain the
decision to opt out of exchange requirements. Managers of firms that are likely to have the
opportunity to enjoy private benefits are less likely to comply with exchange requirements, but,
if such managers are in charge of firms with attractive growth opportunities, compliance levels
are relatively higher. DKS illustrate that cross-listing is associated with a larger valuation gap
for firms based in countries with weak corporate governance practices than it is for firms based
in countries with strong corporate governance practices. Similarly, analysis of the extent to
which firms opt out of exchange requirements illustrates that opting out has value consequences.
More generally, this paper adds to work on how better governance practices facilitate the
process of raising capital from external sources. The modern formulation of agency costs in
Jensen and Meckling (1976) illustrates that insiders who want to raise capital must give up larger
2

See, for example, Reese and Weisbach (2002), Doidge (2004), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Doidge,
Karolyi, Lins, Miller, and Stulz (2009).
3
Siegel (2005) also questions the legal bonding hypothesis, argues for a nuanced view of what complying with U.S.
securities laws entails, and stresses the importance of reputational bonding as a mechanism for committing to
lawfulness, disclosure, and good governance.

4

claims on their firms if they are expected to divert more resources to their own private benefit. A
considerable body of work shows that country-level differences in governance practices affect
the ease with which firms can raise external finance.4 The consequences of opting out offer
more evidence of the effects of strong governance when raising funds from external sources.
Finally, in illustrating how the value of cash inside of firms varies with the extent to
which firms opt out of exchange requirements, this paper advances the idea that corporate
governance affects valuations. Recent work on this topic, like Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick
(2002), Durnev and Kim (2005), Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2006), and Bebchuk, Cohen,
and Farrell (2009), indicates that financial claims are valued more dearly in the market when
corporate governance practices are stronger.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the governance
requirements imposed by U.S. exchanges and documents the extent to which cross-listed firms
opt out of these requirements. Section III discusses whether opting out is associated with
material differences in the governance practices of cross-listed firms. Section IV provides
analysis of potential motivations managers of cross-listed firms might have for opting out, and
Section V considers if opting out has value consequences. Section VI concludes.

II.

Exchange Governance Requirements and Foreign Firm Opt Outs
When issuing securities in the U.S., foreign private issuers trigger the Securities Act of

1933, the Exchange Act of 1934, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and thereby become
exposed to potential SEC and private enforcement action. These laws and mandated accounting
standards remain largely silent on firm governance practices. The major exchanges, namely the
4

See, for example, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997); Rajan and Zingales (1998); Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2005); and Djankov, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008).

5

NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX, impose additional governance requirements on listed firms.
However, the exchanges make an exception for foreign cross-listing firms, which are excluded
from mandatory compliance with many of these rules.5 Instead, U.S. stock exchanges permit
listed foreign firms to follow their home country governance practices, provided firms disclose
how these practices differ from those stated in the exchange requirements.
Prior to 2008, firms that opted out of exchange governance requirements had discretion in
how they presented this information, often placing it on the company website or in annual report
footnotes. It was not uncommon for investors to be led through a series of cross-references
among different disclosure documents and websites in order to compile the firm’s governance
details.
In September 2008, seeking to standardize these disclosures and to facilitate investors’
ability to monitor foreign firms’ corporate governance practices, the SEC amended its rules to
require foreign firms listed on U.S. stock exchanges to file annual governance disclosures on
Form 20-F under a new section, “Item 16G -- Corporate Governance.” This rule went into effect
for fiscal years ending on or after December 15, 2008. This change raised the potential cost of
not disclosing deviations from exchange governance requirements because it added to the risk of
stock exchange penalties the additional liability arising from material misstatements or omissions
in an annual SEC filing.
This paper presents data of firms’ governance exemptions that were made available by
the SEC’s rule change and hand collected from the first Item 16G of Form 20-F filings. The
dataset covers 519 firms listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX markets through Level II
ADRs, Level III ADRs, or direct listings, based on the SEC’s official list of “Foreign companies
5

See, for example, Exchange Act Release No. 24,634, 52 Fed. Reg. 24230 (June 23, 1987) (“Order Approving
Proposed Rule Changes by the American Stock Exchange, Inc. and the New York Stock Exchange Inc. to Amend
the Exchanges’ Listing Standards for Foreign Companies”).

6

registered and reporting with the U.S. SEC; December 31, 2008” (SEC, 2009). The other forms
of cross-listing, namely unregistered transactions and Level I ADRs, maintain the Exchange
Act’s Rule 12g3-2(b) exemption from registration and are not exchange-listed so they are not
subject to exchange governance requirements.6
Each of the exchanges has a listing standards manual that details the corporate
governance requirements that firms must follow unless they opt out. Table 1 provides general
governance rules and then describes each of the provisions imposed by the NYSE, NASDAQ,
and AMEX. There are 12 provisions for the NYSE and 20 for NASDAQ and AMEX. The
provisions of different exchanges follow the same basic framework. In Table 1, provisions are
grouped in the categories of board independence requirements, board committee requirements,
audit committee requirements, general corporate practices, shareholder approval requirements
for stock issuance, and good governance practices. These categories generally reflect the manner
in which the provisions are presented in the exchanges’ listing manuals and by firms in their Item
16G disclosures.
Board independence requirements mandate that a majority of board directors be
“independent,” based on several bright line tests including current employment, remuneration,
and family connections to current employees. These provisions also require that independent
directors have regular meetings that exclude inside directors. Board committee requirements
state that executive compensation and nominations for new directors must be determined by a
6

U.S. securities laws apply to all foreign private issuers—a term that covers non-U.S. issuers, excluding foreign
governments—entering U.S. capital markets to raise capital or to enhance the liquidity of their shares. However, the
regulations imposed on foreign firms are intended to be proportional to the perceived investor risk posed by firms’
modes of accessing the U.S. markets. Unregistered transactions, such as those occurring offshore, or through Level I
ADR programs which represent shares that are traded only over-the-counter in the U.S., through private placements,
or through Rule 144A resales to qualified institutional buyers, do not require filing a registration statement with the
SEC and meeting specific disclosure and financial statement requirements, nor will these transactions typically be
subject to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (Cohen et al., 2009).

7

committee consisting of a majority of independent directors. Audit committee requirements
mandate the existence of a chartered audit committee consisting of independent directors and
restrict the ability of these directors to participate in the preparation of the firm’s financial
statements. Shareholder approval requirements for stock issuance stipulate that shareholders be
allowed to vote on new equity compensation plans, as well as the issuance of additional company
stock. The general corporate practices and good governance practices categories include rules
about, for example, soliciting shareholder proxies, distributing annual reports, reviewing big
transactions for conflicts of interest, and establishing a posted code of conduct. Table 1 contains
additional details about each of these categories.
Provisions tend to be very similar across exchanges, although there are subtle differences.
For example, all three exchanges require a majority of directors be independent and that there be
executive sessions of non-management directors, but there is variation in exactly how
independence is determined and who can and cannot participate in executive sessions. The most
notable difference between the requirements of different exchanges, as analyzed in this paper, is
that the NYSE’s corporate governance standards section does not have provisions categorized as
general corporate practices.
The SEC rule requires that a firm note significant differences between its practices and
the governance requirements of its exchange in Item 16G. An exemption is coded anytime a
requirement is reviewed in an Item 16G disclosure, and a foreign firm’s practices are not
consistent with the practices that would be followed by a compliant U.S. firm’s practice. A firm
that opts out of at least one of the specific provisions within a category is coded as opting out of
that category. Because the SEC rules only require the disclosure of exemptions, the absence of
disclosures on any governance requirement is assumed to indicate compliance. Exemptions are

8

measured in the first year they are reported under the requirements of the September 2008 SEC
rule change; thus these are captured for the first fiscal year of firms that ends on or after
December 15, 2008.
Firms’ governance exemptions appear to remain very stable following these initial
filings. In order to make a change to governance practices, managers typically must win any
approvals required by their firm’s bylaws or corporate charter. They must also promptly notify
the exchange where the firm’s shares are listed and file forms noting changes with the SEC.
Failing to report exemptions in an accurate and timely manner leaves firms liable to legal action.
A review of Form 6-K filings as well as a hand comparison of a sample of Form 20-F filings
covering the years 2008-2011 revealed few minor changes to governance practices. Therefore,
firms do not appear to temporarily mislead investors by claiming to act in accordance with
certain required governance practices and then changing those required practices.
To illustrate the collection procedure, consider the case of Advanced Semiconductor
Engineering, Inc., a Taiwan-based company cross-listed on the NYSE. In Item 16G of its 20-F
filing for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2008, the company lists its opt outs from NYSE
governance rules. For example, the NYSE requires that a listed firm have a nominating
committee and a compensation committee, each composed entirely of independent directors and
governed by a written charter that provides for certain responsibilities of the committee set out in
the NYSE listing standards. The company writes, “We do not have a nominating/corporate
governance committee. The ROC Company Law does not require companies incorporated in the
ROC to have a nominating/corporate governance committee.” With regards to a compensation
committee, the company states, “We do not have a compensation committee. Under the ROC
Company Law, companies incorporated in the ROC are not required to have a compensation

9

committee.” In the previous year’s annual filing, prior to the change in SEC disclosure rule,
there is no mention of the opt outs from exchange requirements, indicating that the SEC rule
change affected company disclosures.
In another example, the Brazilian company CPFL Energia S.A.’s Form 20-F for the fiscal
year ending December 31, 2008 indicates that, “The non-management directors of CPFL do not
meet at regularly scheduled executive sessions without management”—a would-be violation of
the NYSE requirement regarding executive sessions of the board. As with Advanced
Semiconductor, the Form 20-F from the prior year does not contain a section indicating opt outs.
The resulting dataset of measured opt outs provides a striking picture of the extent of
compliance with exchange governance requirements. 80.2% of firms opt out of at least one
category of provisions. Table 2 displays the extent to which firms from different countries opt
out of provisions and the extent to which firms opt out of different categories of provisions. The
sample includes cross-listed firms with headquarters based in 45 countries.7 There is
considerable variation in the extent to which firms opt out of different categories of governance
requirements, as indicated in the last row of the table that presents the share of firms opting out
of each provision. Opting out appears to be common regarding board and audit committee
matters. 51.1% of firms opt out of board independence requirements, 54.7% out of board
committee requirements, and 40.7% out of audit committee requirements. 61.2% of firms opt
out of general corporate practices, 31.2% opt out of shareholder approval requirements for stock
issuance, and 27.4% opt out of general good governance practice requirements.8

7

For eight of the firms in the sample, the headquarters are located in the U.S. Of these firms, six are incorporated in
Canada, one in the U.K., and one in the British Virgin Islands. We include these firms in our analysis but the results
are robust to excluding them.
8
As explained above, NYSE firms are not subject to general corporate practice requirements and therefore cannot
have more than 5 total opt outs.

10

Table 3 provides pairwise correlations indicating the extent to which firms that opt out of
one category of requirement are likely to opt out of another category. These correlations are all
positive, and 13 of the 15 correlations are also statistically distinguishable from zero. Thus, a
firm that opts out of one category of governance requirement typically opts out of others as well.
As one might expect, the correlation between opting out of board independence requirements and
board committee requirements is very high; its value is 0.6426.
The main variable used to measure opt outs in the analysis below is the total number of
opt outs. As indicated in Table 4, which presents descriptive statistics, firms have an average of
2.3 opt outs and a median of 2.0. Thus, the median cross-listed firm opts out of 2 of the 6
categories of governance requirements. These basic patterns in the extent to which firms opt out
of exchange governance requirements and the positive correlation among types of opt outs
suggest that opting out significantly reduces the impact of U.S. exchange requirements on the
governance of cross-listed firms. The next section considers this possibility.

III.

Opting Out and Corporate Governance
Because many features of a firm’s management practices are difficult to observe, it is

challenging to pinpoint whether opting out of exchange requirements is truly associated with
weaker corporate governance. Fortunately, it is possible to measure the share of a firm’s
directors who are independent. A number of studies have shown that firms with more
independent directors tend to have better financial performance and more professional board
committees.9 Hence, the correlation between the extent to which a firm opts out of exchange
requirements and the fraction of the directors of that firm who are independent directors would
9

See Hermalin and Weisbach (2003) and Adams, Hermalin, and Weisbach (2010) for surveys of this literature. The
latter survey emphasizes that causal links from board independence to firm outcomes have not been easy to show.

11

be an indicator that opt outs are associated with weaker governance. Regressions of this fraction
on measures of opt outs reveal this correlation. In such regressions, prior work points out the
importance of controlling for the size of the board as well as the size, leverage, and profitability
of the firm.
Data
The data for these tests come from a few sources. Information on board independence is
from BoardEx, a database containing information on firm leadership and boards for global firms.
These data track the individual directors of firms in each year and provide information indicating
the extent to which directors also hold management roles. Directors are classified as independent
if their role indicates that they are not insiders.10 The Fraction of Independent Directors is
computed for each firm in each year by dividing the number of independent board directors by
the total number of board members. Measures of the independence of directors and of board size
are merged with the data on cross-listed firms that trade on U.S. exchanges using a namematching routine. 439 firms are successfully matched.
Information on the characteristics of firms is drawn from Compustat. The log of assets is
used as a measure of firm size. Leverage is the ratio of total debt to the sum of total debt and
book equity, and profitability is measured as the ratio of net income to assets, or return on assets.
The measures of board size, board independence, and firm characteristics are time varying, and
in order to reduce the impact of any unusual values in a particular year, average values of these
variables taken using data from 2004 to 2008 are used in the specifications. The specifications
also include fixed effects for the country of a firm’s headquarters as well as fixed effects for the
exchange a firm is listed on.
10

Specifically, “Independent Director,” “Independent NED,” “Independent Board Member,” and “Independent
Outside Director” are mapped to the independent indicator.

12

Results
Analysis of the relationship between opting out and board director independence appears
in Table 5. The -0.0330 coefficient on Number of Opt Outs in column 1 indicates that the
average share of independent directors is 3.30 percentage points lower for each additional
exchange requirement that a firm opts out of. This is a roughly seven percent decrease in the
average number of independent board members. The specification in the second column includes
controls for the size of the board, the log of firm assets, firm leverage, and the firm’s return on
assets. The coefficient on the number of opt outs remains negative and significant in this
specification, and its magnitude is similar. In addition, smaller firms and firms with larger
boards tend to have a lower share of independent directors.
Only three of the categories of exchange governance requirements described in Table 1
relate directly to the independence of directors, namely those related to board independence
requirements, board committee requirements, and audit committee requirements. The
specifications in columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 provide a test of whether the measures of opting out
of these particular requirements identify the extent to which firms have independent directors.
In column 3, the coefficients on dummies for firms that opt out of board independence
requirements, board committee requirements, and audit committee requirements are each
negative and significant. However, the coefficients on the dummies that are equal to one for the
other categories of opt outs are each statistically insignificant and small in magnitude.11 Similar
results appear in column 4, which presents a specification that includes additional controls.
Thus, the measures of the extent to which firms opt out of exchange governance requirements

11

As the NYSE does not have requirements characterized as General Corporate Practice requirements, the dummy
for opt outs of such requirements is set equal to zero for NYSE-listed firms.

13

appear to be meaningfully related to governance practices. Firms that opt out of U.S. exchange
governance requirements seem to follow weaker governance practices.

IV.

Opting Out and the Costs and Benefits of Complying
Given that such a large fraction of cross-listed firms opt out of U.S. exchange

requirements and that opting out appears to be associated with materially distinctive corporate
governance choices, it is natural to ask what motivates firms to opt out. Opting out could reflect
some of the same costs and benefits that have been used to explain which firms decide to crosslist in the existing literature. Given the findings in recent work, notably Doidge, Karolyi, Lins,
Miller, and Stulz (2009), two types of considerations seem especially salient. The first relates to
the private benefits managers enjoy. Evidence suggests that these benefits are larger in countries
where corporate governance is weak.12 Thus, managers of firms based in countries where
corporate governance is weak might be reluctant to comply fully with U.S. exchange
requirements, while the costs of complying for managers of firms based in countries with strong
governance practices might be smaller. Alternatively, the benefits of complying with U.S.
exchange governance requirements may be larger for firms whose home country requirements
are weaker, implying that firms from such countries would be less likely to opt out. These
hypotheses can be tested in country-level analysis of what types of environments are home to
firms that opt out of U.S. exchange governance requirements.
The second type of consideration relates to a firm’s need for capital. For firms that are
growing and have a need for external finance, complying fully with U.S. exchange governance
requirements might increase access to capital. When a firm is not bound to strong corporate

12

See, for example, Dyck and Zingales (2004).

14

governance practices, investors should anticipate potential agency problems and be willing to
pay less for an ownership stake. Thus, firms based in countries with weak governance rules that
are growing quickly and have a need to raise capital are likely to benefit from committing to
stringent governance requirements. Firm-level analysis of the relationship between opting out
and measures of growth for firms based in countries with strong and weak governance sheds
light on these ideas.
Data
In order to conduct country-level analysis of the correlation between the extent to which a
cross-listed firm opts out of U.S. exchange requirements and the governance practices in a firm’s
home country, firms are assigned a home country on the basis of the location of the firm’s
headquarters.13 Tests consider two measures of the extent to which the home country legal and
regulatory environment permit managers to consume private benefits. The first is a dummy that
is equal to one for firms based in civil law countries and zero for firms based in common law
countries. These legal origins are drawn from Djankov et al. (2008) and the CIA World
Factbook. Common law tends to promote market outcomes by protecting private property and
contract rights while civil law is more concerned with market failures and supports state-desired
allocations in ways that can attenuate the strength of private contracts. La Porta, Lopez-deSilanes, and Shleifer (2008) reviews research on legal origins, and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) show
that common law countries offer stronger protections to holders of financial claims that are more
efficiently enforced.

13

An alternative choice of country would be the firm’s country of incorporation. However, because the headquarter
country will likely have more sizeable assets than the incorporating country when these are different, the
headquarter country is a better measure when considering potential legal actions.

15

The second measure of corporate governance in a country is the Anti-Self-Dealing Index
created by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008). This index measures the
legal protection of minority shareholders against expropriation by corporate insiders, and it has
been shown to predict a variety of stock market outcomes. The country-level tests also include
controls for market liquidity and GDP per capita. Stock market turnover is defined as the ratio of
the value of total shares traded to the average market capitalization, and it is taken from the
World Bank Financial Structure Database. GDP per capita is drawn from the Penn World
Tables. Each of the independent variables in the country-level analysis is measured using data
from the year 2008.
Data for the firm-level analysis are drawn from Compustat. Measures of net property,
plant, and equipment (PP&E) growth, and equity issuance are used as proxies for the extent to
which a firm is growing and has a need for external finance. Net PP&E growth is computed as
the annual percentage change in net PP&E. Equity issuance is the change in common equity
plus the change in deferred tax assets minus the change in retained earnings, scaled by lagged
assets, following the approach in Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003). The specifications used in
the firm-level analysis also include country fixed effects, exchange fixed effects, and several
additional controls. Firm size is measured using the log of assets; leverage is measured as the
ratio of total debt to the sum of total debt and the book value of equity; and profitability is
measured as the return on assets or the ratio of net income to assets. The specifications also
control for industry q, which is calculated by first, for each firm, computing the ratio of the book
value of total assets less the book value of equity plus the market value of equity less the book
value of deferred taxes to the book value of total assets. Then the median value of this ratio is
calculated for each 2-digit SIC code. In order to reduce the impact of any unusual values in a

16

particular year, each of the right hand side variables in the firm-level analysis is measured as an
average of annual values covering the 2004 to 2008 period. To reduce the influence of outliers,
the net PP&E growth and equity issuance variables are censored at the 1% and 99% level.
Summary statistics for these variables appear in Table 4.
Results
Table 6 presents the results of country-level analysis of the relationship between opting
out and the home country characteristics of cross-listed firms. The dependent variable in the first
two columns is the average of the number of governance categories opted out of by firms that are
headquartered in a particular country. The coefficient on the Civil Law Dummy in column 1 is
0.8768, and it is positive and statistically significant, indicating that firms based in civil law
countries are more likely to opt out of U.S. exchange governance requirements. In column 2, the
coefficient on the Anti-Self-Dealing Index is negative and significant, indicating that firms from
countries where regulations limit self-dealing are less likely to opt out. Each of the
specifications in Table 6 includes controls for stock market turnover and the log of GDP per
capita, so the results on the impact of governance practices in a firm’s home country do not
merely reflect market liquidity or wealth.
The dependent variable in specifications 3 and 4 is the country average of a dummy equal
to one for firms that opt out of any U.S. exchange governance requirement. As such, these
columns analyze cross-country variation in the share of firms that opt out of any governance
requirement. The results in these columns are similar to those in the first two columns. The
share of firms from civil law countries and countries with weak regulations limiting self-dealing
are more likely to opt out of the governance requirements of U.S. exchanges. The last two
columns present results of tests using a third measure of opting out, namely the average fraction

17

of opt outs. This measure addresses the issue that the NYSE does not have requirements
characterized as General Corporate Practice requirements by scaling the number of opt outs for
each firm by the number of categories of requirements imposed by the exchange the firm is listed
on. The results in these columns are similar to those in the previous ones.
Overall, the country-level analysis in Table 6 suggests that cross-listed firms are more
likely to comply with U.S. exchange governance requirements when they already comply with
stringent governance requirements in their home country and are unlikely to be able to consume
private benefits. The costs of compliance with U.S. exchange regulations appear to be more
likely to dominate the benefits for firms from countries with weak as opposed to strong corporate
governance regulations.
The tests presented in Table 7 examine whether firms with higher growth and external
financing needs adhere to exchange requirements. The dependent variable in each specification
is the number of categories of U.S. exchange governance requirements a firm opts out of. The
specifications estimate the relationship between the number of opt outs and various firm
characteristics. All regressions include fixed effects for the exchange the firm is listed on as well
as country fixed effects. For the sample of firms based in common law countries, the coefficient
on PP&E growth is negative but it is insignificant in explaining the number of opt outs, as
indicated in the first column. However, this coefficient is negative and significant in the second
column, implying that when firms are based in countries with weak corporate governance
regulations, they opt out of fewer requirements if they are experiencing higher levels of growth.
While there are differences in the significance of the coefficients on PP&E Growth for the
sample of firms in common law countries and the sample of firms in civil law countries, an F-test

18

reveals it is not possible to conclude that the coefficient on net PP&E growth in column 1 is
statistically different from the coefficient on this variable in column 2.
The specifications in columns 3 and 4 include controls for firm size, firm leverage, firm
profitability, and a measure of q for the firm’s industry. Once again, the coefficient on net PP&E
growth is negative in both specifications, but it is only significant in column 4, which presents
results for the sample of firms based in civil law countries.
The coefficients on Log Assets in these specifications are also noteworthy. These
coefficients are positive in both specifications, but only the one in column 4 is significant. Thus,
in the sample of firms that are based in civil law countries and cross-list on a U.S. exchange,
smaller firms are less likely to opt out of exchange corporate governance requirements.
Although coefficients on Industry q are negative in both specifications—suggesting the firms in
industries with better investment opportunities are less likely to opt out—these coefficients are
not statistically significant.
Columns 5-8 repeat this analysis but instead of exploring the relationship between net
PP&E growth and the number of opt outs for firms based in different kinds of countries, the
specifications explore the relationship between equity issuance and the number of opt outs. The
results in these columns are similar to those in the first four columns. Firms that engage in more
equity issuance and that are based in civil law countries opt out of fewer governance
requirements than do other firms. It is noteworthy that the coefficients on Equity Issuance are
statistically different from each other across both the two samples of firms in columns 5 and 6
and columns 7 and 8.
Taken together, the results in Tables 6 and 7 provide evidence that while on average
cross-listed firms from countries with weak corporate governance practices are more likely to opt

19

out of U.S. exchange governance requirements, if firms from such countries are small, growing
and need external finance, they are more likely to comply. Thus, the costs of complying with
U.S. exchange governance rules appear, on average, to outweigh the benefits for cross-listed
based in countries with weak governance regulations, but the need to fund growth provides
especially strong incentives to comply for such firms.

V.

Opting Out and Valuations
Opting out of governance requirements could affect the market value of firms. If

governance requirements limit the ability of corporate insiders to make choices that generate
private benefits at the expense of capital providers, valuations of firms that abide by
requirements should be higher than those of firms that do not. Empirically analyzing the impact
of opting out on broad measures of firm value such as Tobin’s q, however, is challenging.
Many determinants of value, including the attractiveness of growth opportunities, are difficult to
measure in a cross-country setting. Simple tests of whether Tobin’s q varies with the extent to
which firms abide by U.S. exchange corporate governance requirements do not yield significant
results.
A more revealing approach to exploring the consequences of opting out on firm value
focuses on the value of cash holdings, and it is based on the work of Faulkender and Wang
(2006), Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith (2007), and Frésard and Salva (2010). These papers develop a
method that uses stock market returns to estimate the impact of changes in cash holdings on
changes in firm value for different types of firms. Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith (2007) find that the
value of cash is lower in poorly governed firms, and their approach can be used to assess if
opting out of U.S. exchange governance requirements appears to reduce the value the market

20

assigns to cash held inside of cross-listed firms from countries with weak governance
regulations. The motivation for this hypothesis is that cash reserves can be easily accessed by
managers, and managers have considerable discretion in how cash reserves are used. If
managers are not constrained by corporate governance rules and regulations, they might have
greater latitude to use cash in ways that generate private benefits at the expense of shareholder
value. While shareholders of a cross-listed firm from a country with strong governance
regulations are protected whether or not the firm opts out of U.S. exchange governance
requirements, these U.S. exchange governance requirements might play a more significant role
in protecting shareholders of firms from countries with weak governance regulations.
In order to consider how the relationship between changes in cash holdings and changes
in firm value varies across different kinds of cross-listed firms, it is informative to regress the
annualized excess stock market returns of a firm on changes in cash holdings, changes in cash
holdings interacted with a measure of the extent to which cross-listed firms opt out of U.S.
exchange requirements, and a set of controls. Given that the consequences of opting out of U.S.
exchange requirements are likely to be larger for firms based in countries with weak corporate
governance regulations, it is also informative to separately conduct analysis of the subsample of
firms based in common law countries and the subsample of firms based in civil law countries. In
these specifications, controls for changes in firms’ profitability, financial policy, and investment
capture idiosyncratic firm characteristics that may be correlated with both firm cash holdings and
returns. A more detailed discussion of this approach appears in Faulkender and Wang (2006)
and Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith (2007). Frésard and Salva (2010) use this framework to illustrate
that investors place a higher value on the cash held by foreign firms that are cross listed in the
U.S.

21

Data
Following the methodology used in prior work, annualized excess stock market returns
are calculated using CRSP data. The returns of the 25 reference portfolios come from Kenneth
R. French’s website.14 Excess returns are calculated on a monthly basis and annualized for the
regressions. Data used to compute the control variables are drawn from Compustat, and these
controls include the change in earnings, the change in net assets, the change in R&D
expenditures, the change in interest expenses, the change in dividends, beginning of period cash,
the value of total debt, and new finance, which is the sum of new equity issues and new debt
issues. Each of these is scaled by the market value of equity. Following Faulkender and Wang
(2006), the outcome and control variables are censored at the 1% and 99% level. The data used
in analyzing the value of cash holdings cover 2000 through 2011. Each specification includes
exchange fixed effects.
Results
The first column in Panel A of Table 8 displays results for the full sample. The -0.0927
coefficient on the interaction of the change in cash holdings and the number of opt outs indicates
that opting out of an additional U.S. exchange governance requirement category reduces the
value of cash by almost $0.10, but this coefficient is not statistically significant. The
specification that is presented in column 2 includes country fixed effects, and it yields similar
estimates.
The next four columns present results for the subsamples of firms based in common and
civil law countries. Opting out of U.S. exchange governance requirements should have larger
effects if governance practices in a firm’s home country are weaker. Consistent with this
hypothesis, the coefficient on the interaction of the change in cash holdings and the number of
14

Http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.

22

opt outs is negative and significant in columns 5 and 6, but it is insignificant in columns 3 and 4.
For firms based in civil law countries, opting out of a requirement reduces the value of each
dollar of cash by about $0.20. Opting out of requirements does not appear to have a statistically
significant effect on the value of cash for firms based in common law countries.
Panel B of Table 8 provides estimates of the marginal value of $1 in cash that are based
on the coefficients in Panel A. For the average firm in the full sample, a dollar inside the firm is
worth about $1.21. This estimate is computed using mean values of leverage, lagged cash, and
the number of opt outs for firms based in all countries in the sample. For the full sample, on the
basis of specifications with country fixed effects, the implied value of a dollar to firms that do
not opt out of any U.S. exchange governance requirements is $1.49, and the implied value of a
dollar to firms that opt out of all six types of U.S. exchange governance requirements is $0.92.
The differences in the sign and magnitude of the coefficients on the interaction of the change in
cash holdings and the number of opt outs across firms in common and civil law countries imply
large disparities in the effects of opting out on the value of cash. For firms based in common law
countries that do not opt out of any U.S. exchange governance requirements, a dollar is worth
$1.54, and it is worth $1.85 for firms from those countries that opt out of all six types of
requirements; the difference between these does not have the expected sign, but it is not
statistically significant. However, for firms based in civil law countries that do not opt out of
any U.S. exchange governance requirements, a dollar is worth $1.52, and it is only $0.32 for
firms from those countries that opt out of all six types of requirements. The difference between
these two values is statistically different from zero.
The coefficients on the controls in Table 8 are similar to those obtained in prior work. In
both Faulkender and Wang (2006) and Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith (2007), increases in earnings,

23

dividends, and assets tend to be associated with larger increases in value. Changes in interest
expenses, higher levels of debt, lower levels of lagged cash, and new debt and equity issues tend
to be associated with decreases in value. Changes in R&D expenditures are insignificant in
explaining changes in value, as they were in Dittmar and Marht-Smith (2007). Although the
interactions of the change in cash holdings with lagged cash and with leverage are insignificant
in Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith (2007), these interactions also have negative and significant
coefficients in Faulkender and Wang (2006).

VI.

Conclusion
Foreign firms’ ability to opt out of U.S. exchange governance requirements and follow

their home country rules provides a window into central questions in corporate governance. As a
result of recently enacted SEC disclosure rules, foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges now must
articulate more clearly the extent to which they comply with exchange requirements. Studying
the extent to which cross-listed firms opt out provides insight about the costs and benefits of
complying with stringent governance rules. Such investigation also sheds light on the effect of
governance requirements on valuation.
Analysis of which firms opt out of U.S. exchange requirements and of the consequences
of opting out reveals four main findings. First, opting out is quite common. 80.2% of crosslisted firms opt out of at least one U.S. exchange corporate governance requirement. Although
prior literature has emphasized the governance differences between cross-listings that do and do
not trade on a U.S. exchange, there is considerable heterogeneity in the extent to which listed
foreign firms agree to comply with the governance requirements of exchanges. Second, firms

24

that opt out appear to adopt weaker governance practices. More specifically, firms that opt out
of board requirements have fewer independent directors.
Third, the decision to opt out appears to reflect the relative costs and benefits of this
governance choice. The costs of complying are likely to be higher for insiders who might enjoy
certain private benefits when following weak governance practices allowed in their home
country. The benefits of complying are likely to be higher for firms that are attempting to raise
capital and grow. Consistent with this tradeoff, the data show that firms based in countries with
weak corporate governance are less likely to comply and those that are based in such countries
and are expanding and issuing equity are more likely to comply. Finally, the results indicate that
opting out of U.S. exchange requirements has consequences for how the market values cash
holdings. For firms from countries with weak governance requirements, cash within the firm is
worth significantly less if the firm opts out of more U.S. exchange requirements.
While making a causal statement is difficult due to endogeneity concerns, the evidence
indicates that compliance facilitates the ability of firms to raise external finance to pursue
growth. Foreign firms bond themselves to the more stringent corporate governance requirements
of U.S. exchanges in a manner that has meaningful effects on their access to capital and their
market valuation. However, the high share of foreign firms that opts out, especially foreign firms
from countries with weak governance regulations, suggests that the costs of complying with
strict governance requirements are too high for many insiders. This implies a limit to the extent
cross-listed firms can effectively borrow the U.S. governance environment. Strong foreign
institutions do not appear to easily substitute for the institutional environment in a firm’s home
country.

25

These results suggest refinements to the legal bonding hypothesis used to explain crosslisting. While the presumption that all cross-listed firms completely bond themselves to U.S. law
and exchange rules does not appear to be true, the cost-benefit framework proposed in the
existing literature explains the extent of compliance among firms that do cross-list. An
important question for future research is why firms choose to cross-list in the U.S. but opt out of
its exchanges’ rules.

26

References
Adams, Renée B., Benjamin E. Hermalin, and Michael S. Weisbach. 2010. “The Role of Boards
of Directors in Corporate Governance: A Conceptual Framework and Survey.” Journal of
Economic Literature 48 (1): 58–107.
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2003. “When does the market matter?
Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118 (3): 969–1005.
Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell. 2009. “What Matters in Corporate
Governance?” Review of Financial Studies 22 (2): 783–827.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2005. “Financial and Legal
Constraints to Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of Finance 60 (1): 137–177.
Coffee Jr., John. 1999. The Future as History: “The Prospects for Global Convergence in
Corporate Governance and its Implications. ” Northwestern University Law Review 93: 641707.
Cohen, Alexander F., and Kirk A. Davenport, Bryant B. Edwards, Antti V. Ihamuotila, Jeffrey
H. Lewis, Mark A. Stegemoeller, Michael W. Sturrock, Joel H. Trotter, John D. Watson, Jr.
2009. “Latham & Watkins’ Securities Offerings and Listings in the U.S.: An Overview for
Non-US Issuers.” International Financial Law Review.
Dittmar, Amy, and Jan Mahrt-Smith. 2007. “Corporate Governance and the Value of Cash
Holdings.” Journal of Financial Economics 83 (3): 599–634.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003.
“Courts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2): 453–517.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The
Law and Economics of Self-dealing.” Journal of Financial Economics 88 (3): 430–465.
Doidge, Craig, G. 2004. “U.S. Cross-Listings and the Private Benefits of Control: Evidence from
Dual-Class Firms.” Journal of Financial Economics 72 (3): 519–553.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M Stulz. 2004. “Why Are Foreign Firms Listed in
the U.S. Worth More?” Journal of Financial Economics 71 (2): 205–238.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, Karl Lins, Darius Miller, and René M Stulz. 2009. “Private
Benefits of Control, Ownership, and the Cross-listing Decision.” Journal of Finance 64 (1):
425–466.

27

Durnev, Art, and E. Han Kim. 2005. “To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal
Environment, and Valuation.” Journal of Finance 60 (3): 1461–1493.
Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales. 2004. “Private Benefits of Control: An International
Comparison.” Journal of Finance 59 (2): 537–600.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1993. “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1): 3-56.
Faulkender, Michael, and Rong Wang. 2006. “Corporate Financial Policy and the Value of
Cash.” Journal of Finance 61 (4): 1957–1990.
Frésard, Laurent, and Carolina Salva. 2010. “The value of excess cash and corporate governance:
Evidence from U.S. cross-listings.” Journal of Financial Economics 98 (2): 359–384.
Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick. 2003. “Corporate Governance and Equity
Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1): 107-155.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach. 2003. "Boards of Directors As An
Endogenously Determined Institution: A Survey of The Economic Literature," FRB New
York - Economic Policy Review 9 (1): 7–26.
Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics 3 (4): 305–360.
Karolyi, G. Andrew. 1998. “Why Do Companies List Shares Abroad?: A Survey of the Evidence
and Its Managerial Implications.” Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 7: 1–60.
———. 2006. “The World of Cross-Listings and Cross-Listings of the World: Challenging
Conventional Wisdom.” Review of Finance 10 (1): 99–152.
———. 2012. “Corporate governance, agency problems and international cross-listings: A
defense of the bonding hypothesis.” Emerging Markets Review 13 (4): 516–547.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997. “Legal
Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance 52 (3): 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. “Law
and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 106 (6): 1113–1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Economic
Consequences of Legal Origins. ” Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2): 285–332.
Pinkowitz, Lee, Rohan Williamson, and René Stulz. 2006. “Does the Contribution of Corporate
Cash Holdings and Dividends to Firm Value Depend on Governance? A Cross-Country
Analysis.” Journal of Finance 61 (6): 2725-2751.
28

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” The American
Economic Review 88 (3): 559–586.
Reese, William, and Michael Weisbach. 2002. “Protection of Minority Shareholder Interests,
Cross-listings in the United States, and Subsequent Equity Offerings.” Journal of Financial
Economics 66 (1): 65–104.
Siegel, Jordan. 2005. “Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S.
Securities Laws?” Journal of Financial Economics 75 (2): 319–359.
Stulz, René. 1999. “Globalization, Corporate Finance, and the Cost of Capital.” Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance 12 (3): 8–25.

29

Figure 1
Share of Firms Opting Out of Different Numbers of Requirements
Notes: This figure displays the share of firms that opt out of different numbers of exchange governance requirements. Each bar represents the share when the number of categories of opt outs
correspond to the values displayed on the x-axis.

90.0%

80.0%
70.0%

Share of Firms

60.0%
50.0%

40.0%
30.0%
20.0%
10.0%

0.0%

1 or more

2 or more

3 or more

4 or more

5 or more

6

Table 1
Description of the U.S. Stock Exchanges' Governance Requirements
Notes: This table provides a description of each of the governance requirements of the NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX that foreign cross-listed firms
might opt out of. For each exchange, the individual requirements are grouped into the larger categories used in the paper: Board Independence,
Board Committee, Audit Committee, General Corporate Practices, Shareholder Approval for Stock Issuances, and General Good Governance
Practices.

Governance Requirement
A. NYSE
General Rules

Majority Board Independence

Executive Sessions of Non-Management
Directors

Establish Nominating Committee or
Nomination Decisions by Independent
Directors

Establish Compensation Committee or
Compensation Decisions by Independent
Directors

Description
Listed firms that are foreign private issuers, as such term is defined in Rule 3b-4 under
the Exchange Act, are permitted to follow home country practice in lieu of the
provisions of Section 303A of the NYSE Listed Company Manual. Section 303A.11
requires the disclosure of differences between the corporate governance rules contained
in Section 303A which reflect the practices required of domestic firms and a particular
foreign firm's practices. Deviations from exchange requirements related to provisions
for shareholder approval for issuance of securities (Rule 312.03) and solicitation of
proxies (Rule 402.00,402.04) need not be disclosed in Item 16G so these are not
captured in the analysis.
Board Independence Requirements
Rule 303A.01 requires that a majority of the directors of a listed firm be independent.
Independence is determined in accordance with the criteria in Rule 303A.02. To be
considered independent, the Board must determine that the member has no material
relationship with the firm. The NYSE also has identified certain specific relationships
with the firm that preclude an individual from being considered independent until 3
years after the specified relationship has ended. The bright line test items include: being
an employee of the firm, receiving direct compensation of $120,000 in any year, or
being an executive officer or having a family member be an executive officer of an
entity that receives the greater of $1 million or 2% of its consolidated gross revenues
from the firm.
Rule 303A.03 requires that non-management directors meet at regularly scheduled
sessions without management. This NYSE requirement allows directors to be included
in such sessions who are not considered independent for reasons other than being an
officer of the firm. In the event that executive sessions include non-independent
members, the NYSE recommends that there be one meeting per year where only
independent members meet in executive session.
Board Committee Requirements
Rule 303A.04 requires that listed firms have a nominating committee composed entirely
of independent directors or that the directors be nominated by the independent board
members. The committee is required to have a written charter that describes the
committee's purpose and responsibilities and also requires the committee to conduct an
annual performance appraisal. The committee's responsibilities include identifying and
selecting the director nominees unless the firm is legally bound by law or contract to
have others nominate certain directors.
Rule 303A.05 requires that listed firms have a compensation committee composed
entirely of independent directors. The committee is required to have a written charter
which describes the committee's purpose and responsibilities and also requires the
committee to conduct an annual performance appraisal. Among the committee's
responsibilities are to set the CEO's compensation and to make recommendations to the
board for the compensation of non-CEO executive officers.

Audit Committee: Minimum of Three
Members

Audit Committee Requirements
Rule 303A.07(a) requires that the audit committee of listed firms have at least three
members and each member must have knowledge in finance. At least one of its members
must have experience in accounting or financial matters. This rule also limits the number
of audit committees on which a member can serve to three unless the board determines
that simultaneous service on multiple boards does not interfere with the member's duties
to this committee.

Audit Committee: Independent Members

Rule: 303A.07(b) requires that in addition to the independence requirements set forth in
Rule 10A-3 under the Exchange Act that prohibit a director from receiving
compensation from the firm or being an affiliated person of the firm or any of its
subsidiaries, each audit committee member must satisfy the specific bright line test
requirements for independence set in 303A.02 that are described above.

Audit Committee: Charter

Rule 303A.07(c) requires that the audit committee have a written charter that addresses
the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee which must include those set out in
Rule 10A-3 of the Exchange Act and under Section 303A.07(c). The Exchange Act
principally requires the committee to be responsible for the appointment, compensation,
retention, and oversight of the outside auditors and have such auditors report directly to
the committee. Section 303A.07(c) requires the committee to conduct a performance
appraisal of the committee, to obtain and review the outside auditors report of the firm's
internal controls, to discuss policies regarding risk and risk management, to review the
firm's financial statements and disclosures, and to set hiring policies involving
employees of the outside auditor.

Audit Committee: Internal Audit Function

Rule 303A.07(d) requires that each listed firm have an internal audit department to
provide management and the audit committee with ongoing assessments of the firm’s
risk management processes and system of internal control.

Shareholder Approval Requirements for Stock Issuances
Shareholder Approval to Establish or
Rule 303A.08 requires that shareholders must be given the opportunity to vote on all
Amend Equity Compensation Plan
equity compensation plans and material revisions thereto.

Corporate Governance Guidelines

General Good Governance Practices
Rule 303A.09 requires that listed firms must adopt and disclose their corporate
governance guidelines. The board of directors should evaluate the performance of its
functions and its committees at least once a year.

Code of Business Conduct and Ethics

Rule 303A.10 requires that listed firms must adopt and disclose a Code of Business
Conduct and Ethics for directors and employees and promptly disclose any waivers of
the code for directors or executive officers. The code of ethics must deal with conflicts
of interest, corporate opportunities, compliance with laws and regulations, and
confidentiality.

Corporate Governance Website Portal

Rule 303A.14 requires that listed firms have and maintain a publicly accessible website.

B. NASDAQ
General Rules

The 5600 series rules of the NASDAQ Manual comprise the NASDAQ's Corporate
Governance Requirements. The requirements under this section are more comprehensive
than the 303A corporate governance requirements contained in the NYSE Listed
Company Manual. Rule 5615 provides that a foreign firm may follow its home country
practice in lieu of the requirements of Rule 5600, provided that the foreign private issuer
discloses in its annual reports filed with the SEC each requirement of the 5600 series
rules that it does not follow and describes the home country practice followed instead.

Majority Board Independence

Executive Sessions of Independent
Directors

Establish Compensation Committee or
Compensation Decisions by Independent
Directors

Board Independence Requirements
Rule 5605(b)(1) requires that a majority of the Board of Directors be independent
directors as defined in Rule 5605(a)(2). To be independent, the individual cannot be an
executive officer or employee of the firm, or an individual that has a relationship with
the firm that the board determines would interfere with the individual exercising
independent judgment. This definition differs from the NYSE definition in that the
NASDAQ permits a relationship so long as the board determines that that it will not
interfere with the individual's independent judgment. The NASDAQ also lists certain
specific relationships with the firm that would disqualify an individual from being
considered independent for a period of 3 years after the specified relationship ends.
The bright line test indicate that a relationship exists if an individual is an employee of
the firm, if he or a family member receives direct compensation of $120,000 or more in
any 12 month period, if the individual is an executive officer of the firm, or if the
individual or a family member is an executive officer of an entity that receives the
greater of $200,000 or 5% of its consolidated gross revenues from the firm in a given
year.
Rule 5605(b)(2) requires that the independent directors must have regularly scheduled
meetings at which only they are present. There should be a minimum of two executive
sessions each year.
Board Committee Requirements
Rule 5605(d)(1) requires that the compensation of the CEO and other executive officers
be determined, or recommended to the Board of Directors, either by a majority of the
independent directors or by a compensation committee comprised solely of independent
directors. The CEO may not be present during voting or deliberations. Unlike the NYSE
rule, no charter is required for the compensation committee.

Establish Nominating Committee or
Nominating Decisions by Independent
Directors

Rule 5605(e)(1) requires that director nominees must be selected or recommended for
selection by the board of directors, either by a majority of the independent directors or
by a nominations committee comprised solely of independent directors, in accordance
with the nominations process set forth in a formal written charter or board resolution.

Adopt Charter or Board Resolution
Governing Nominating Committee

Rule 5605(e)(2) requires that the board must adopt a charter or resolution describing
the committee's responsibilities, including the nomination process.

Audit Committee Charter

Audit Committee Requirements
Rule 5605(c)(1) requires that each firm adopt a formal written audit committee charter
that explains the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee which, at a minimum,
must include those set out in Rule 10A-3 of the Exchange Act. The purpose of the
committee is to oversee the firm's financial reporting process and oversee auditor
independence.

Audit Committee Composition Members
Independent

Rule 5605(c)(2)(A)(i) requires that the firm must have an audit committee of at least
three members who are independent as defined under Rule 5605(a)(2), meet the
independence criteria set forth in Rule 10A-3(b)(1) under the Exchange Act and satisfy
certain other criteria. The independence requirements set forth in Rule 10A-3 under the
Exchange Act prohibit a director from receiving compensation for anything other than
board and committee service from the firm or being an affiliated person of the firm or
any of its subsidiaries. The SEC provides limited exemptions from the audit committee
requirements for firms from certain countries where country laws require a statutory
auditor or board of auditors.

Audit Committee No Participation in
Preparing Financial Statements

Rule 5605(c)(2)(A)(iii) requires that each member must certify that they have not
participated in the preparation of the firm’s financial statements at any time during the
last three years.

Audit Committee Member Financial
Literacy

Hold Annual Shareholder Meeting

Rule 5605(c)(2)(A)(iv) requires that each member must be able to read and understand
financial statements and at least one member of the audit committee must have past
employment in finance or accounting.
General Corporate Practices
Rule 5620(a) requires that each firm with listed common stock must hold an annual
meeting of shareholders no later than one year after the end of the firm’s fiscal-year end.

Solicit Proxies and Provide Proxy
Statement for Shareholder Meetings

Rule 5620(b) requires that each firm must solicit proxies and provide proxy statements
for all meetings of shareholders and provide copies of such proxy solicitation to the
NASDAQ.

Distribution of Annual Reports

Rule 5250(d)(1) requires that firms must make their annual report available to
shareholders containing audited financial statements within a reasonable period after it is
filed with the SEC.

33. 33% Quorum

Rule 5620(c) requires that each firm must provide for a quorum for any meeting of its
shareholders. The quorum may not be less than 33. 33% of the outstanding shares of the
firm’s voting common stock.

Shareholder Approval Requirements for Stock Issuances
Shareholder Approval to Establish or
Rule 5635(c) requires shareholder approval when an equity compensation plan is
Amend Equity Compensation Plan
established or materially amended.
Shareholder Approval for Change of
Control

Rule 5635(b) requires a shareholder vote before the firm’s common stock is issued if
such issuance will result in a change of control of the firm.

Shareholder Approval for Acquisition of
Stock or Assets of Related Party or
Involving a 20% Private Issuance

Rule 5635(a) requires a shareholder vote before the firm’s stock is issued in connection
with certain acquisitions of stock of another firm where a related party is involved or
where the stock to be issued exceeds 20% of the firm’s stock.

Shareholder Approval for 20% Private
Issuance at Below Market Value

Rule 5365(d)(1-2) requires a shareholder vote if 20% or more of the firm’s stock is
issued privately at a price below the current market value of the stock.

Direct Registration Program

General Good Governance Practices
Rule 5255a requires that securities listed on the NASDAQ must be eligible for a direct
registration program operated by a clearing agency. Direct registration allows the
shareholder to be registered directly with the transfer agent without the need of a
physical certificate to provide evidence of ownership.

Code of Conduct

Rule 5610 requires that listed firms must adopt a code of conduct applicable to all
directors, officers, and employees.

Conflicts of Interest

Rule 5630(a) provides that the audit committee or another independent body of the
board of directors of each firm must conduct appropriate review and oversight of all
related party transactions for potential conflict of interest situations on an ongoing basis.

C. AMEX Requirements
General Rules

AMEX Rule 110 provides that a foreign private issuer may follow its home country
practice in lieu of the requirements of Part 8 of the AMEX Company Guide, provided
that the foreign private issuer discloses in its annual reports filed with the SEC or on its
website each requirement of Part 8, as well as certain specified provisions outside of
Part 8, that it does not follow and describes the home country practice followed instead.

Majority Board Independence

Executive Sessions of Independent
Directors

Establish Compensation Committee or
Compensation Decisions by Independent
Directors

Board Independence Requirements
Rule 802(a) requires that a majority of the Board of Directors be independent directors
as defined in Rule 803(A)(2). To be independent, the individual cannot be an officer or
employee of the firm, or an individual that has a relationship with the firm that the board
determines would interfere with the individual exercising independent judgment. This
differs from the NYSE rule in that it allows a relationship to exist so long as the board
determines that it will not interfere with the individual carrying out the required duties.
Rule 802 (c) requires that the independent directors must have regularly scheduled
meetings at which only they are present. There should be a minimum of one executive
sessions each year.
Board Committee Requirements
Rule 805(a) requires that compensation of the CEO and other executive officers must be
determined, or recommended to the Board of Directors, either by a majority of the
independent directors or by a compensation committee comprised solely of independent
directors. The CEO may not be present during voting or deliberations. No charter is
required. Under the AMEX rules a compensation is not required if the independent
directors approve CEO compensation.

Establish Nominating Committee or
Nominating Decisions by Independent
Directors

Rule 804(a) requires that director nominees must be selected, or recommended for
selection by the board of directors, either by a majority of the independent directors or
by a nominations committee comprised solely of independent directors, in accordance
with the nominations process set forth in a formal written charter or board resolution. A
nomination committee is not necessary if the independent directors nominate the
directors.

Adopt Charter or Board Resolution
Governing Nominating Committee

Rule 804(c) requires that the board adopt a charter or resolution describing the
committee's responsibilities, including the nomination process.

Audit Committee Charter

Audit Committee Requirements
Rule 803(B)(1) requires that each firm adopt a formal written audit committee charter
that explains the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee which, at a minimum,
must include those set out in Rule 10A-3 of the Exchange Act.

Audit Committee Composition Members
Independent

Rule 803(B)(2)(a)(i) requires that each firm must have an audit committee of at least
three members who are independent as defined under Rule 803(A)(2), meet the
independence criteria set forth in Rule 10A-3(b)(1) under the Exchange Act, and satisfy
certain other criteria.

Audit Committee No Participation in
Preparing Financial Statements

Rule 803(B)(2)(a)(ii) requires that each member must certify that they have not
participated in the preparation of the firm’s financial statements at any time during the
last three years.

Audit Committee Member Financial
Literacy

Rule 803(B)(2)(a)(iii) requires that each member must be able to read and understand
financial statements and that at least one member of the audit committee must have past
employment in finance or accounting.
General Corporate Practices

Hold Annual Shareholder Meeting

Rule 704 requires that each firm hold an annual meeting of shareholders no later than
one year after the end of the firm’s fiscal-year end.

Solicit Proxies and Provide Proxy
Statement for Shareholder Meetings

Rule 705 requires that each firm must solicit proxies and provide proxy statements for
all meetings of shareholders and provide copies of such proxy solicitation to the AMEX.

Distribution of Annual Reports

Rule 610 requires that each firm must make their annual report available to shareholders
containing audited financial statements within a reasonable period after it is filed with
the SEC.

33.33% Quorum

Rule 123 requires that each firm must have a quorum for any meeting of its
shareholders. The quorum may not be less than 33.33% of the outstanding shares of the
firm’s voting common stock.

Shareholder Approval Requirements for Stock Issuances
Establish or Amend Equity Compensation Rule 711 requires shareholder approval when an equity compensation plan is established
Plan
or materially amended.
Change of Control

Rule 713(b) requires a shareholder vote before the firm’s common stock is issued if such
issuance will result in a change of control of the firm.

Acquisition of Stock or Assets of Related
Party or Involving a 20% Private Issuance

Rule 712(b) requires a shareholder vote before the firm’s stock is issued in connection
with certain acquisitions of stock of another firm where a related party is involved or
where the stock to be issued exceeds 20% of the firm’s stock.

20% Private Issuance at Below Market
Value

Rule 713(a)(ii) requires a shareholder vote if 20% or more of the firm’s stock is issued
privately at a price below the current market value of the stock.

Direct Registration Program

General Good Governance Practices
Rule 135 requires that securities listed on AMEX must be eligible for a direct
registration program operated by a clearing agency. Direct registration allows the
shareholder to be registered directly with the transfer agent without the need of a
physical certificate to provide evidence of ownership.

Code of Conduct

Rule 807 requires that each firm must adopt a code of conduct applicable to all
directors, officers, and employees.

Conflicts of Interest

Rule 120 requires that each firm conduct appropriate review and oversight of all related
party transactions for potential conflict of interest situations on an ongoing basis by the
firm’s audit committee or another independent body of the board of directors.

Table 2
Summary Statistics of Opt Outs by Country
Notes: This table provides basic statistics on opting out. It indicates the number of firms that are cross-listed on a U.S. exchange but headquartered in each of the countries in the first column. It
also provides the share of firms from each of those countries that opt out of U.S. exchange governance requirements that are associated with the categories displayed in the top row. The last row
of the table provides information for the whole sample. General Corporate Practices is only relevant to firms listed on NASDAQ and AMEX, so it is computed only for these firms. The notation
"n.a." indicates that the percentage is not available because all firms for that country are listed on the NYSE, and the NYSE does not have requirements characterized as General Corporate
Practices.

Country
Argentina
Australia
Bahamas, The
Belgium
Bermuda
Brazil
Canada
Cayman Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan

Number
of Firms Any Provisions
14
93%
11
73%
1
100%
1
0%
16
69%
29
97%
39
56%
1
0%
13
100%
79
59%
2
100%
2
100%
1
100%
10
100%
10
100%
23
83%
17
76%
1
100%
13
85%
2
100%
11
64%
66
82%
5
100%
21
100%

Board
Independence
93%
27%
100%
0%
56%
93%
13%
0%
100%
32%
100%
50%
0%
60%
90%
52%
71%
100%
69%
100%
18%
35%
80%
95%

Board
Committee
93%
55%
100%
0%
63%
93%
8%
0%
100%
30%
100%
50%
0%
60%
90%
39%
65%
100%
54%
50%
27%
39%
80%
90%

Audit
Committee
86%
27%
100%
0%
38%
86%
3%
0%
85%
18%
100%
50%
0%
80%
90%
9%
24%
0%
54%
100%
27%
12%
100%
95%

General
Corporate
Practices
100%
71%
100%
n.a.
75%
100%
52%
0%
n.a.
36%
n.a.
100%
n.a.
100%
100%
83%
64%
n.a.
100%
n.a.
50%
63%
100%
100%

Shareholder
Approval
Requirements
for Stock
Issuance
0%
27%
0%
0%
19%
24%
26%
0%
31%
24%
50%
50%
100%
10%
30%
39%
29%
0%
8%
0%
18%
45%
20%
71%

General Good
Governance
Practices
64%
18%
100%
0%
38%
66%
0%
0%
77%
14%
50%
100%
0%
50%
20%
30%
24%
0%
54%
50%
27%
11%
20%
48%

Korea, Rep.
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Russian Federation
Singapore
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan, China
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States

11
4
19
15
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
5
1
6
5
1
7
10
1
30
8

91%
75%
100%
87%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
83%
100%
100%
100%
90%
100%
87%
25%

36%
50%
95%
40%
0%
100%
50%
100%
100%
100%
100%
80%
100%
50%
80%
100%
14%
70%
100%
27%
0%

64%
25%
95%
53%
100%
100%
100%
0%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
50%
80%
100%
14%
80%
100%
77%
0%

55%
50%
79%
60%
0%
100%
0%
0%
100%
100%
100%
60%
100%
33%
80%
100%
86%
60%
100%
23%
0%

67%
100%
100%
80%
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
100%
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
100%
100%
100%
n.a.
60%
n.a.
67%
25%

27%
0%
42%
53%
0%
0%
50%
0%
0%
0%
0%
80%
0%
17%
20%
0%
71%
50%
0%
27%
25%

55%
50%
32%
7%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
100%
60%
0%
0%
40%
0%
0%
40%
100%
23%
0%

All Countries

519

80.2%

51.1%

54.7%

40.7%

61.2%

31.2%

27.4%

Table 3
Correlation of Opt Outs
Notes: This table displays the correlation matrix for dummy variables indicating whether a cross-listed firm has opted out of a particular category of U.S. exchange governance requirement.
There are six dummies, one for each of the categories of requirements listed in the first row and first column. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Shareholder
Approval
General Corporate Requirements for
Board Committee Audit Committee
Practices
Stock Issuance

Board Independence

Board
Independence
1.0000

Board Committee

0.6426***

1.0000

Audit Committee

0.5592***

0.5322***

1.0000

General Corporate Practices

0.4205***

0.3936***

0.3426***

1.0000

0.0531

0.0689

0.1382***

1.0000

0.402***

0.4423***

0.2658***

0.1089**

Shareholder Approval Requirements 0.1105**
for Stock Issuance
General Good Governance Practices 0.4452***

General Good
Governance
Practices

1.0000

Table 4
Summary Statistics
Notes: This table summarizes the variables used in the regressions in Tables 5-8. For Table 5, Fraction of Independent Directors is the average
fraction of directors who are classified as independent in the BoardEx database. Number of Opt Outs is the number of governance categories the
firm opts out of. The other opt out variables are dummy variables that are equal to one for firms that opt out of distinct categories of requirements
that appear in Table 1. Opt Out of General Corporate Practices is equal to zero for all NYSE-listed firms because the NYSE does not have any
such requirements. Board Size is the number of directors on the company's board. Leverage is total debt, defined as the sum of short term and
long term debt, divided by total debt plus book equity. Return on Assets is net income divided by total assets. All time-varying covariates are
averages of the corresponding variables taken over the five years from 2004 to 2008. For Table 6, Average Number of Opt Outs is the number of
governance categories the firm opts out of, averaged by country. A firm's country is measured as the reported location of their headquarters.
Average of Opt Out Dummy is the country average of a dummy equal to one if a firm opts out of any of the governance requirements. Average
Fraction of Opt Outs is the country average of the fraction of categories of requirements that a firm opts out of; there are six categories for
NASDAQ and AMEX-listed firms and five for NYSE-listed firms. The Civil Law Dummy is a dummy equal to one for firms with headquarters
in a country with a civil law legal origin. The Anti-Self-Dealing Index is drawn from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008),
and higher values of this variable indicate that a country imposes stronger controls on self dealing. Stock Market Turnover measures the total
value of stocks traded as a fraction of average market capitalization. For Table 7, Number of Opt Outs is the number of governance categories the
firm opts out of. Net PP&E Growth is the annual first difference in net property, plant, and equipment scaled by lagged property, plant, and
equipment. Equity Issuance is the change in common equity plus the change in deferred tax assets minus the change in retained earnings, scaled
by lagged assets. Leverage is total debt, defined as the sum of short term and long term debt, divided by total debt plus book equity. Return on
Assets is net income divided by total assets. Industry q is calculated by first, for each firm, computing the ratio of the book value of total assets
less the book value of equity plus the market value of equity less the book value of deferred taxes to the book value of total assets, and then
taking the median value of this ratio for each 2-digit SIC code. All time-varying characteristics are averages of firm variables over the five years
from 2004-2008. For Table 8, Annualized Excess Returns is the annualized excess return of the firm relative to the Fama and French (1993) 25
size and book-to-market portfolios. Cash includes cash and marketable securities. Many variables are scaled by the market value of equity (ME).
Number of Opt Outs is the number of governance categories that firms opt out of. Earnings is earnings before extraordinary items plus interest,
deferred taxes, and investment tax credits. Net assets is the value of assets net of cash, and R&D is the value of R&D expenses. Interest
expenses include total interest and related expenses. Dividends include common dividends paid, and lagged cash is the lagged value of cash.
Debt/Market Value is the ratio of the sum of long term and short term debt to the sum of the long term debt, short term debt, and the market value
of equity. New Finance is the sum of net equity issues and net debt issues.

Variable
Table 5
Fraction of Independent Directors
Number of Opt Outs
Opt Out of Board Independence Requirements
Opt Out of Board Committee Requirements
Opt Out of Audit Committee Requirements
Opt Out of General Corporate Practices
Opt Out of Shareholder Approval Requirements for Stock Issuance
Opt Out of General Good Governance Practices
Board Size
Log Assets
Leverage
Return on Assets
Table 6
Average Number of Opt Outs
Average of Opt Out Dummy
Average Fraction of Opt Outs
Civil Law Dummy
Anti-Self-Dealing Index
Stock Market Turnover
Log GDP Per Capita

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Median

0.4293
2.3179
0.5106
0.5472
0.4066
0.2678
0.3121
0.2736
9.9271
7.1807
0.3196
0.0078

0.2206
1.6803
0.5004
0.4982
0.4917
0.4433
0.4638
0.4462
4.8657
2.8473
0.2775
0.1754

0.4615
2.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
9.0000
7.0242
0.2960
0.0354

2.6039
0.8608
0.4360
0.6667
0.5029
0.8456
10.0167

1.1790
0.2450
0.3205
0.4767
0.2374
0.6275
0.8518

2.6154
1.0000
0.4000
1.0000
0.4600
0.8100
10.3402

Table 7
Number of Opt Outs
Net PP&E Growth
Equity Issuance
Log Assets
Leverage
Return on Assets
Industry q

2.3179
0.3521
0.2025
7.1807
0.3196
0.0078
1.6281

1.6803
0.6186
0.3546
2.8473
0.2775
0.1754
0.4188

2.0000
0.1668
0.0390
7.0242
0.2960
0.0354
1.5390

0.0738
0.0224
0.0583
2.2923
0.0259
0.1141
0.0004
0.0017
0.0013
0.2978
0.2902
0.0497
0.0019
0.0097

0.6243
0.1916
0.5221
1.6633
0.2108
0.5004
0.0162
0.0217
0.0203
0.4501
0.2683
0.1940
0.2555
0.0923

-0.0306
0.0049
0.0000
2.0000
0.0072
0.0498
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1592
0.2569
0.0023
0.0002
0.0000

Table 8
Annualized Excess Returns
Change in Cash Holdings/ME
Number of Opt Outs X Change in Cash Holdings/ME
Number of Opt Outs
Change in Earnings/ME
Change in Net Assets/ME
Change in R&D/ME
Change in Interest Expenses/ME
Change in Dividends/ME
Lagged Cash/ME
Debt/Market Value
New Finance/ME
Lagged Cash/ME X Change in Cash Holdings/ME
Leverage X Change in Cash Holdings/ME

Table 5
Independent Directors and Opting Out
Notes: The dependent variable is the average fraction of directors who are classified as independent in the BoardEx database. Number of Opt Outs
is the number of governance categories the firm opts out of. The other opt out variables are dummy variables that are equal to one for firms that opt
out of distinct categories of requirements that appear in Table 1. Opt Out of General Corporate Practices is equal to zero for all NYSE-listed firms
because the NYSE does not have any such requirements. Board size is the number of directors on the company's board. Leverage is total debt,
defined as the sum of short term and long term debt, divided by total debt plus book equity. Return on Assets is net income divided by total assets.
The dependent variable and the time-varying covariates are averages of the corresponding variables taken over the five years from 2004 to 2008.
Each specification is an OLS specification that includes country fixed effects as well as fixed effects for the exchange the firm is listed on.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors that correct for clustering at the country level appear in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Fraction of Independent Directors

Dependent Variable:

(3)

(4)

-0.0562***
(0.0203)

-0.0460**
(0.0207)

Opt Out of Board Committee Requirements

-0.0388*
(0.0222)

-0.0456**
(0.0194)

Opt Out of Audit Committee Requirements

-0.0872***
(0.0263)

-0.0910***
(0.0250)

Opt Out of General Corporate Practices

0.0179
(0.0364)

0.0090
(0.0351)

Opt Out of Shareholder Approval Requirements for
Stock Issuance

-0.0166
(0.0160)

-0.0088
(0.0155)

Opt Out of General Good Governance Practices

0.0049
(0.0236)

-0.0048
(0.0222)

Number of Opt Outs

(1)

(2)

-0.0330***
(0.0066)

-0.0336***
(0.0063)

Opt Out of Board Independence Requirements

Board Size

-0.0114***
(0.0023)

-0.0110***
(0.0023)

Log Assets

0.0146*
(0.0073)

0.0163**
(0.0070)

Leverage

0.0492*
(0.0275)

0.0430
(0.0312)

Return on Assets

0.0743
(0.0484)

0.0790
(0.0537)

Country Fixed Effects?
Exchange Fixed Effects?
No. of Obs.
R-Squared

Yes
Yes
439
0.4831

Yes
Yes
438
0.5156

Yes
Yes
439
0.4988

Yes
Yes
438
0.5305

Table 6
Country Characteristics Associated with Opting Out
Notes: The dependent variable in the first two columns is the number of governance categories the firm opts out of, averaged by country. A firm's home country is measured as the reported location
of its headquarters. The dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is the country average of a dummy equal to one if a firm opts out of any of the governance requirements. The dependent variable in
columns 5 and 6 is the country average of the fraction of categories of requirements that a firm opts out of; there are six categories for NASDAQ and AMEX-listed firms and five for NYSE-listed
firms. The Civil Law Dummy is a dummy equal to one for firms with headquarters in a country with a civil law legal origin. The Anti-Self-Dealing Index is drawn from Djankov, La Porta, Lopezde-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008), and higher values of this variable indicate that a country imposes stronger controls on self dealing. Stock Market Turnover measures the total value of stocks traded
as a fraction of average market capitalization. The specifications are OLS specifications, and heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors appear in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance
at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Dependent Variable:

Average Number of Opt Outs
(1)

Civil Law Dummy

(2)

0.8768**
(0.3404)

Anti-Self-Dealing Index

Average of Opt Out Dummy
(3)

(4)

0.1281*
(0.0732)
-1.3589**
(0.6074)

Average Fraction of Opt Outs
(5)

(6)

0.1933***
(0.0631)
-0.2433**
(0.1113)

-0.2691**
(0.1199)

Stock Market Turnover

-0.2213
(0.2990)

0.0327
(0.2813)

0.0064
(0.0580)

0.0251
(0.0629)

-0.0374
(0.0541)

0.0041
(0.0550)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.1703
(0.1841)

-0.3420*
(0.1806)

-0.0573
(0.0382)

-0.0591
(0.0409)

-0.0412
(0.0359)

-0.0767**
(0.0365)

Constant

3.9504**
(1.6970)

6.6969***
(1.7526)

1.3617***
(0.3570)

1.5712***
(0.3706)

0.8209**
(0.3370)

1.4057***
(0.3553)

43
0.1783

40
0.1641

43
0.1478

40
0.1275

43
0.2291

40
0.1848

No. of Obs.
R-Squared

Table 7
Firm Characteristics Associated with Opting Out
Notes: The dependent variable is the number of governance categories the firm opts out of. Net PP&E Growth is the annual first difference in net property, plant, and equipment scaled by lagged
property, plant, and equipment. Equity Issuance is the change in common equity plus the change in deferred tax assets minus the change in retained earnings, scaled by lagged assets. Leverage is
total debt, defined as the sum of short term and long term debt, divided by total debt plus book equity. Return on Assets is net income divided by total assets. Industry q is calculated by first, for
each firm, computing the ratio of the book value of total assets less the book value of equity plus the market value of equity less the book value of deferred taxes to the book value of total assets,
and then taking the median value of this ratio for each 2-digit SIC code. All control variables are averages of firm variables over the five years from 2004 to 2008. Each specification is an OLS
specification with country fixed effects, as well as fixed effects for the exchange the firm is listed on. Standard errors clustered at the country level appear in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Countries in Sample:
Net PP&E Growth

Number of Opt Outs
Civil Law
Common Law

Common Law

Civil Law

Common Law

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0980
(0.2332)

-0.2882***
(0.0859)

-0.0866
(0.2059)

-0.2252**
(0.0988)

Equity Issuance

Civil Law

Common Law

Civil Law

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.1543
(0.1814)

-0.9760***
(0.2042)

0.3963
(0.3482)

-0.7247***
(0.2050)

Log Assets

0.0363
(0.1276)

0.2083***
(0.0711)

0.0553
(0.1268)

0.2036***
(0.0600)

Leverage

0.3756
(0.9397)

-0.5853
(0.5129)

0.5134
(0.9084)

-0.6444
(0.4898)

Return on Assets

-0.1387
(0.8739)

-0.5399
(0.7463)

0.0244
(1.0777)

-0.9638
(0.8534)

Industry q

-0.3165
(0.3319)

-0.1672
(0.2307)

-0.3066
(0.3582)

-0.0936
(0.2348)

Yes
Yes
219
0.1799

Yes
Yes
292
0.4484

Yes
Yes
220
0.1918

Yes
Yes
278
0.4592

Country Fixed Effects?
Exchange Fixed Effects?
No. of Obs.
R-Squared

Yes
Yes
219
0.1662

Yes
Yes
292
0.4085

Yes
Yes
220
0.1722

Yes
Yes
278
0.4242

Table 8
Opting Out and the Value of Cash
Panel A
Notes: The dependent variable is the annualized excess return of the firm relative to the Fama and French (1993) 25 size and book-to-market
portfolios. Cash includes cash and marketable securities. Many variables are scaled by the market value of equity (ME). Number of Opt Outs is
the number of governance categories that firms opt out of. Earnings is earnings before extraordinary items plus interest, deferred taxes, and
investment tax credits. Net assets is the value of assets net of cash, and R&D is the value of R&D expenses. Interest expenses include total
interest and related expenses. Dividends include common dividends paid, and lagged cash is the lagged value of cash. Debt/Market Value is the
ratio of the sum of long term and short term debt to the sum of the long term debt, short term debt, and the market value of equity. New Finance is
the sum of net equity issues and net debt issues. The specifications are OLS specifications, and the specification in the even numbered columns
include country fixed effects. All specifications include fixed effects for the exchange the firm is listed on. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
errors that correct for clustering at the firm level appear in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels,
respectively.

Dependent Variable
Countries in Sample:

Annualized Excess Returns
Common Law

All

Civil Law

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Change in Cash Holdings/ME

1.6489***
(0.2216)

1.6878***
(0.2274)

1.8365***
(0.3396)

1.8587***
(0.3455)

1.6403***
(0.3087)

1.6502***
(0.3112)

Number of Opt Outs X Change
in Cash Holdings/ME

-0.0927
(0.0739)

-0.0945
(0.0736)

0.0543
(0.0947)

0.0515
(0.0939)

-0.1955**
(0.0909)

-0.1997**
(0.0913)

Number of Opt Outs

0.0058
(0.0062)

0.0056
(0.0073)

0.0091
(0.0092)

0.0145
(0.0092)

0.0007
(0.0086)

-0.0074
(0.0106)

Change in Earnings/ME

0.5006***
(0.0942)

0.4976***
(0.0942)

0.4679***
(0.1331)

0.4601***
(0.1347)

0.4558***
(0.1198)

0.4660***
(0.1164)

Change in Net Assets/ME

0.1592***
(0.0407)

0.1776***
(0.0404)

0.1914**
(0.0786)

0.2135**
(0.0826)

0.1532***
(0.0474)

0.1651***
(0.0443)

0.0857
(0.7674)

0.2540
(0.7733)

0.4435
(0.9091)

0.6163
(0.9051)

0.2410
(1.6119)

0.3232
(1.6542)

Change in Interest
Expenses/ME

-2.3311***
(0.6745)

-2.2656***
(0.6663)

-4.2232***
(0.9908)

-4.1335***
(1.0000)

-1.3657*
(0.7715)

-1.3077*
(0.7481)

Change in Dividends/ME

2.1220***
(0.5176)

2.2446***
(0.5230)

2.7898***
(0.7375)

2.8959***
(0.7541)

1.5429**
(0.6849)

1.6995**
(0.6981)

Lagged Cash/ME

0.1488***
(0.0522)

0.1691***
(0.0547)

0.2633***
(0.0740)

0.2995***
(0.0774)

0.0352
(0.0553)

0.0506
(0.0587)

Debt/Market Value

-0.1663***
(0.0472)

-0.1579***
(0.0488)

-0.0776
(0.0730)

-0.0722
(0.0774)

-0.2054***
(0.0623)

-0.2092***
(0.0625)

-0.1450
(0.0949)

-0.1545
(0.0996)

-0.1095
(0.1446)

-0.1415
(0.1531)

-0.1957
(0.1249)

-0.1745
(0.1295)

-0.6474***
(0.1187)

-0.6712***
(0.1221)

-1.1488***
(0.3055)

-1.1451***
(0.3123)

-0.4436***
(0.1142)

-0.4458***
(0.1167)

0.0654
(0.3776)

-0.0021
(0.3797)

0.0407
(0.5776)

0.0662
(0.5748)

0.1040
(0.4854)

0.0119
(0.4865)

No
Yes
2,370
0.1603

Yes
Yes
2,370
0.1771

No
Yes
1,180
0.1901

Yes
Yes
1,180
0.1977

No
Yes
1,190
0.1560

Yes
Yes
1,190
0.1861

Change in R&D/ME

New Finance/ME
Lagged Cash/ME X Change in
Cash Holdings/ME
Leverage X Change in Cash
Holdings/ME
Country Fixed Effects?
Exchange Fixed Effects?
Observations
R-squared

Panel B
Notes: This panel displays mean values of lagged cash, leverage, and the number of opt outs for different samples. It also provides estimates of
the marginal value of a dollar for firms based in different legal environments that are implied by the regression results in Panel A.

Countries in Sample:
Mean Lagged Cash
Mean Leverage
Mean Number of Opt Outs
Marginal Value of $1, Average
Number of Opt Outs
Marginal Value of $1, Number
of Opt Outs=0
Marginal Value of $1, Number
of Opt Outs=6

All

Common Law
(3)
(4)
0.2938
0.2938
0.2336
0.2336
2.2168
2.2168

(1)
0.2950
0.2906
2.9195

(2)
0.2950
0.2906
2.9195

1.21

1.21

1.61

1.48

1.49

0.92

0.92

Civil Law
(5)
0.2962
0.3442
3.5810

(6)
0.2962
0.3442
3.5810

1.65

0.84

0.81

1.49

1.54

1.54

1.52

1.82

1.85

0.37

0.32

