                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             USING BANKRUPTCY TO REDUCE FORECLOSURES:
DOES STRIP-DOWN OF MORTGAGES AFFECT THE SUPPLY OF MORTGAGE CREDIT?

                                            Wenli Li
                                          Ishani Tewari
                                         Michelle J. White

                                       Working Paper 19952
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19952


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Wenli Li, Ishani Tewari, and Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Bankruptcy to Reduce Foreclosures: Does Strip-down of Mortgages Affect the Supply
of Mortgage Credit?
Wenli Li, Ishani Tewari, and Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 19952
March 2014
JEL No. G21,K2,K35

                                             ABSTRACT

We assess the credit market impact of allowing mortgage “strip-down”—that is, reducing the principal
of underwater residential mortgages to the current market value of the property for homeowners in
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Our identification is provided by a series of U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals
decisions in the early 1990’s that introduced mortgage strip-down in parts of the U.S., followed by
a 1993 Supreme Court ruling that abolished it all over the U.S. We find that the Supreme Court decision
led to a short-term reduction of 3% in mortgage interest rates and a short-term increase of 1% in mortgage
approval rates, but only the approval rate effect persists in longer sample periods. In contrast, the
circuit court decisions to allow strip-down did not have consistent effects on mortgage terms. We
also show that strip-down had little effect on default rates by homeowners with existing mortgages.
Taken together, these results suggest that mortgage lenders responded weakly to both the adoption
and abolition of strip-down because strip-down had little effect on their profits from mortgage lending.
According to these findings, re-introducing strip-down of mortgages in bankruptcy as a foreclosure-
prevention program would have only small and transient effects on the supply of mortgage loans.


Wenli Li                                            Michelle J. White
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia                Department of Economics
wenli.li@phil.frb.org                               University of California, San Diego
                                                    La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
Ishani Tewari                                       and NBER
Yale School of Management                           miwhite@ucsd.edu
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
ishani.tewari@yale.edu
    Since the mortgage crisis began in 2008, an unprecedented 4.2 million home foreclosures
have been completed in the U.S.—an average of 850,000 per year compared to 250,000 per year
during the period 2000 to 2006 (CoreLogic, 2013).2 The number of foreclosures has also been
very high in other countries such as Spain that experienced housing crises, even though
homeowners there remain liable to repay their mortgages in full even after giving up their homes
(Daley, 2010). Governments have tried various measures to reduce the number of foreclosures.
In the U.S., Federal government programs under the Bush and Obama Administrations offered
compensation to lenders if they modified underwater mortgages by reducing homeowners’
monthly payments; but these programs were unsuccessful because few lenders were willing to
allow modifications.3 4

     In this paper, we study an alternative approach to reducing foreclosures—called mortgage
strip-down or cramdown, which would allow bankruptcy judges to reduce the principle owed on
underwater mortgages to the current market value of the home for homeowners who file for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. This approach has the advantage that underwater mortgages can be
modified regardless of whether lenders consent, so that homeowners with underwater
mortgages would have a bankruptcy alternative to defaulting and moving out of their homes.
The Obama Administration proposed legislation in 2009 to allow strip-down of residential
mortgages in Chapter 13, but Congress did not enact it due to heavy lobbying by mortgage
lenders.5 Our analysis is also relevant to another recent proposal for dealing with underwater



2 Completed foreclosures are those in which title to the property passes to the mortgage lender and the

homeowner either moves out or becomes a tenant.
3 The Bush and Obama Administration programs to reduce foreclosures were, respectively, “Hope for

Homeowners” and the “Making Home Affordable Plan.” The latter program required participating
lenders to lower homeowners’ monthly payments to 38% of their gross income; the government then paid
the cost of lowering monthly payments to 31% of gross income. Neither program aided more than a few
thousand homeowners. See Bajaj (2008), Bernard (2009), and Stolberg and Andrews (2009).
4 Various reasons have been proposed for why lenders refused to modify mortgages; these include the fact

that doing so would force them to recognize their accounting losses, the fact that mortgage servicers were
sometimes prevented from modifying mortgage terms by the terms of mortgage securitizations, the fact
that servicers were incentivized to foreclose rather than to modify mortgages, and the fact that lenders
expected some homeowners who defaulted to “self-cure”. For discussion, see Adelino et al (2009) and
Mayer et al (2009).
5 The proposed bills were the “Helping Families Save Their Homes Act of 2009” (H.R. 1106, 111th Cong.

(2009)), introduced in the House, and the “Helping Families Save Their Homes in Bankruptcy Act of
2009” (S. 61, 111th Cong. (2009)), introduced in the Senate.

                                                    2
mortgages: that local governments use eminent domain to take underwater mortgages within
their jurisdictions, compensate lenders for the mortgages based on the amount they would
receive if they foreclosed, and give homeowners new mortgages with the principle reduced to
current market value.6
    Whether allowing strip-down of underwater home mortgages would improve economic
efficiency is theoretically ambiguous. Allowing strip-down is beneficial since homeowners often
default on their mortgages and move out when their mortgages are underwater, but lenders fail
to maintain the vacant homes during the foreclosure process—the result is “zombie homes” that
fall into disrepair, cause neighborhood blight, lower values of nearby homes, and deprive local
governments of property tax revenue. The fact that borrowers and lenders do not bear the full
cost of mortgage default and foreclosure means that too many foreclosures occur.7 However,
allowing strip-down has the drawback that it erodes creditor protection by forcing lenders to give
up some of their contractual remedies for default. This may reduce the supply of credit—the
Mortgage Bankers Association argued that allowing strip-down would raise mortgage interest
rates by at least 1½ percentage points.8
    In this paper, we assess the link between the strength of protection provided to mortgage
lenders and the terms of mortgage loans, using a quasi-experimental setting in which four of the
eleven U.S. Courts of Appeal (circuit courts) decided between 1989 and 1992 to allow strip-
down of residential mortgages in Chapter 13 bankruptcy and the U.S. Supreme Court decided in
1993 to abolish strip-down all over the U.S. The timing of these court decisions is plausibly
exogenous to market conditions, since circuit courts can only decide legal questions when they
receive an appeal of a case involving the question and, similarly, the Supreme Court only decides
legal questions when it receives an appeal from a circuit court involving the question (although
the Supreme Court—unlike the circuits—can either accept or reject appeals). We use a
difference-in-difference approach that compares changes in mortgage approval rates, mortgage
size, and interest rates in affected versus unaffected regions following each court decision.

6 See Hockett (2013) and Dewan (2013) for discussion.
7 Campbell et al (2011) find that homes located 1/20 of a mile away from a foreclosure lose 1% of their
value, using residential sale data from Massachusetts in the 1990’s. The Center for Responsible Lending
(2013) found that each foreclosure results in nearby homes losing a total of $23,000 in value. See Craig
(2014) for discussion of “zombie homes”.
8 For testimony against the bills in Congress by a representative of the Mortgage Bankers Association, see

Kittle (2007). See www.mortgagebankers.org/NewsandMedia/PressCenter/59343.htm for a press
release by the Mortgage Bankers Association on the bills.

                                                    3
    Our main results are that the Supreme Court decision to abolish strip-down had small but
significant effects on mortgage credit availability, with lenders cutting interest rates by around 23
basis points, or 3%, and increasing approval rates by 0.9 percentage points, or 1%, in affected
relative to unaffected regions. These changes occurred during the period three months after the
decision relative to three months before, but only the approval rate change persisted over a
longer time period. The small size of the reduction in interest rates when strip-down was
abolished is noteworthy since it is less than one-sixth of the effect predicted by the Mortgage
Bankers Association, which was at least 1½ percentage points. We also find that the circuit
court decisions to allow strip-down did not have consistent effects on the availability of
mortgage credit—lenders did not change the terms of mortgage loans in two of the four circuits,
they lowered interest rates in one of the remaining circuits and raised interest rates in the other.
These inconsistent responses by lenders are probably due to the fact that the profitability of
mortgage lending—as measured by serious delinquency rates on mortgages—does not appear to
be significantly affected by whether strip-down is allowed or not. We conclude that if strip-
down were adopted nationally, creditors’ response is likely to be small and short-term.
    Section 2 of the paper discusses bankruptcy and foreclosure law and the legal justification for
allowing strip-down of mortgages in bankruptcy. Section 3 discusses the literature. In section 4,
we consider whether lenders are predicted to respond to strip-down by changing the quantity or
the price of mortgage loans, or both. Sections 5 and 6 discuss empirical specification and
results. Section 7 concludes.

2. Law of Bankruptcy and Foreclosure9
    There are two bankruptcy procedures, Chapters 7 and 13, both of which help homeowners
who are at risk of default on their mortgages. Under Chapter 7, some or all of homeowners’
unsecured debts are discharged, but the terms of mortgages and other secured loans remain
unchanged. Homeowners must give up all of their assets above an exemption level set by their
state of residence, but they are not obliged to use any of their future income to repay debt.
Because mortgage loans are not changed or discharged in Chapter 7, the procedure does not
directly help financially distressed homeowners save their homes. Nonetheless it helps


9This discussion is based on U.S. bankruptcy law before the 2005 bankruptcy reform, since our empirical
work uses pre-2005 data. See Eggum et al (2008) and White and Zhu (2010) for discussion of how
Chapter 13 bankruptcy helps homeowners save their homes.

                                                   4
homeowners indirectly, since discharge of unsecured debt reduces their obligation to pay non-
mortgage debt and they may use the increase in ability to pay to avoid or cure their mortgage
default.
      Homeowners who wish to save their homes benefit more directly from filing under Chapter
13. Here they must propose a plan to repay some of their debt from future income, but they are
not obliged to give up any of their assets. Repayment plans must last for 3 to 5 years.
Homeowners who are in default on their mortgages can repay their mortgage arrears as part of
their plans and, if they complete the full schedule of payments, then their original mortgage
contracts are reinstated. The plan also covers unsecured debt and debtors may propose repaying
as little as 1% of the amount owed. Only the bankruptcy judge must accept the repayment plan;
lenders’ consent is not required. Thus homeowners can save their homes in Chapter 13 and also
receive the benefit of having some of their unsecured debts discharged.10 In the early 1990’s,
this was a valuable option to homeowners who had positive equity in their homes and therefore
wished to avoid foreclosure.
     During certain periods (discussed below), homeowners with underwater mortgages could
also petition for mortgage strip-down in Chapter 13. Legally, strip-down “bifurcates”
underwater mortgages into two parts: a secured part equal to the current market value of the
home and an unsecured part equal to the difference between the mortgage principal and current
market value. Because unsecured claims in Chapter 13 are only entitled to be paid their value in
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding—which is usually very low—the division of the mortgage
into two parts effectively discharges the underwater portion of the mortgage and reduces the
                                                              11
mortgage principle to current market value of the home.
     U.S. bankruptcy law contains conflicting provisions concerning strip-down of residential
mortgages in bankruptcy. One provision of the Bankruptcy Code, 11 U.S.C. §506, allows any
type of secured debt to be bifurcated in bankruptcy and the underwater portion of the debt to be
converted from secured to unsecured. However another provision of the Code, 11 U.S.C.
§1322(b)(2), forbids strip-down of mortgages if they are collateralized only by a single-family


10 Some types of unsecured debts cannot be discharged in bankruptcy, including tax obligations, most
student loans, and lawyers’ fees for the bankruptcy itself. See White and Zhu (2010) for discussion.
11 One factor that deters homeowners from using Chapter 13 bankruptcy is the high cost of filing. Average

costs for debtors filing for bankruptcy during the period that we study were $1,600 for Chapter 13,
compared to only $600 for Chapter 7 (Flynn and Bermant, 2002). In Chapter 13, debtors often pay legal
fees over time as part of the repayment plan.

                                                    5
home that is the owner’s principle residence.12 Because of the conflict between these two
provisions, the issue of whether strip-down of residential mortgages is allowed in Chapter 13 has
been litigated many times. A number of bankruptcy courts and U.S. district courts allowed strip-
down of residential mortgages in Chapter 13 and, between 1989 and 1992, four U.S. circuit
courts—the 9th, 2nd, 10th, and 3rd—allowed it. Another circuit court—the 5th, decided a similar
case in 1992, but did not allow strip-down. The remaining circuit courts never allowed strip-
down, although some district courts within these circuits allowed it. Because strip-down of
residential mortgages in Chapter 13 was allowed in some circuits but not others, the U.S.
Supreme Court accepted an appeal on this issue and, in June 1993, it decided in the case of
Nobelman v. American Savings Bank to abolish strip-down of residential mortgages all over the
U.S.13 See figure 1 for a map showing the circuit court and district court regions and table 1 for
a list of court decisions and dates. 14
      Our empirical work uses difference-in-difference to examine how the circuit court and
Supreme Court decisions to allow and abolish strip-down of residential mortgages in Chapter 13
bankruptcy differentially affected the supply of mortgage loans in the regions where strip-down
was temporarily allowed relative to the regions where it was never allowed.


3. Literature Review

     Our analysis ties in closely with work examining the link between creditor protection and
financial markets or—more broadly—between protection of contracts and the level of financial
development. In a seminal work in law and finance, La Porta et al. (1997) show that countries
with better investor and creditor protection have broader capital markets. Extending this work,
Djankov et al. (2007) construct an index that measures the legal rights of creditors. This measure
is used to assess the "power theories of credit" which argue that the supply of private credit
depends crucially on the power of creditors to force repayment, grab collateral, or take over the
firm. Laeven and Majnoni (2005) and Bae and Goyal (2009) find, in samples of bank loans from
multiple countries, that banks respond to poor enforceability of contracts by increasing interest


12 See Elias (2011) and Levitin (2009) for discussion.
13 508 U.S. 324, 968 F. 2d 483, decided June 1, 1993.
14 Each Federal district court has a bankruptcy court that covers the same territory. Decisions of

bankruptcy courts are appealed either to a bankruptcy appellate panel for the district or to the district
court directly. Decisions of district courts can be appealed to the circuit court.

                                                      6
rates, shortening maturities, and reducing loan amounts. In single country studies using data
from Italy and India, Jappelli et al (2005) find higher credit availability in jurisdictions with
greater judicial efficiency, i.e., faster court action when creditors sue to enforce their default
rights, and Visaria (2009) finds similar effects when new debt recovery tribunals were introduced
in India to speed up enforcement of creditors’ rights. On the other hand, Lilienfeld-Toal et al
(2010) present evidence that, if credit supply is inelastic rather than elastic, stronger creditor
protection increases credit access for wealthy borrowers, but reduces it for small borrowers.
       In the context of US consumer credit markets, several papers exploit cross-state variation in
creditor protection to draw a causal link between the level of creditor protection and credit
availability. Pence (2006) finds that mortgage sizes are 3 to 7% smaller in states with defaulter-
friendly foreclosure laws. Lin and White (2001), Gropp et al. (1997) and Berkowitz and White
(2004) examine the effect of variable bankruptcy exemptions across U.S. states on credit
availability. These articles find that states with high exemption levels (which favor debtors by
allowing them to keep more of their assets in bankruptcy) have higher rejection rates for home
improvement loans, higher interest rates on car loans, and reduced lending to small businesses.
Gropp et al. (1997) also find that high asset exemptions redistribute credit toward wealthier
borrowers. Li et al. (2011) and Kuchler and Stroebel (2009) show that bankruptcy exemption
levels also affect households’ decisions to default on their mortgages.
      Research focusing on the consequences of strip-down is sparse and mostly limited to
qualitative discussion. Levitin (2009) was the first to consider the effects of allowing strip-down
of mortgages in bankruptcy on the terms of new mortgage loans. His article provides a detailed
legal and policy analysis, but only a rudimentary empirical analysis. 15 Specifically, Levitin
made use of the fact that, under current law, mortgages can be stripped down if they are secured
by owner-occupied multi-family homes, residential properties that are held by investors, or
vacation homes, but cannot be stripped down if they are secured by owner-occupied single-
family homes. He obtained quotes for new mortgage loans for all four types of properties,
holding property and borrower characteristics constant. He found that there were no appreciable
differences between the terms of mortgages that were versus were not subject to strip-down,
which he interpreted to imply introducing strip-down would not affect the terms of mortgage
loans. A more recent paper by Goodman and Levitin (2012), written contemporaneously with

15   J.K. Winn (1993-94) and Eggum et al (2008) also discuss strip-down of mortgages in Chapter 13.

                                                      7
ours, also uses difference-in-difference to estimate the average effect of strip-down on mortgage
interest rates. There are several key differences between their paper and ours. First, we
examine the impact of strip-down on mortgage approval rates and loan size, in addition to the
impact on interest rates. Second, we separately analyze the effects of the circuit court decisions
to allow strip-down versus the Supreme Court decision to abolish strip-down. Doing so reveals
considerable heterogeneity between the decisions to allow versus abolish strip-down as well as
among the decisions to allow it. Finally, motivated by this finding, we dig deeper into the
channels underlying these non-uniform findings and look into how allowing strip-down affects
the profitability of lending across jurisdictions.


4. Theoretical considerations
       How is the availability of mortgage strip-down in Chapter 13 predicted to affect both the
supply of mortgage credit and the terms of mortgage loans? To answer this question, we must
consider both the demand and supply sides of the mortgage market.
       Turning first to the demand side, the availability of both bankruptcy and mortgage strip-down
in bankruptcy affect demand for mortgages by providing partial insurance to debtors against the
downside risk of borrowing. Bankruptcy provides debtors with partial wealth insurance, because
unsecured debt can be discharged when debtors experience adverse events such as job loss or
health problems that reduce their incomes. As a result, bankruptcy makes risk-averse individuals
more willing to borrow and increases their demand for loans. 16 Strip-down of mortgages in
Chapter 13 bankruptcy also provides borrowers with partial wealth insurance, because part of
their mortgage debt is discharged when the value of their homes falls enough to wipe out their
home equity. The insurance provided by strip-down in Chapter 13 also raises risk-averse
individuals’ demand for mortgage loans.
       The availability of strip-down also affects borrowers’ probability of default. Regardless of
whether strip-down is available or not, borrowers have an incentive to default on their mortgages
when their home equity is negative, because by walking away from their homes, they wipe out
their negative home equity. When there is no strip-down, borrowers’ cost of default is the cost of
purchasing a new home, obtaining a new mortgage, and moving. But when strip-down is
available, the cost of default falls to the cost of filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 13.

16   See White (2006) for discussion of the insurance view of bankruptcy.

                                                      8
Therefore borrowers are predicted to default on their mortgages more often when strip-down is
allowed.
     Turning to the supply side, the availability of strip-down has two potential effects on lenders’
profits: profits are predicted to fall because more homeowners default, but profits conditional on
default may either rise or fall depending on whether lenders’ loss when mortgages are stripped-
down is higher or lower than their loss when they foreclose. Levitin (2009) argues that losses are
lower under strip-down. But even if this were true, the availability of strip-down is likely to
reduce lenders’ profit because more homeowners default.17 Overall, the availability of strip-
down is predicted both to increase demand for mortgages and reduce the supply of mortgages, so
that lenders are predicted to increase interest rates. But the availability of strip-down could
either increase or reduce the probability of mortgage applications being approved and the size of
mortgage loans.


5. Data, Specification and Results
     5.1 Data. We use two different data sources in order to get information on approval rates for
mortgage applications, mortgage loan size, and interest rates.
     The first is the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data, which is a monthly census of
nearly all home mortgage applications in the U.S. We restrict our sample to applications for
conventional mortgages to purchase or refinance owner-occupied single-family homes, since the
Supreme Court decision in the Nobelman case applied only to mortgages with these
characteristics.18 For each loan application, we know whether the application was approved, the
loan principle, the location of the property at the census tract level, the applicant’s income, race
and sex and whether there was a co-applicant (usually interpreted as marital status). All of these

17 A third effect of strip-down on lenders’ profits is that, because strip-down would occur only in regions
where housing values have fallen, allowing it increases lenders’ repayment risk by making mortgage
defaults more positively correlated within regions.
18 We drop mortgages to purchase or refinance second homes and investment properties, because they

were never subject to the prohibition on strip-down. We also drop applications for home improvement
loans, because they are not secured by the house, and for non-conventional mortgages, because
repayment of these mortgages is guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration or the Veterans
Administration and lenders are unlikely to vary the terms of guaranteed mortgages in response to legal
rules that affect default. We would also have liked to drop applications for mortgages on owner-occupied
2-to-4-family homes, but HMDA does not distinguish between single-family versus multi-family owner-
occupied homes. However the number of mortgage applications for multi-family owner-occupied homes
is small. We also drop observations in Hawaii and Alaska and we drop the top and bottom 0.5% of
observations based on income and loan size. Finally, to keep sample sizes manageable, we take a 20%
random sample of the remaining data.

                                                     9
variables are taken from the mortgage application. We also know whether the loan was for
purchase or refinance, and type of lender.19 We add dummy variables for whether strip-down of
mortgages in bankruptcy is allowed in the court district where the property is located, whether
the Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing rate in the relevant district (lagged one month) is in the top 10%
of the national distribution, and whether the proportion of households in the census tract who are
minorities exceeds 30%. We also add average income in the metropolitan area where the
property is located, the unemployment rate in the relevant county (lagged one month), and a
house price index at the zipcode level (lagged one month). Except for the percent minority in the
census tract, all of these variables are observed monthly.20 The Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing rate
is entered because mortgage strip-down is only allowed when borrowers file under Chapter 13
and because network effects imply that individuals are more likely to hear about and file for
bankruptcy under Chapter 13 if they live in a district with a higher Chapter 13 filing rate.21
      The second dataset is the Monthly Interest Rate Survey (MIRS), a monthly sample of
conventional mortgages that originated during the last week of each month. The fact that the
MIRS data include only originated mortgages raises the possibility of selection bias, because
rejected mortgage applications are excluded. We nonetheless examine the MIRS because it is
the only source of data on interest rates during the period we study. MIRS includes information
on interest rates, mortgage principle, lender type, and property location. No borrower
characteristics or additional loan characteristics are available. We add the same regional-level
variables as for the HMDA data.
      Finally, we also examine data from the Mortgage Bankers Association on serious mortgage
delinquency rates, defined as the proportion of mortgages in which payments are more than 90
days past due. For the period we study, data are available quarterly by state.


     5.2 Specification and results for the Supreme Court decision to abolish strip-down.
     We use a difference-in-difference model to estimate the effect on mortgage markets of the
Supreme Court decision to abolish strip-down. The specification is:


19 Lender types include banks, credit unions, thrifts, and independent mortgage banks.
20 The average income by metropolitan area and the percent minority by census tract are constructed from
HMDA data. The county-level unemployment rates are from Bureau of Labor Statistics. The house price
index is from CoreLogic. Chapter 13 filing rates are from the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.
21 See Fay et al (2003) for empirical evidence that bankruptcy filing rates are higher when the lagged

aggregate bankruptcy rate in the district is higher.

                                                  10
             Mortgage market outcome = α + β1Four circuits*Post + β2Districts*Post
                              + γZ + δD + λM + μT + ε.      (1)


To simplify the notation, we drop subscripts indicating that the observations are for individual
mortgages in a given month-year. Post denotes observations after the Supreme Court decision in
June 1993, Four circuits denotes observations in the 9th, 3rd, 10th, and 2nd circuit court regions
where strip-down was allowed prior to the Supreme Court decision, and Districts denotes
observations in district or bankruptcy courts where strip-down was allowed prior to the Supreme
Court decision and which are not in any of the four circuits. Thus Four circuits*Post and
Districts*Post are interaction terms that equal one for observations in circuits and districts where
the Supreme Court decision abolished strip-down. Z is the set of covariates mentioned above. D
denotes district-level fixed effects, M denotes month fixed effects, and T denotes district-level
linear time trends. Because we include district-level fixed effects, we do not include Four
circuits or Districts alone.
     We use short sample periods of three months before to three months after the Supreme Court
decision in order to examine whether lenders responded to the law change when it occurred and
to reduce the possibility that we might be capturing the effect of divergent trends in affected
relative to unaffected regions. 22 In particular the latter might be a problem because the four
circuits that allowed strip-down are mainly on the west coast and in the northeast, which often
have divergent economic trends from the rest of the country. (We also use district-level linear
time trends to allow for divergent linear trends across districts.)
     The main coefficients of interest are β1 and β2, which measure the change in mortgage market
outcomes after the Supreme Court decision in the circuits and districts that previously allowed
strip-down relative to those where strip-down was never allowed. We distinguish between the
effects of circuit court versus district court decisions, because circuit court decisions more
definitively change the law.
     For the HMDA data, the mortgage market outcomes we examine are whether mortgage
applications were approved and the size of the mortgage loan that the borrower applied for. We
use probit for the approval regressions and Tobit for the mortgage loan size regressions, with

22Because the Supreme Court decision occurred on June 1, 1993, we assign June observations to the post
period, so that our sample period covers March through August 1993.

                                                  11
left-censoring for rejected applications. For the MIRS data, the dependent variables are the
interest rate and the mortgage size and we use OLS for both. The predicted signs of β1 and β2 are
ambiguous in the approval rate and loan size regressions and are negative in the interest rate
              23
regression.
   Figure 2, top panel, gives monthly average mortgage approval rates for the period of three
months before to three months after the Supreme Court decision to abolish strip-down, using the
HMDA data. These figures are constructed using the raw data. Treated observations are in the
circuit court and district court regions where strip-down was allowed prior to the Supreme Court
decision and control observations are in regions where strip-down was never allowed. We set
approval rates and mortgage size for both groups equal to zero in May 1993, just before the
Supreme Court decision, so that the figures for other months are relative to the levels in May
1993 for each group. Approval rates for the treated versus control groups have similar trends
prior to the Supreme Court decision, but approval rates for the treated group increase relative to
the control group after the decision and remain higher. These figures suggest that the Supreme
Court decision resulted in a rise in approval rates and loan sizes in the treated relative to the
control group. Figure 2, lower panel, gives the same data for mortgage loan size. Here the
trends in the treated and control groups are quite different prior to the Supreme Court decision,
but mortgage size increases by more after the decision in the treated group than in the control
group. Figure 3 shows the same charts using MIRS data on interest rates and mortgage size.
Interest rates for the treated group are below those for the control group both before and after the
Supreme Court decision; while loan sizes rise by more after the decision for the control group
than for the treated group. Neither of the figures using the MIRS data suggest that interest rates
or loan sizes changed in the treated relative to the control group following the Supreme Court
decision.
    Table 2 gives summary statistics for both datasets for the period of three months before to
three months after the Supreme Court decision.
    Table 3 gives the benchmark regression results for the Supreme Court decision, using both
data sets. p-values are shown in parentheses. In the approval rate regression, the coefficient of
Four circuits*Post is 0.91 percentage points and statistically significant (p = .02), suggesting that

23 In all regressions, errors are clustered at the district level. We use weights to make the MIRS sample

nationally representative. HMDA data are unweighted, since the sample covers nearly the entire
population of mortgage applications.

                                                     12
approval rates for mortgage applications rose after the Supreme Court decision in the affected
relative to the unaffected circuits. The percent increase is 0.00913/0.813, or 1.1%. In the
interest rate regression, the coefficient of Four circuits*Post is -23 basis points and statistically
significant (p < .01), or 3.4%. Thus lenders both loosened credit rationing and reduced interest
rates in the affected relative to the unaffected circuits following the Supreme Court decision,
with the direction of the interest rate changesupporting our prediction. But we do not find any
significant change in mortgage loan size in the affected relative to unaffected circuits after the
decision. We also do not find significant changes in any of the mortgage market outcomes in the
affected relative to unaffected districts.
      Turning to other variables, one that is particularly of interest is the dummy for mortgages in
districts where the lagged Chapter 13 filing rate is in the top decile, since more mortgages are
likely to be stripped down in districts where Chapter 13 filings are more common. Surprisingly,
we do not find in either dataset that lenders significantly changed approval rates or loans terms in
these high Chapter 13 districts once we control for other variables. (Below, we also examine
whether the difference-in-difference terms are larger in districts with high Chapter 13 filing
rates.)24
     We did a number of specification checks and the results are shown in table 4. Each figure in
table 4 gives the coefficient of Four circuits*Post from a separate regression. Only the results
for the approval rate and interest rate regressions are shown, because the interaction term in the
regressions explaining mortgage loan size were never significant. For the same reason, we also
do not report the results for Districts*Post. The first line of table 4 repeats the results for Four
circuits*Post from table 3. In the next line of table 4, we replace Post in equation (1) by Months
since decision, where the number of months since the decision equals one, two or three. In this
specification, the abolition of strip-down is assumed to have a gradually increasing effect on
mortgage market outcomes, with the marginal effect remaining the same each month of the post-
period. The coefficient of the interaction term in this linear difference-in-difference specification
is predicted to be approximately half the size of the coefficient of the interaction term in the
benchmark.25 The interaction term in the regression explaining approval rates becomes


24 See Canner and Passmore (1994), Avery et al (1993) and www.ffiec.gov/hmda/history.htm for
discussion of the large race and sex coefficients in HMDA.
25 This is because the average value of number of months after the Supreme Court decision is two,

assuming that the number of observations is the same each month following the decision.

                                                   13
insignificant in this specification, while the interaction term in the interest rate regression
remains marginally significant (p = .06), but drops from 23 to 9 basis points.
    The next two lines examine whether lenders’ response to the Supreme Court decision was
stronger for high-risk borrowers. We classify borrowers as high-risk if they are located in
districts with above-median Chapter 13 filing rates or if they obtained their mortgages from
independent mortgage banks—which specialize in high-risk loans. In the next two sets of
regressions, the sample is restricted to the relevant group of high-risk borrowers. For the HMDA
samples, both interaction terms have larger coefficients in the high-risk subsamples than in the
benchmark and the results are statistically significant: lenders increased approval rates by 1.6
percentage points after the Supreme Court decision in districts with high Chapter 13 filing rates
and independent mortgage banks increased approval rates by 1.4 percentage points after the
Supreme Court decision, compared to an increase of 0.9 percentage points in the benchmark.
However the change in interest rates after the Supreme Court decision is smaller for the high-risk
subsamples than for the full sample, suggesting that lenders did not expect the abolition of strip-
down to affect high-risk borrowers more strongly than low-risk borrowers. In the fifth line of
table 4, we rerun the benchmark model using a longer sample period of six months before to six
months after the Supreme Court decision: the result for approval rates remains similar to the
result in the benchmark, but the result for interest rates disappears. Finally in the last line of
table 4, we repeat the analysis using a fake date of one year after the actual Supreme Court
decision. The results were insignificant in both samples.
     Overall, these results suggest that lenders responded to the Supreme Court decision to
abolish mortgage strip-down by lowering interest rates in circuits that previously allowed strip-
down relative to those that never allowed it: the decline was 24 basis points, or 3.4%. This
result is in line with our predictions, but the effect is small, short-term, and not particularly
robust. We also found that lenders increased approval rates in affected relative to unaffected
regions by 0.9 percentage points after the decision, or 1.1%, and this result is more robust. We
did not find any significant effect of the Supreme Court decision on the size of mortgage loans in
affected relative to unaffected regions.

    5.4 Specification and results for the circuit court decisions to allow strip-down.
    Now turn to our analysis of the circuit court decisions to allow strip-down on mortgage
market outcomes. The specification becomes:

                                                  14
          Mortgage market outcome = α + β₃Circuit*Post + γZ + δD + λM + μT + ε.                    (2)

Here we estimate separate regressions for each of the four circuit court decisions to allow strip-
down, using sample periods of three months before to three months after each court’s decision.
Circuit is now a dummy that equals one for observations in the relevant circuit court region and
Post is a dummy for months after each court’s decision. For each regression, the treatment group
is observations in the relevant circuit and the control group is observations in circuits and
districts that never allowed strip-down.26 The major coefficient of interest is β₃, which is
predicted to have the opposite sign from β1 and β₂ in equation (1). The mortgage market
outcome variables and the controls remain the same as in table 3.
    We use MIRS data to estimate regressions for all four circuit court decisions. But because
HMDA data are only available at the mortgage level starting January 1990, we cannot use these
data to estimate regressions for the two earliest circuit court decisions, the 9th and the 3rd. As a
falsification test, we also estimate the same regressions for the 5th circuit court, which decided
not to allow strip-down in August 1992. For this regression, the coefficient of the interaction
term is predicted to be insignificant.27
    The results are given in table 5. Each figure in the table is the coefficient of Circuit-*Post
from a separate regression. Only two of the interaction terms are statistically significant—those
in the regressions explaining interest rates for the 9th and 3rd circuit court decisions. They show
that lenders raised interest rates by 9 basis points, or 0.9%, in the 9th circuit court region relative
to other circuits after strip-down was allowed and the result is marginally significant (p = .10).
This response by lenders is in line with our predictions, since demand for mortgages is predicted
to rise and supply is predicted to fall when strip-down is permitted. But, surprisingly, the next
circuit court decision to allow strip-down—in the 3rd circuit—resulted in a large fall of 34 basis
points in interest rates relative to unaffected circuits, or 3.4% (p = .03). The last two circuit court


26 Thus the 3rd circuit court regression omits observations in the 9th circuit, the 10th circuit court regression

omits observations in the 3rd and 10th, and the 2nd circuit regression omits observations in the 9th, 3rd, and
10th circuits. In all regressions, we also drop observations in districts that allowed strip-down, but are not
in the 9th, 3rd, 10th or 2nd circuits.
27 Summary statistics and full regression results are given in Appendix tables 1 and 2. Because all of the

circuit court decisions occurred in the middle of the relevant month, we assign observations in the month
of the decision to the post period. The time periods for the circuit court samples are July – December
1989 for the 9th circuit, November 1989 – April 1990 for the 3rd circuit, October 1990 – April 1991 for the
10th circuit, January – June 1992 for 2nd circuit, and May – October 1992 for the 5th circuit.


                                                       15
decisions to allow strip-down had no statistically significant effects on mortgage market
outcomes. In addition, the results suggest that lenders did not change approval rates for
mortgage applications or mortgage loan sizes following any of the circuit court decisions to
allow strip-down. The placebo test using the 5th circuit decision had, as expected, had no
significant effects on any of the mortgage market outcomes. Overall, these results suggest that
lenders did not respond strongly or consistently to the circuit court decisions to allow strip-down.

      We also reran all of the regressions in table 5 using the linear difference-in-difference
specification in which the dummy variable Post is replaced by the number of months since the
decision. These results are shown in table 6. In this specification, the increase in interest rates
following the 9th circuit court decision remains positive and becomes more strongly significant (p
= .03), suggesting that lenders’ response to the strip-down decision gradually increased in size
over the three months following the decision. The large negative interest rate response by
lenders that we previously found in response to the 3rd circuit court decision to allow strip-down
disappears. But several of the results are surprising, including the large and significant increase
in the size of mortgage loans in response to the 2nd circuit court decision to allow strip-down—
$12,400 (p = .04)—and the significant changes in the approval rate and interest rate in response
to the 5th circuit court decision, which is our placebo test. Thus some of the mortgage market
responses to the circuit court decisions allowing strip-down are difficult to explain and do not
support our predictions.
    To investigate the increase in interest rates in the 3rd circuit court region further, we reran the
3rd circuit regressions using the sample period of the 9th circuit court decision, or July to
December 1989. Our hypothesis is that, at the time of the 9th circuit decision, lenders may have
anticipated that the 3rd circuit would shortly follow the 9th in allowing strip-down and might
therefore have increased interest rates in the 3rd circuit region in advance of the actual decision.28
But if lenders later decided that the availability of strip-down did not reduce the profitability of
mortgage lending, then they might have reversed the increase in the 3rd circuit region a few
months later. The results of this regression, run using the linear difference-in-difference
specification to allow lenders to respond gradually to the 3rd circuit court decision, are shown in

28 The 3rd circuit court case involving strip-down was decided in February 1990, which was four months

after the 9th circuit court decision. Although we could not obtain the dates when the 3rd circuit strip-down
case was appealed or argued, these events were likely to have occurred around the time of the 9th circuit
decision or shortly thereafter.

                                                     16
the last row of table 6. The coefficient of the interaction term in fact has a significant and
positive coefficient of .178 (p = .02), which supports the hypothesis that lenders in the 3rd circuit
region initially raised interest rates following the 9th circuit court decision, when they anticipated
that the 3rd circuit would follow the 9th in allowing strip-down, but reversed the increase a few
months later. The reversal in the 3rd circuit and the lack of a response by lenders to the 10th and
2nd circuit courts’ decisions allowing strip-down suggest that lenders gradually learned that strip-
down had little effect on the profitability of mortgage lending. We also reran the 9th circuit
regressions using the 3rd circuit sample period to see if lenders in the 9th circuit also reversed
their initial increase in interest rates. While the sign of the interaction term shifts from positive
to negative in the later sample period, it is not significant.
  In the next section, we examine whether the lack of a strong response by lenders to the four
circuit court decisions to allow strip-down can be explained by the fact that strip-down has little
effect on the profitability of mortgage lending.


    5.5 The relationship between strip-down and mortgage default rates.
  As discussed above, the profitability of lending depends on both the probability that borrowers
default and the cost to lenders of default when it occurs. We cannot measure the latter, but we
can obtain data on the probability of serious mortgage delinquency, defined as the fraction of
mortgages that are more than 90 days delinquent. We use serious mortgage delinquency as our
measure of default, since homeowners who are in default for more than 90 days on their
mortgages are unlikely to self-cure. The profitability of mortgage lending is unambiguously and
negatively related to serious delinquency rates, because higher delinquency rates reduce lenders’
profit even if strip-down saves them money by reducing the number of foreclosures conditional
on default. We hypothesize that we do not find a strong relationship between whether mortgage
strip-down is allowed in bankruptcy and the terms of new mortgage loans because the
availability of strip-down has little or no effect on serious delinquency rates.

    To examine this relationship, we obtained data on serious mortgage delinquency rates during
the early 1990’s. The best available data are aggregate delinquency rates at the state-quarter
level. We constructed separate samples of delinquency rates for periods of six months before to
six months after each circuit court decision allowing strip-down and the Supreme Court decision
abolishing strip-down. Then we ran separate regressions for each court decision, using the same

                                                   17
interaction terms as in equations (1) and (2), plus state fixed effects. We expect the coefficients
of the interaction terms in the circuit court regressions to be positive, since allowing strip-down
reduces homeowners’ cost of default, and we expect the coefficient in the Supreme Court
regression to be negative. But an alternative is that homeowners’ default rates do not change in
response to the availability of strip-down in bankruptcy, in which case all of the interaction terms
would be insignificant.

   The results are shown in table 7, left-hand column. The first two circuit court decisions to
allow strip-down, in the 9th and 3rd circuits, are not associated with significant changes in serious
delinquency rates. The final two circuit court decisions allowing strip-down, in the 10th and 2nd
circuits, are significantly related to serious delinquency rates, but the coefficient is positive as
predicted in the 2nd circuit while it is negative in the 10th circuit. The result for the Supreme
Court decision is insignificant. We also ran the model for the 5th circuit court decision—again as
a placebo test—and the result is insignificant, as expected. These results suggest that lenders’
profit from mortgage lending was not strongly affected by whether strip-down was allowed or
not in the relevant region, because default rates by homeowners mainly remained unchanged.
The right-hand column of table 7 shows the results of rerunning the same regressions, but
assuming that serious delinquency rates respond to changes in the availability of strip-down with
a one-quarter lag. The results are similar to those with no lag, except that the positive result for
the 2nd circuit court decision disappears. These results suggest that, except in the 10th circuit,
serious delinquency rates did not respond to changes in the availability of strip-down.

   Overall, these results suggest that lenders did not respond strongly to the circuit courts’
decisions to allow strip-down of mortgages in Chapter 13, probably because strip-down had little
effect on the profitability of mortgage lending. Our results suggest that lenders responded
asymmetrically to court decisions to allow versus abolish strip-down—they did not consistently
respond to the circuit court decisions to allow strip-down, but they lowered interest rates in
response to the Supreme Court decision to abolish strip-down. We cannot tell whether this
asymmetry reflects the greater salience of Supreme Court decisions or the fact that circuit court
decisions are frequently reversed on appeal, while Supreme Court decisions cannot be appealed.

      6. Conclusion. We examined the effect on mortgage loans of four circuit court decisions
to allow strip-down of residential mortgages in Chapter 13 bankruptcy and the later Supreme

                                                  18
Court decision to abolish it. Using difference-in-difference, our main result is that the circuit
court decisions allowing strip-down did not affect the terms of mortgage loans, but the Supreme
Court decision abolishing strip-down caused lenders to lower interest rates to fall by 13 - 16
basis points and to loosen credit rationing by around 1%. We think that the overall effects of
strip-down on mortgage markets are small because strip-down had little effect on lenders’ profit
from mortgage lending, as evidenced by the fact that (except in the 10th circuit region) serious
mortgage delinquency rates did not change in response to the court decisions.

   The fact that the results are small suggests that allowing strip-down in Chapter 13 bankruptcy
would not seriously disrupt the mortgage market or strongly reduce the supply of mortgage
loans. Thus mortgage strip-down could be a worthwhile new approach to reducing foreclosures.

   One final issue is what our results imply concerning the recent proposal that local
governments take underwater mortgages by eminent domain and issue new, smaller mortgages to
homeowners. Some lenders have announced that if local officials proceed with the eminent
domain proposal, they will cease making mortgage loans in the affected jurisdictions. We think
that the key difference between mortgage strip-down and the eminent domain proposal is that
eminent domain will simultaneously strip-down all of the underwater mortgages within a
jurisdiction, regardless of whether homeowners would have filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy and
sought strip-down on their own. Such concerted action that reduces the value of all underwater
mortgages within a jurisdiction would harm lenders by much more than allowing strip-down in
Chapter 13.




                                                 19
Figure
F      1:




   20
                                                       Figure
                                                       F      2:

       Ap
        pproval Rattes and Loan
                              n Size by Trreated versu
                                                     us Control G
                                                                Groups: HM
                                                                         MDA Data

                                                   App
                                                     proval rates :

        0.0
          01

            0
                    19930
                        03          1993
                                       304           199
                                                       9305           1 99306          199307           199308
       -0.0
          01

       -0.0
          02

       -0.0
          03
                                                                                        Control
       -0.0
          04                                                                            Treated


       -0.0
          05

       -0.0
          06



                                                      Lo
                                                       oan Size:

      6000

      5000

      4000                                                           control group
                                                                     treeated group
      3000

      2000

      1000

           0
                   199303
                        3          19930
                                       04           199305           19 9306          1199307         199308
     -1000


Notes: The data are averrage monthly ap  pproval rates for
                                                        f mortgages ffor the period tthree months bbefore to three
months aftter the Supremee Court decisioon. For both th  he treated and control groupss, the figures foor May 1993 arre set
equal to zeero and figures for other montths are differen
                                                        nces relative too May 1993.




                                                            21
                                            Figure 3:
                 Interest Rates and Loan Size by Treated versus Control Groups
                                          MIRS Data

                                                 Interest rates:
     0.2
                                                                     Control
                                                                     Treated
     0.1


       0
               199303         199304         199305             199306         199307       199308

    ‐0.1


    ‐0.2


    ‐0.3


    ‐0.4
                                                                                                           Loan
                                                        Size:

    12500
                                              control
                                              treated
    10000


     7500


     5000


     2500


           0
                 199303         199304          199305            199306         199307        199308

    ‐2500


Notes: The data are average monthly interest rates and loan sizes for mortgages originated during the period six
months before to six months after the Supreme Court decision. For both the treated and control groups, the figures
for May 1993 are set equal to zero and the figures for other months are differences relative to May 1993.




                                                         22
                                     Table 1:
U.S. Court Decisions Allowing and Disallowing Strip-Down of Residential Mortgages

          District and Bankruptcy Court Decisions Allowing Strip-down
                          District        Circuit      Date
               Massachusetts                 1     April 1991
               Rhode Island                  1       Feb 1990
               Maine                         1       Jan 1993
               Connecticut                   2      July 1991
               Pennsylvania, E district      3      May 1988
               New Jersey                    3       Jan 1989
               Virginia, W district          4      July 1994
               Virginia, E district          4       Feb 1990
               North Carolina, E district    4      May 1991
               West Virginia, S district     4      May 1991
               Indiana, N district           5      Dec 1989
               Ohio, S district              6       Feb 1989
               Michigan, W district          6      June 1992
               Michigan, E district          6       Feb 1993
               Tennessee, W district         6       Jan 1992
               Illinois, N district          7     April 1990
               Oregon                        9      Dec 1988
               New Mexico                   10       Oct 1990
               Kansas                       10      Sept 1987
               Oklahoma, W district         10      Nov 1989
               Georgia, Middle district     11      Nov 1992
               Alabama, N district          11     April 1992


                                 Circuit Court Decisions:

             Circuit              Type of decision                     Date
                9                Allowed strip-down                October 1989
                3                Allowed strip-down                February 1990
               10                Allowed strip-down                January 1991
                2                Allowed strip-down                  April 1992
                5              Did not allow strip-down             August 1992
       Notes: The Supreme Court decision abolishing strip-down occurred on June 1, 1993.




                                               23
                                     Table 2:
                    Summary Statistics: Supreme Court Samples

                                                      HMDA                            MIRS
If loan approved (percent)                          81.3 (39.0)                         --
Loan size, if approved (000$)                       106 (75.8)                     111 (66.3)
Interest rate (percent)                                  --                        7.11 (1.05)
Circuits 2,3,9 and 10                                  0.445                          0.464
Districts                                              0.211                          0.164
Income (000$)                                       65.7 (48.4)                         --
If African-American applicant                     0.0326 (0.178)                        --
If other non-white applicant                       0.0881 (.283)                        --
If female applicant                               0.160 (0.367)                         --
If married applicant                              0.764 (0.424)                         --
If refinance (versus purchase)                     0.659 (.474)                         --
Lagged unemployment rate                            7.22 (2.09)                    6.52 (2.36)
(%, MSA)
Income (000$) (MSA)                                  43.7 (7.90)                  42.9 (7.26)
Lagged house price growth rate                      0.373 (0.678)                 0.429 (.752)
(%) (MSA)
Chapter 13 filing rate (district)              0.00011 (0.00009)                0.00010 (.00008)
If minority percent > 30                         0.174 (0.380)
(census tract)

 Notes: The samples cover March through August 1993, which is 3 months before to 3 months after the
 Supreme Court strip-down decision on June 1, 1993. Dollar figures are in current (1993) dollars. Standard
 errors are in parentheses.




                                               24
                                            Table 3:
                  Effects of the Supreme Court Decision to Abolish Strip-down:
                                       Benchmark Results

                          Approval rate         Mortgage loan           Interest rate         Mortgage loan
                           (Percentage              size                (Percentage               size
                             points)                 ($)                   points)                 ($)
                            (HMDA)               (HMDA)                   (MIRS)                (MIRS)
Four circuits             0.913** (.02)          24.3 (.96)           -0.229*** (.01)          680 (.90)
*Post
Districts*Post            -0.0252 (.96)          1,020 (.12)            0.0417 (.63)            -9,740 (.12)
If Chapter 13        -0.506 (.30)      -168 (.83)                       -0.0296 (.48)           1,630 (.32)
filing rate is
highest decile
If African-         -11.2*** (.00) -17,900*** (.00)                            --                     --
American
If other non-white -4.28*** (.00)    5,930*** (.00)                            --                     --
If female             0.140 (.60)   -6,470*** (.00)                            --                     --
If married          4.14*** (.00)  10,800*** (.00)                             --                     --
Income             0.0392*** (.00)    700*** (.00)                             --                     --
If refinance        5.09*** (.00)   -7,530*** (.00)                            --                     --
(versus purchase)
If minority         -4.49*** (.00) -19,300*** (.00)                     0.0143 (.79)           7,920** (.01)
percent > 30
Unemployment        -0.00363 (.92)     90.2 (.47)                       0.0129 (.11)          -1,830** (.02)
rate (lagged)
MSA income ($)      0.289*** (.00)   2,460*** (.00)                     -9.48e-06**          2,120*** (.000)
                                                                            (.02)
Monthly house            -0.00337 (.30)          -1,010* (.08)           -1.18 (.50)            30,400 (.63)
price growth rate
Constant                         --           -67,900*** (.00)          8.66** (.00)            11,500 (.49)
District dummies                 Y                   Y                       Y                       Y
District-level time              Y                   Y                       Y                       Y
trends
Month dummies                    Y                     Y                      Y                      Y
Sample size                  774,000                774,000                 63,700                 63,700
R-squared                      .051                  .030                    .12                    .26

Notes: p-values are in parentheses. Probit results are given as marginal effects. The sample period is April through
September 1993, or three months before to three months after the decision date of June 1, 1993. The HMDA
regressions contain a dummy for missing race—these are not reported. MIRS regressions are weighted by sample
weights. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors
are clustered at the district level.




                                                        25
                                           Table 4:
                  Effects of the Supreme Court Decision to Abolish Strip-down:
                   Specification Checks, Subsamples, and Fake Date Analysis


                                                        Approval rate                Interest rate
                                                           (HMDA)                      (MIRS)
Benchmark results                                       0.913** (.017)             -0.236*** (.01)
Linear diff-in-diff specification                         0.239 (.41)               -0.0921* (.06)
(Months since S. Court decision*post)
Chapter 13 filing rate > median                          1.56** (.04)              -0.182*** (.01)
Lender is independent mortgage bank                      1.42** (.05)               -0.0841* (.08)
Six month before/after sample period                     1.04*** (.01)              -0.0912 (.24)
Fake date (one year later)                                -0.831 (.13)               -0.114 (.12)

Notes: Each figure is the coefficient of Four circuits*Post in a separate regression. Only results explaining
approval rates and the interest rate are reported, since the interaction terms in the loan size regressions are never
significant. The linear difference-in-difference specification assumes that the Post effect changes at the same rate
each month after the Supreme Court decision in the affected relative to unaffected circuits. The high Chapter 13
subsample consists of mortgages on properties located in districts with above-median Chapter 13 filing rates. The
independent mortgage bank subsample consists of mortgages originated by independent mortgage banks, which
specialize in riskier loans. The six month before/after sample period runs from January – December 1993. The fake
date analysis shifts the sample period one year later. The specification for all of the regressions is otherwise the
same as in table 3 and the notes to table 3 apply. p-values are in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                         26
                                                       Table 5:

                        Effects of Circuit Court Decisions to Allow Strip-down:
                                           Benchmark Results

                            Approval rate              Mortgage               Interest rate           Mortgage
                             (Percentage               principle              (Percentage             principle
                                points)                   ($)                    points)                 ($)
                               (HMDA)                  (HMDA)                   (MIRS)                 (MIRS)
Circuit 9                         --                       --                0.0898* (.10)          1,490 (.74)
Circuit 3                         --                       --               -0.343** (.03)           8,530 (.42)
Circuit 10                    -1.32 (.45)            -2,020 (.57)             0.0280 (.89)           9,500 (.46)
Circuit 2                    0.260 (.87)               493 (.75)             0.0833 (.49)             193 (.96)
Circuit 5 (did not           -0.767 (.32)             1,030 (.74)           -0.0425 (0.71)          5,530 (0.32)
allow strip-down)

Notes: Each figure is the coefficient of Circuit*Post in a separate regression. P-values are in parentheses. Sample
periods for each regression are three months before to three months after each court decision. *, ** and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
All regressions contain available covariates, district fixed effects, month fixed effects and district linear time trends.




                                                           27
                                               Table 6:
                       Effects of Circuit Court Decisions to Allow Strip-down:
                                Linear Difference-in-Difference Model

                           Approval rate            Mortgage             Interest rate            Mortgage
                            (Percent)               principle             (Percent)               principle
                            (HMDA)                   (000$)                (MIRS)                   (000$)
                                                    (HMDA)                                         (MIRS)
Circuit 9                        --                     --             0.0924** (.03)           -2,050 (.46)
Circuit 3                        --                     --               0.0681 (.53)            3,580 (.61)
Circuit 10                  0.680 (.36)            1,830 (.46)          -0.0471 (.64)          -12,200 (.35)
Circuit 2                    1.03 (.46)            1,550 (.42)           -0.131 (.26)         12,400** (.04)

Circuit 5 (did not        -2.18*** (.00)            -788 (.64)           0.282* (.10)           2,180 (.70)
allow strip-down)
Circuit 3, using the              --                     --             0.178** (.02)            -366 (.93)
circuit 9 sample
period

Notes: Figures shown are the coefficients of the interaction term, (Months since decision*Post). Other notes to
table 5 apply to table 6.




                                                        28
                                            Table 7:
         Effects of Court Decisions to Allow Strip-down on Serious Delinquency Rates

                                                        MIRS
                                                             Serious                      Serious
                                                        Delinquency Rate,           Delinquency Rate,
                                                         Current Quarter               Lagged One
                                                                                          Quarter
        Circuit 9                                           -0.341 (.20)               0.0948 (.38)
        Circuit 3                                            0.166 (.17)                0.163 (.56)
        Circuit 10                                       -0.232*** (.002)            -0.249*** (.00)
        Circuit 2                                          0.102* (.055)              -0.0120 (.88)
        Circuit 5 (did not allow strip-                   -0.0703 (.183)               0.0574 (.59)
        down)
        Supreme Court (abolished strip-                     0.0143 (.77)               -0.00653 (.90)
        down)

Notes: Each entry is the coefficient of Circuit*Post or Four circuits*Post in a separate regression. For each
regression, the sample period is six months before to six months after the relevant court decision. *, ** and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. All regressions include state and quarter fixed effects and state linear trends.




                                                          29
                                          References


Adelino, Manuel, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen, “Why Don’t Lenders Renegotiate
More Home Mortgages? Redefaults, Self-Cures, and Securitization.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston Public Policy Discussion Paper 09-4 (2009).

Avery, Robert B., Patricia E. Beeson, and Mark S. Sniderman, “Accounting for Racial
Differences in Housing Credit Markets,” FRB Cleveland, Working Paper 9310, 1993.

Bae, Kee‐Hong, and Vidhan K. Goyal. "Creditor rights, enforcement, and bank loans." The
Journal of Finance 64, no. 2 (2009): 823-860.

Bajaj, V., “U.S. Vows More Help for Homeowners,” New York Times, October 23, 2008.

Berkowitz, Jeremy, and Richard Hynes, “Bankruptcy Exemptions and the Market for Mortgage
Loans,” Journal of Law & Economics, vol. 42(2), pp. 809-830, 1999.

Bernard, Tara S., “Slow Start to U.S. Plan for Modifying Mortgages,” New York Times, May 13,
2009.

Canner, Glenn B., and Wayne Passmore, “Residential Lending to Low-Income and Minority
Families: Evidence from the 1992 HMDA Data.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 80:2, Feb.
1994, pp. 79-108.

Craig, Susanne, “A New Effort in Albany to Put Lenders in Charge of Abandoned Properties,”
New York Times, February 9, 2014.

Dewan, Shaila, “More Cities Consider Using Eminent Domain to Halt Foreclosures,” New York
Times, November 15, 2013. www.nytimes.com/2013/11/16/business/more-cities-consider-
eminent-domain-to-halt-foreclosures.html.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. "Private credit in 129
countries." Journal of Financial Economics 84, no. 2 (2007): 299-329.

Eggum, John, Katherine Porter and Tara Twomey, “Saving Homes in Bankruptcy: Housing
Affordability and Loan Modification,” Utah Law Review, vol. 2008:3 (2008): 1123-1168.

Elias, Stephen, The New Bankruptcy: Will It Work for You? 4th Edition. Berkeley, CA: Nolo
Press, 2011.

Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst and Michelle J. White, “The Household Bankruptcy Decision,” American
Economic Review, vol. 92:3, June 2002, pp. 708-718.

Flynn, Ed, and Gordon Bermant, “Bankruptcy by the Numbers: A Tale of Two Chapters:
Financial Data.” American Bankruptcy Institute Journal, vol. 21(8), pp. 20 and 38 (2002).

                                              30
Goodman, Joshua, and Adam Levitin, “Bankruptcy Law and the Cost of Credit: The Impact of
Cramdown on Mortgage Interest Rates,” working paper, Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard University, August 2012.

Gropp, Reint, J. Karl Scholz, and Michelle J. White, "Personal Bankruptcy and Credit Supply
and Demand," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112, pp. 217-251, Feb. 1997.

Hockett, Robert, “Paying Paul and Robbing No One: An Eminent Domain Solution for
Underwater Mortgage Debt,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics
and Finance, Vol. 19:5, 2013, www.newyorkfed.org/research/current_issues.

Jappelli, Tullio, Marco Pagano, and Magda Bianco. "Courts and Banks: Effects of Judicial
Enforcement on Credit Markets." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37:2, pp. 223-44,
2005.

Keys, B., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig. “Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening?
Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2009.

Kau, J.B., and T. Kim, “Waiting to Default: The Value of Delay,” J. of the Am. Real Estate and
Urban Economics Association,” vol. 22:3, pp. 539-551 (1994).

Kittle, David, “Statement before the Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law of
the H. Comm. on the Judiciary,” 110th Cong. at 3 (2007).

Kuchler, Theresa, and Johannes Stroebel, “Foreclosure and Bankruptcy: Policy Conclusions
from the Current Crisis,” working paper, Stanford University, April 2009.

Laeven, Luc, and Giovanni Majnoni. "Does Judicial Efficiency Lower the Cost of
Credit?" Journal of Banking & Finance 29, no. 7 (2005): 1791-1812.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. "Legal
determinants of external finance." The Journal of Finance 52, no. 3 (1997): 1131-1150.

Levitin, Adam, “Resolving the Foreclosure Crisis: Modification of Mortgages in Bankruptcy,”
Wisconsin Law Review, vol. 2009:1, pp. 565-656.

Li, Wenli, Michelle J. White, and Ning Zhu, “Did Bankruptcy Reform Cause Mortgage Defaults
to Rise?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, vol. 3, pp. 123-147 (2011).

Lin, Emily Y., and Michelle J. White, "Bankruptcy and the Market for Mortgage and Home
Improvement Loans," Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 50:1, pp. 138-162, July 2001.

Pence, Karen, “Foreclosing on Opportunity: State Laws and Mortgage Credit,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 88(1), pp. 177-182, 2006.



                                              31
Stiglitz, Joseph, and Andrew Weiss, “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,”
American Economic Review, vol. 71:3, pp. 393-410, 1981.

Stolberg, S., and E.L. Andrews, “$275 Billion Plan Seeks to Address Crisis In Housing,” New
York Times, Feb. 18, 2009.

Visaria, Sujata. “Legal Reform and Loan Repayment: The Microeconomic Impact of Debt
Recovery Tribunals in India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Microeconomics, vol. ?:
pp. 59-81 (2009).

White, A.M., “Deleveraging the American Homeowner: The Failure of 2008 Voluntary
Mortgage Contract Modifications,” Connecticut Law Review (2009).

White, Michelle J., "Economics of Corporate and Personal Bankruptcy Law." In The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, 2008.

White, Michelle J., and Ning Zhu, "Saving Your Home in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy," Journal of
Legal Studies, vol. 39:1, pp. 33-61, January 2010.

Winn, Jane Kauffman, “Lien-Stripping After Nobelman,” Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review,
vol 27, p. 541, 1993-94.




                                              32
                                    Appendix Table 1:
                         Summary Statistics for Circuit Court Samples

                                               HMDA

                               Circuit 10                Circuit 2           Circuit 5
Approval rate                0.756 (0.429)             0.797 (0.409)       0.816 (0.388)
Mortgage loan size ($)      84,700 (66,700)           85,400 (64,000)     89,185 (63,557)
If African-American          0.0430 (.203)            0.0382 (0.191)      0.0371 (0.189)
applicant
If other non-white           0.0601 (0.238)           0.0493 (0.217)      0.0471 (0.2119)
applicant
If female applicant          0.155 (0.362)             0.147 (0.354)       0.149 (0.356)
If married applicant         0.739 (0.439)             0.763 (0.425)       0.761 (0.426)
Income ($)                  61,100 (50,000)           62,700 (49,100)     62,055 (46,193)
If refinance (versus         0.362 (0.481)             0.583 (0.493)       0.566 (0.496)
purchase)
Lagged unemployment            6.49 (1.87)              7.72 (2.12)         7.28 (2.02)
rate (%, MSA)
Income ($) (MSA)              38,100 (6,780)           39,700 (7,140)      41,053 (7,641)
Lagged house price          -0.00232 (.0111)         0.00300 (0.00759)   0.00221 (0.00693)
growth rate (MSA)
Chapter 13 filing rate        0.136 (.343)             0.185 (0.388)       0.150 (0.357)
(district)
If minority percent >         0.157 (.364)             0.138 (0.345)       0.124 (0.329)
30 (census tract)




                                                33
                                          MIRS

                 Circuit 9    Circuit 3         Circuit 10   Circuit 2   Circuit 5
Loan size, if    103,769       86,552             87753       95773       94052
approved ($)     (63475)      (52561)            (51273)     (57964)     (57278)
Interest rate     10.16         10.10              9.89        8.50        8.09
(percent)         (.778)       (.754)             (.873)      (.995)      (1.03)
Lagged             5.03          5.39              6.20        6.79        6.51
unemployment      (1.74)       (1.95)             (2.33)      (2.35)      (2.32)
rate (%, MSA)
Income ($)       37,800       35,400             35,900      39,900       39,700
(MSA)            (6,840)      (6,850)            (6,540)     (7,280)      (7,220)
Lagged house     .0065539      .0020195          -0.00397     .00296      0.00327
price growth    (.0091351)   (.0090266)          (.00925)    (.00817)    (0.00731)
rate (MSA)
Chapter 13        0.197        0.167              0.177       0.165       0.232
filing rate       (.398)       (.373)             (.382)      (.371)      (.422)
(district)




                                           34
                                         Appendix Table 2:
                    Effects of the Circuit Court Decision to Abolish Strip-down

                                           HMDA: Approval Rates
                              Circuit 10          Circuit 2                        Circuit 5
Circuit*Post               -0.0132 (.454)             .0025 (.873)             -0.0077 (.324)
If Chapter 13          0.0123 (.463)                 -0.0160 (.000)          -0.0189*** (.000)
filing rate is in
the highest decile
If African-          -0.132*** (.000)               -.1368*** (.000)          -0.126*** (.000)
American
If other non-white     -0.0600 (.000)              -0.0501*** (.000)         -0.0433*** (.000)
If female             -0.00025 (.952)               .0114*** (.000)           0.0106***(.000)
If married           0.049*** (.000)                0.049*** (.000)           0.048*** (.000)
Income              0.00043*** (.000)              0.00043*** (.000)         0.00051*** (.000)
If refinance        0.0110*** (.463)                  0.0100 (.302)          0.0209*** (.000)
(versus purchase)
If minority         -0.0702*** (.000)              -0.0639*** (.000)         -0.0629*** (.000)
percent > 30
Unemployment           0.0007 (.617)                 -0.0007 (.420)             0.0003 (.612)
rate (lagged)
MSA income ($)        0.000586 (.457)              0.0035*** (.000)           0.0033*** (.000)
Monthly house        0.000075 (.405)               0.000027 (0.576)            0.00000 (.940)
price growth rate
District dummies              Y                               Y                        Y
District-level time           Y                               Y                        Y
trends
Month dummies                 Y                             Y                         Y
Sample size                88,442                        207,860                   269,514
R-squared                   .0367                         .0417                     .046

Notes: For each regression, the sample period is three months before to three months after the relevant court
decision. P-values are in the parenthesis.




                                                         35
                                 HMDA: Mortgage Loan Size

                         Circuit 10           Circuit 2           Circuit 5
Circuit*Post            -2.016 (.573)       0.4927 (.754)       1.029 (.739)
If Chapter 13           2.686 (.446)       -2.503* (.083)     -1.995*** (.000)
filing rate is in
the highest decile
If African-           -21.687*** (.000)   -20.782*** (.000)   -20.356*** (.000)
American
If other non-white     -8.940*** (.000)   -5.055*** (.000)    -5.024*** (.000)
If female              -4.663*** (.000)   -3.560*** (.000)    -3.786*** (.000)
If married            12.049*** (.000)    10.170*** (.000)    10.821*** (.000)
Income                 0.627*** (.000)     0.658*** (.000)    0.707*** (.000)
If refinance          -10.735*** (.000)   --9.154***(.000)    -8.376*** (.000)
(versus purchase)
If minority           -11.168*** (.000)   -15.297***(.000)    -16.538*** (.000)
percent > 30
Unemployment            -0.039 (.870)       -0.206 (.336)       0.121 (.473)
rate (lagged)
MSA income ($)        1.069*** (.001)      2.016***(.000)     2.462*** (.000)
Monthly house          0.0147 (.160)       0.0014 (0.149)      0.0044 (.693)
price growth rate
Constant               -11.405 (.298)     -56.255*** (.000)   -61.669*** (.000)
District dummies             Y                   Y                   Y
District-level time          Y                   Y                   Y
trends
Month dummies                 Y                  Y                   Y
Sample size                88,442             207,860             269,514
R-squared                   .0256              .030                .035




                                              36
                                      MIRS: Interest Rates
                      Circuit 2     Circuit 10     Circuit 9              Circuit 3      Circuit 5
Circuit*Post         0.109 (.37)   -0.052 (.76) 0.146** (.04)          -0.271* (.08)   -0.0425 (.71)
Monthly house        0.412 (.90)    1.01 (.51)   -0.796 (.41)           -4.33* (.07)     3.31 (.51)
price growth rate
Unemployment           0.0238      0.0479* (.06)        0.0112 (.17)    0.031 (.15)    0.0149 (.49)
rate (lagged)           (.33)
MSA income ($)        -7.06e-6       -1.14e-5           -8.47e-6**      -2.07e-5***      -4.41e-6
                        (.51)          (.16)               (.02)            (.00)          (.42)
If Chapter 13         -0.350**      0.06 (.45)                         -0.0559 (.46)   0.0586 (.15)
filing rate is in       (.03)
the highest decile
District dummies        Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes
District level          Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes
linear time trends
Month dummies           Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes
Sample size            18,747          8,929              31,271          12,109          24,159
R-squared               .128            .146               .077            .127            .173



                                   MIRS: Mortgage Loan Size
                      Circuit 2     Circuit 10   Circuit 9               Circuit 3       Circuit 5
Circuit*Post         1,159 (.78)   3,680 (.75)  4,680 (.23)            9,440 (.36)      5,530 (.32)
Monthly house         219,000*      -133,000*    -147,000                 97,000       11,300 (.90)
price growth rate        (.06)         (.07)       (.35)                   (.36)
Unemployment           -2,580*      3,220***    -2,440***               -3,410***      -1,290 (.35)
rate (lagged)            (.09)         (.00)       (.00)                   (.00)
MSA income ($)         1.62***       -1.92***    2,31***                 2.38***         1.97***
                         (.00)         (.00)       (.00)                   (.00)           (.00)
If Chapter 13        -10,100***        5,470                              9,170          -8,710*
filing rate is in        (.00)         (.14)                               (.16)           (.07)
the highest decile
District dummies        Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes
District level          Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes
linear time trends
Month dummies           Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes
Sample size            18,747          8,929              31,271          12,109          24,159
R-squared               .221            .167                .34            .197            .189

Notes: For each regression, the sample period is three months before to three months after the
relevant court decision. p-values are in parenthesis. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                   37
