NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPPLY-SIDE MACROECONOMICS

John Helliwell

Working Paper No. 1995

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
-in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1995
August 1986

Supply-Side Macroeconomics

ABSTRACT

This paper tests New Classical and Keynesian explanations of
output determination within an encompassing "factor utilization"
model wherein the output decision by producers is modelled as the
choice of a utilization rate for employed factors. In this
encompassing model, the ratio of actual to normal output (with
the latter defined by a nested CES vintage production function
with capital, energy and employment as factor inputs) is
explained by unexpected sales (a Keynesian element), abnormal
profitability (one component of which is the Lucas "price
surprise" effect), and abnormal inventories.
Results using Canadian data show that the Keynesian and New
Classical elements contribute explanatory power, as does the
production-function-based measure of normal output, while each of
these partial models is strongly rejected in favour of the
encompassing model. The highly structured factor utilization
model is also seen to fit better than an unstructured VAR model.
U.S. data confirm the results, and show that there are
significant effects from abnormal demand, profitability and
inventory levels even if the labour and capital components of
normal output are defined using hours and utilized capital rather
than employment and the capital stock. The results are also
confirmed using alternative output (and hence input) concepts,
using a translog function instead of a CES function to define
normal output, and using data for several other major industrial
countries.

John F. Helliwell
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia

Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Y2
CANADA

Supply-Side Macroeconomics
John F. Helliwell*

Department of Economics, University of British Columbia
The macroeconomics of the supply side, after years of
neglect, has passed from obscurity to fame without very much by
way of econometric comparison of alternative models. Thus the
time seems ripe for an empirical stocktaking based on a
comparison of some of the various models that have been used to
explain cyclical and longer-term changes in aggregate output.

To make this ambitious task more manageable, I shall limit
my consideration to theories and models that have been used to
determine directly the level or changes in real aggregate output,
thus bypassing many legitimate supply-side issues --

for

instance

those dealing with factor supply and the determinants of
unemployment and inflation. My excuse for this is the hope that I

shall thereby be able to assess and compare some diverse
approaches that are seldom discussed together, let alone
comparably tested with the same body of data.
Setting the Stage

Presidential address, annual meeting of the Canadian Economics
Association/ l'Association canadienne d'Economique, Winnipeg, May
30, 1986. I am grateful for the valuable and extensive research
collaboration of Alan Chung, Tim Fisher, Shelley Phipps, Perry
Sadorsky, Peter Thurlow, and especially Robert York. In preparing
and revising the address, I have had helpful suggestions from
them, and from Pierre Fortin, Marc Gaudry, Andre Plourde, Doug
Purvis, Jean Waelbroeck, Tom Wilson, and especially Michael
Parkin. In the development of the factor utilization model, much
has been due to the continuing research collaboration of Mary
MacGregor, Robert McRae, and Andre Plourde. This research has
been made possible by many years of financial support from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
*

2

The three classes of supply models I shall consider, and
attempt to generalize, include:

1. New Classical models. Two sorts will be considered. Results

are first presented for theLucas (1973) supply function that
has become an important part of many papers and models in the
New Classical stream. This equation, in its structural form,

explains non-trend changes in output in terms of deviations
in the price level from its expected value. Then I shall

consider other New Classical models that subsume the Lucas
supply function in reduced-form equations that explain
departures of output from its trend in terms of unanticipated
changes in monetary and other policies (e.g., Barro 1978,
Darby et al. 1983);

2. Demand—driven Keynesian models of output determination. In
these models, output is determined primarily by changes in
final demand, taking account of inventory accumulation and

changing imports, but with no direct effect from factor
supplies or profitability; and

3. Unstructured Vector Autoregressive (VAR) equation systems. In
recent years, there has been criticism of all structural
models, especially by Sims (1980,1982), on the grounds that
their imposed restrictions are inconsistent with the data.

This has led Sims and others to develop alternative equation
systems that involve flexible lag structures, no exclusion

restrictions, and no imposed functional form beyond the
assumption of log-linear relationships among the jointly
dependent variables. These models provide a useful benchmark

3

against which to test more structured models. In choosing
variables to be included in the VAR model, we have closely
followed Doan, Litterman and Sims (1984).

The main empirical assessments will make use of annual data
for Canada covering the period 1954-1982, although some reference
will also be made to results from similar tests based on data
from the United States and other large OECD economies.

Before proceeding to a separate discussion of each of the
model types, I shall present a more general supply model, which I
shall describe as the 'factor utilization model'. Within this
more general model, the Keynesian and New Classical models can be
seen as nested special cases, each emphasizing different, and
potentially important, aspects of the more general model that
encompasses them. There will follow one section devoted to each
model type, a section of econometric tests of the specification
and stability of the alternative models, and a short concluding
section.

The Factor Utilization Model
The rationale for the factor utilization model lies in a
two-stage optimizing procedure by firms. The first stage models
the forward—looking process whereby firms make sets of
interrelated plans for the levels and prices of output, and the
levels of factor inputs, to maximize the present value, in
risk—adjusted terms, of future quasi—rents. In doing this, they
are assumed to face a less than perfectly elastic demand for
output, to form expectations about the relative costs of factor
inputs, and to choose factor input combinations to minimize the

4

costs of producing the desired levels of output at normal
intensities of factor use. An explicit production function is
used to relate planned output to factor inputs. In such a
context, the long-run production function can best be thought of
as determining a synthetic measure of output: normal output, or
the amount that would be produced if all employed factors were
used at normal or average rates. Normal output (QSV) is
determined by:

QSV =

where

((flNNE)

-1)/r vKEV(T1T]T'(n1)

(i)

and p are scale/distribution parameters, r is the

elasticity of substitution between the two composite inputs,
which are efficiency units of labour (IINNE) and a vintage bundle
of capital and energy (KEy).'

In the second stage of the optimizing process, firms choose
their preferred short-term combinations of utilization rates,
inventory changes, and prices to respond to final demand

conditions, cost conditions, and inventory levels that differ
from those anticipated at the time the commitments were made to
build or hire the currently employed stocks of capital (with
their associated energy use) and labour. In reality, of course,
1 The nature and estimation of the two-level CES production
structure described in more detail in Helliwell and Chung (1987).
In a later section of the paper, results will be presented based
on alternative functional forms, alternative measures of output,
and using data from different countries, to test the extent to
which the results are likely to be sensitive to the special
assumptions being used in the earlier sections. The results are
found to be robust to changes in the choice of functional form,
output concept, and factor inputs used in the definition of
normal output.

5

the two stages of the optimization process are interdependent, as

capital, energy, and employment are all quasi-fixed rather than
truly fixed factors, so that any unexpected or temporary changes
in demand or cost conditions will lead to changes in the measured
factor inputs as well as in their rates of utilization.
Thus the measure of normal output, which is a

production-function-based combination of the measured factor
inputs, must be treated as endogenous rather than predetermined
in the estimation process. Indeed, there are many who would argue
that the production function using measured factor inputs should,
if it is appropriately specified, capture all of the systematic

variation of output2, with all remaining variance of output being
due to errors of measurement, functional form or aggregation, or
to random disturbances of production. The factor utilization

model provides a straightforward test of this hypothesis, since
if the hypothesis is true the unexpected demand, profitability

and inventory variables will have no power to explain the
differences between actual and normal output.3
2 For example, both Keynes and many of the New Classical critics
of Keynesian models have assumed that an aggregate production
function exists and determines the actual level of output
produced. In Keynes' own work, labour was treated as a variable
factor of production. New Classical models either make this same
assumption, or suppose some costs of adjustment for labour and
other factor inputs, but in either case restrain output to that
determined by an implicit underlying production function. The
role of production functions in models of aggregate output is
treated in more detail in the supporting paper.
Tests to be reported later in this paper show that all three of
these variables have systematic effects on output beyond those
captured by the production function based on measured factor
inputs at normal rates of utilization. This is true even if the
labour input is measured in hours worked rather than employment,
and if some similar adjustment is made to attempt to capture
variations in the rate of use of the capital stock.

6

The lack of independent measures of factor—specific
utilization rates, especially for capital, is a primary reason
for according separate treatment to utilization as a determinant
of production. A related issue is the lack of any explicit
measures of the costs of abnormal utilization rates. Thus it is
impossible to treat general factor utilization as a factor of

production on all fours with the extensive factors of production
(labour, capital, and energy). By definition, total costs of

production are unchanged with changes in the utilization rate as
defined in this paper, so that per-unit measured costs of
production must fall as the utilization rate rises. In the real
world, of course, abnormally high utilization rates sustained for
an extended period of time would lead to fatigue, equipment
breakdown due to inadequate maintenance and repair, and higher
wages due to the implicit redefinition of labour contracts. In a
more subtle way, abnormally high utilization rates bleed away
resources from the training, planning and innovation activities
of firms, and hence hold back the overall rate of reduction in
average costs. Lower utilization rates impose the familiar costs
of idle capacity, although the preceding discussion is intended
to show that much of what appears to be idle capacity facilitates
many types of time-shiftable maintenance, repair, and investment
activity.

There is reason to suspect that abormally high and abnormally
low utilization rates may not have symmetric effects on the
present value of total costs, especially if they are large or
long-sustained. The symmetric functional form adopted for the
utilization rate decision may therefore be in error. Tests for
non-normality of errors are reported in Helliwell and Chung
(1987); they show some, but not a significant amount, of the
negative skewness that might be expected.

7

Since neither the rate nor the costs of abnormal factor
utilization are subject to direct measurement, a feasible
modelling strategy is to measure the rate of utilization
indirectly, as the ratio of actual output to normal output, where
the latter is what would be forthcoming from the production

function at normal utilization rates. This implicitly splits the
production decision into two components: a forward-looking
decision process to jointly choose the planned level of output
and the associated levels of factor inputs, and the short—term
decision about the optimal intensity of factor use. One advantage
of this treatment is that all of the dynamic complexities of the
forward-looking part of the optimization process can be subsumed
in the measures of normal output, thus increasing the simplicity
and precision of the modelling of the short—term output decision.

By the same token, of course, the resulting equation for output
is not sufficient to answer all of the empirical and policy

questions that are commonly thought of as supply-side issues. I
shall return to this matter in the concluding section.

What are the appropriate determinants of the short—term
utilization decision? First, it is necessary to assume something
about the form of the implicit costs that must be borne if factor
utilization differs from its normal values. The factor
utilization model, as specified in this paper, is based on the
assumption that average costs are minimized at average historical
utilization rates, and that there are symmetric increases in the
present value of costs when utilization rates are either above or
below their normal values. Why then do firms ever choose to adopt

8

utilization rates different from their normal values? The answer
is that actual cost or demand conditions frequently differ from
those that were anticipated when the factor combinations were
assembled. The alternative ways of dealing with unanticipated
changes in cost or demand conditions include changes in
production, changes in inventories (or order backlogs), changes
in imports, and changes in prices.

Changes in production can be achieved through changes in
either the quantities or the rates of utilization of employed
factors. Typically it is costly, in terms of the present value of
profits, to concentrate adjustment entirely in any one of the
alternative forms. For given imports and final sales, the
production decision and the inventory decision are in effect the
same decision, as any additional output is added to inventories.
If there is an increase in final sales, it will in general lead
to an increase in the utilization rate and a reduction in
inventories. Abnormally low profitability, as represented by high
average costs relative to output price, can be taken as a proxy
for the marginal profitability of current production for future
sale. Finally, the difference between actual and target inventory
stocks, which provides a cumulative measure of the extent to
which buffering movements of inventories have been used to meet
past changes in final sales, also affects the utilization
decision, under the conventional assumption that average unit
costs rise with inventory shortfalls or excesses. Thus, under the
most usual assumptions about the costs of abnormal utilization
rates and abnormal inventories, the derived model of optimum

9

factor utilization will depend on final sales, profitability, and
inventories. Each variable is measured relative to its normal or
target value, with the utilization rate constrained to take its
own normal value when sales, profitability and inventory stocks
are all at their normal values. Normal output is scaled so that
the normal value of the utilization rate is 1.0 by construction.
The form for estimation is therefore:
Q/QSV =

SS131KGP132CQ133V

(2)

where SS is the ratio of actual to normal final sales, with both
terms expressed as proportions of normal output:
SS = (SALES/QSV)/<SALES/QSV>5

and KGP is the ratio of desired to lagged actual inventory
stocks, with desired stocks expressed as a constant proportion of
normal output6:
KGP = QSV(<KINV(t-1)/QSV>)/KINV(t--1)

and CQ, an inverse measure of profitability, is defined as
5<x> denotes the sample average of x.
6 Thus QSV appears in the denominator of the dependent variable
and two of the independent variables. Can this give rise to an
upward bias in the estimates of
or 132? Equation (2) is
estimated with lnQ as the dependent variable, and the net
coefficient on ln(QSV) constrained to be 1.0-131-132. Unless this
constraint is binding, the appearance of QSV in the denominators
of the sales and inventory terms cannot be influencing the values
and 132. F statistics reported in the tables show that
taken by
constraining the directly estimated coefficient on 1nQSV to be
1.0, and therefore the net coefficient to be 1.0—131—132, is easily
accepted by the data, so that there is no risk of bias in the
estimates of i3 and 132.

10

current unit costs relative to the output price. The
theoretically expected values of the parameters are therefore: s3
> 0, 132 > 0,

< 0. The error term, v, is assumed to be

log-normally and independently identically distributed.

Although this is a highly constrained model of production,
with only three coefficients subject to unrestricted estimation,
it will next be shown that it needs only slight generalization to
include Keynesian demand-driven models (which emphasize the roles

of final sales and inventory disequilibrium) and Lucas Supiy
functions (based on one component of the profitability variable)
as special cases.

There is an econometric complication posed by the fact that
although the New Classical and Keynesian models can be treated as
special cases of factor utilization models, the version of the
factor utilization model normally estimated imposes some
restrictions that are not imposed in the Keynesian and New

Classical models. To deal with this, we shall develop
encompassing7 models in each section that contain all of the

models assessed in that section as special cases. F statistics
can then be used to provide approximate tests of the plausibility
of each model's restrictions. In a later section of the paper,

all of the models tested in earlier sections, including the most
highly restricted form of the factor utilization model, will be
tested against a general encompassing model that includes each
section's encompassing model, and hence each of the structural
For more on the use of encompassing models as means of
comparing otherwise non—nested hypotheses, see Hendry and Richard
(1982), Mizon (1984), and Mizon and Richard (1986).

11

models, as special cases.

Generalizing New Classical Supply Functions
Many of the most influential recent papers in macroeconomics
embody the hypotheses of rational expectations and
market-clearing equilibrium, and the implication that "...

private

agents' mistakes in forming expectations are the sole

mechanism through which variations in aggregate demand provide
impulses for the business cycle" (Lucas and Sargent 1981, p. xxv,
emphasis in original).

The supply function proposed by Robert Lucas (1973) has
played a key role in the subsequent development of theoretical
and applied macroeconomics. This section considers direct
estimates of the Lucas supply function and then the parallel
applications by Barro (1978) and Darby et al. (1983) of
reduced-form output equations which test the effects of
anticipated and unanticipated changes in monetary policy.
The Lucas supply function, like much other work in the
rational expectations tradition following Muth (1961), explains
deviations of output from its normal value in terms of
unanticipated differences between actual and expected prices.
Although only relative prices and not absolute price changes
should influence real variables in New Classical models, Lucas
argues that producers have difficulty in distinguishing absolute
and relative price changes. In these circumstances it is rational
for them to treat changes in the absolute price level as
containing some element of relative price increase. Thus when
prices rise relative to prior expectations, producers temporarily

12

raise their output, with the effect subsequently diminishing as
the gap between actual and expected prices disappears. In
applying the model, we have followed the U.S. applications by
Mishkin (1982a;1982b) and the Canadian application by Darrat
(1985) in defining the expected price level as the predicted
value from a multivariate regression on previous values of a
number of key macroeconomic variables.8 Since the current price
level is an endogenous variable, especially so in the context of
a flexible-price equilibrium model of the sort hypothesized by
Lucas and Friedman, we estimate the supply equation (shown as
model 1.1 in Table 1) by means of Instrumental Variables9 with
the list of instruments for the price level including all of the
variables used in the regression for the expected price plus the
current values of the exogenous variables (which are mostly
foreign variables, as shown in the Glossary) of the macroeconomic
system in which the supply model is imbedded.
Our results are more like those of Mishkin (1982b) than
those of Darrat (1985), since we show no significant output
effect from unanticipated inflation. Since our price variable is
the expected price divided by the actual price, it should, and
8 The exact list of variables is shown in the Glossary. Following
a suggestion by Michael Parkin, the results reported in Table 1
are based on an expected price equation whose information set
includes all past endogenous variables plus predicted values
(based on univariate time-series models) of current exogenous
variables. Alternative specifications reported in the companion
paper show that the results are similar if the information set is
reduced to include only lagged endogenous variables, or based on
a univariate time—series model for the price level itself.
Mishkin and Darrat both use ordinary least squares rather than
simultaneous estimation. This is more defensible in their case
than in ours, as they use quarterly rather than annual data, and
use so many periods of lagged data that the role of current
prices is correspondingly much reduced.

13

does, take a negative sign in the Lucas supply equation10.

Our equation 1.1, like that of Lucas (1973), uses a time
trend and lagged output to capture the joint effects of normal
output and persistent cyclical influences:
(3)

Q=Aoea0QTQ_1(Pe/P)a2ei

where QT is a linear time trend and A0 is a constant. Since the
time trend and lagged output represent simplifications rather

than desired features of the Lucas supply function, the natural
first step in generalizing the model is to substitute a
production-function--based level of normal output for the time
trend and the lagged level of output'':

Q/QSV = Ao(Pe/P)a2e2

(4)

As shown in equation 1.2, this substantially improves the fit of
the model, but does not have much effect on the role of
unanticipated inflation. Mishkin (1982b, p. 797) suggests that
the poor performance of the Lucas supply equation in his tests
may be due to the inclusion of data from the stagflationary
10 To help explain the apparent discrepancy between our results
and those of Darrat, there is a table in the supporting paper
showing a series of regressions altering one by one the
differences in sample period, data definition, degree of time
aggregation, and estimation method that distinguish our study
from his.
''Those who treat the production function as a continuously
binding structural relation would consider the step more natural
if QSV were defined to include normal or potential employment
rather than actual employment. Using a version of QSV smoothed in
such a manner does not alter the role of the expected price
variable, although it does increase somewhat the impact of the
subsequent inclusion of the demand and profitability variables.

14

episodes of the 1970s, during which producers were confronted
with unexpectedly high prices and unexpectedly low demand.

The model can be generalized in two ways to help remedy the
inability of the unexpected price variable to capture the
combined effects of unanticipated higher prices, higher costs and
lower demand in the 1970s. The first addition is a variable
(1nSS) representing abnormal sales, where SS is the level of

final sales divided by normal output (QSV), adjusted so that the
ratio of sales to scaled normal output equals 1.0 on average over
the 29—year sample period. Normal output, when scaled to take
account of the average size of imports and inventory investment,
is taken to be a good measure of normal anticipated sales, since
the past factor demand decisions (which are embodied in current
employment and capital stock, and hence in normal output) were
presumably based on the then prevalent expectations for sales
levels now. When actual and normal sales are equal, the log of
their ratio equals zero, and the term drops out of the equation,

leaving output equal to normal output unless actual price differs
from expected price:

Q/QSV = Ao(Pe/P)a2SSP1E3

(5)

As shown in equation 1.3, adding the unexpected sales variable
substantially improves the fit of the model, although the

coefficient on the expected price variable remains insignificant
The next adjustment recognizes that there can be unexpected
changes in costs as well as in prices:

15

Q/QSV = Ao(Pe/P)a2(C/Ce)c3SS1e4

(6)

Adding the log of the ratio of current to expected unit costs12,
further improves the fit of the equation, arid raises also the

effect of the price variable, as shown in equation 1.4.

Since it may take a long time to bring the stocks of capital
and labour into line with the desired level and structure of
production, there is also reason to expect that abnormally low
profitability (as measured by the ratio of normal costs to
expected price) may have a continuing effect on output (relative
to normal) as long as it differs from its normal value of 1 .0:

Q/QSV = Ao(Pe/P)a2 (C/Ce)a3 (Ce/Pe)°SS' e

(7)

This further generalization of the Lucas supply model, still in
the general spirit of the model (since output will be at its
normal value when profitability is normal), is shown in equation
1.5 to add materially to the explanatory power of the model, and
to increase the coefficient on the expected price variable.

A final generalization of the model is to add the log of the
ratio of the desired to the target level of inventories, KGP, as
defined below equation (2). This addition improves the logic of
the short—term production decision, by acknowledging limits to
12 The definition of expected costs makes use of the structure of
the production model rather than a regression. Expected or normal
costs are defined by the cost function dual to the nested
three—factor CES production function used to define normal
output. It represents what unit costs will be, given current
relative prices for capital, energy, efficiency units of labour,
after factor proportions have been adjusted so as to minimize
costs.

16

the use of inventories as buffer stocks. Some buffering role for
inventories is implied by the fact that production does not rise
commensurately with abnormal sales. The inventory term also is in
the spirit of the Lucas equilibrium model in that production
equals normal output when inventories are at their target values
(as long as profitability and sales are also at their normal
values). The form of the equation is therefore:

Q/QSV = Ao(Pe/P)a2(C/Ce)a3 (Ce/Pe)SS1KGP2 e6

(8)

Adding the inventory variable1 as shown in equation 1.6, also
improves the performance of the unanticipated price variable, so
that it now passes conventional tests of statistical
significance.

Equation 1.6 is the most general specification tested in
Table 1. The final equation of this series tests whether the
three relative price and cost variables can be combined to form a
single variable:

Q/QSV = SS1KGP$2CQ3ei

where CQ =

(Pe/P)(C/Ce)(Ce/Pe)

(9)

=

c/P,

or current unit costs

relative to the output price. In addition, the constant term A in
equation (8) is constrained to be equal to 1.0 in equation (9),
to ensure that factor utilization equals 1.0 when sales,
inventories and profitability are at their normal values. These
constraints are accepted easily, as shown by the F statistic

17

below equation 1.7.13 By contrast, if we look back at the F
statistics on the constraints imposed in equations 1.1 through
1.5, and especially in equations 1.1 through 1.3, it is apparent

that the generalizations are virtually demanded by the data. In
addition, as we have seen, they increase the weight of evidence
in favour of the Lucas hypothesis that unexpected increases in

prices lead to temporary increases in output. As we shall see
later, however, this does not imply anything about the likely
effectiveness or ineffectiveness of policy, since that will

depend in the longer term on the extent to which the policies
influence the desired future level of output, and hence factor

demands and the normal level of output. Additional econometric
tests of the equations reported in Table 1 are shown in Table 5.
They will be discussed later, when comparisons are made with the
other models to be reported in Tables 2 through 4.

Barro's papers (1977;1978) provide an alternative test of
New Classical assumptions by means of reduced-form equations that
explain real cyclical variables in terms only of unanticipated
changes in the money supply. To make this operational, it is also
13 The constraints do, however, lower the DW statistic to the
point where positive autocorrelation of residuals is revealed.
Given the likelihood that the errors of aggregation and the other
approximations involved in the aggregate production function are
themselves autocorrelated, this result is not surprising. It is
necessary to ensure, however, that the autocorrelation is not
evidence of deeper problems of specification. The broadest
assurance against this risk is provided by the differencing test
results reported in the specification tests section of the paper.
Note also that the equation shows no need for the lagged
dependent variable, since the lagged dependent variable is one of
the variables whose exclusion is tested by the F statistic below
equation 1.7. Tests reported in the companion paper also show
that the parameter estimates are not affected by estimation in
first difference form, and the same is true if Cochrane-Orcutt
transformations are used.

18

necessary to have a model for the formation of expectations about
the level of the money supply. This is the same issue that arises
for the direct estimation of the Lucas supply function, and is
usually handled in the same way —by an equation that explains the
expectation for the current period in terms set of relevant
information variables known in the previous period. In equation
2.1, we have attempted to replicate as closely as possible the
methods used by Barro (1978) in his study of the effects of
unanticipated money on the level of output in the United States.
Equation 2.1 contains a time trend and the previous year's values
of the difference between actual and anticipated money growth,
and of anticipated money growth. Unanticipated money growth, both
current and lagged, has significant positive effects on real
output. There is also a significant positive effect from lagged
anticipated money growth, although under New Classical
assumptions only unanticipated money growth is supposed to
influence real income. Adding the previous year's value of

transitory income, as suggested by Darby et al (1983) and shown
in equation 2.2, increases the explanatory power of the equation
and reduces the effect of anticipated money growth.
In the remaining columns of Table 2, we show the effects of

sequentially adding the normal output, abnormal sales, abnormal
profitability, and abnormal inventory variables of the factor
utilization model of supply. Using normal output instead of a
time trend, and adding the variables for abnormal sales, profits,

and inventories lowers the size of the coefficients on the money
variables, so that in equation 2.6 they are small and

19

insignificant. Thus equation 2.7, which is equation 2.6
restricted to exclude the Barro and Darby variables, fits the
data as well as equation 2.6.

Our results do not imply that monetary policy, whether
anticipated or not, has no effect on aggregate output. The
results do suggest, however, that the output effects of monetary
policy are best represented indirectly: in the longer term
through changes in factor demands and hence through changes in
the normal level of output, and in the shorter term by changes in
abnormal sales, profitability, and inventories.

Adding Supply Effects to a Demand—Driven Keynesian System
In this section, we start with a demand—side explanation of
output, and then gradually introduce key elements of supply—side
modelling until we reach the same factor utilization model in
which the Lucas supply function was nested.
It is not immediately clear how to set up a Keynesian
equation for the determination of the level of aggregate output.
In most Keynesian models, real GNP is the sum of separately
determined equations for consumption, fixed investment, export,
and inventory investment, minus imports:
GNP = C +

I

+ G +

IINV + X

- M

(10)

To obtain a stochastic form for such a model, it is necessary to
substitute into the GNP identity one or more of the key
behavioural equations. To preserve the demand-oriented spirit, we
have chosen to treat real final sales (SALES = C+I+G+X) as

20

determined elsewhere in the system1 and to obtain the output
equation by substituting the inventory investment and import
equations into the GNP identity. The logic of this is that
inventory changes, output changes, and changes in imports

represent the three alternative ways (apart from price changes)
to accommodate changes in final demand conditions. The
combination of the inventory and import equations thus implicitly
incorporates the Keynesian model of the producers' output
decision. The usual inventory demand equation in a KeynesIan
macro model relates the change in inventories to sales, expected
sales, and the gap between actual and target inventories. This
usually involves sales, the change in sales,15 and the lagged
inventory stock in the estimation equation:
IINV =

f(SAES,KINV(t—1))

(ii)

Real imports depend, in the main, on final sales and the relative
prices of imports and domestic output:
M = g( RELP, SALES)

(12)

where RELP is the ratio of the import to output price index.

Using a log-linear form, which can only be an approximation when
log-linear behavioural equations are combined with the linear
identity for real GNP,16 we derive the equation for real output

In estimation, final sales therefore has the status of an
endogenous variable in the instrumental variables regression.
The change in sales, reflecting the generally offsetting
effects of sales expectations and inventory buffering, proved
insignificant and is excluded from our reported equations.
16In our application, there is the additional approximation posed
14

21

as a function of real final sales, the lagged stock of
inventories, and the price of imports relative to domestic
output:

Q = A0SALES'11KINV(t_1)'12RELP'13u

(13)

where u is a log-normally distributed error term, and where the
theoretically expected values of the parameters are: ii >

0,

>

0,

'12

<

0. Equation 3.1, the fitted form of (13), has significant

coefficients with the expected signs. The results show that

production rises slightly more than proportionately with final
sales, much in keeping with the demand-oriented models on which
the equation is based. By combining inventory and import

responses, the equation does not permit separate identification
of the buffer role for inventories. If imports also rose

proportionately with unexpected sales (other evidence suggests
that they rise less than proportionately), then the 1.07

coefficient on the final sales variable would imply no buffering
role for inventories.

Before jumping to any such conclusion, consider the effect
of adding some supply structure to the system. As a first step,

equation 3.2 adds the relative profitability variable 1nCQ, with
little effect. But when output is linked more closely to the
supply side, as in equation 3.3, the situation changes
substantially. To move from equation 3.2 to 3.3, the normal
16(corit'd) by the fact that the output concept is based on real
domestic product at factor cost, while final sales are at market
prices. The results reported in Table 7, based on GDP at market
prices, show that this approximation does not influence the
results reported in Table 3.

22

supply variable 1nQSV is added, with coefficient constrained to
unity, and the final sales and inventory variables both are
redefined to make them consistent with the factor utilization
model, with normal sales and the inventory target both being made
proportional to normal output. The net effect of these changes is
simply to add one more variable and one more constraint to the
demand-driven equation 3.2. This introduction of the supply
structure increases the goodness of fit of the model, cuts the
sales coefficient in half, and establishes an important role for
the profitability variable. This suggests that the very high
coefficient on sales in the demand—driven equation 3.1 is due to
the exclusion of the supply-oriented measure of normal output,

thus putting an upward bias on the sales coefficient, since the
sales and normal output variables are positively correlated.

It can be seen that equation 3.3 encompasses the Keynesian
demand-driven model (since equation 3.1 is equal to 3.3 with the
coefficients on the normal output and profitability variables
constrained to equal zero) and the factor utilization model,

since equation 3.3 is equation 1.7 with the addition of the
relative price variable. The F value of 18.2 under equation 3.1

shows that the Keynesian model can be rejected relative to the
encompassing model, while equation 3.4, which restricts the
import price variable out of the encompassing model, and thus

reproduces equation 1.7, shows that the factor utilization model
has all of the explanatory power of the encompassing model.

It is tempting to consider the demand-driven Keynesian model
of equation 3.1 and the Lucas supply function of equation 1.1 as

23

competitors, and then to make statistical comparisons between
them in terms of non-nested hypothesis tests. However, the
advantage of the tests that we have constructed to test each of
the models separately against the factor utilization model of
short-term supply is that we can now see that both of the simple
models are heavily rejected by the more general models that were
constructed to encompass them separately with the factor
utilization model.

In a subsequent section I shall report the results of the
tests of all of the structural models assessed in the context of
a single equation encompassing them all. In the meantime, the
current results show some of the likely ways in which the Lucas
supply function and the Keynesian demand—driven models of output
can be seen to represent different aspects of a more general
model of aggregate supply. Attempts to fit the partial models
were seen to produce misleading and imprecise estimates of the
partial effects, as well as to give less accurate and robust
explanations of the level of aggregate output.
Of course, it is still possible that there is a yet more
general model to be found that would lead to the rejection of the
factor utilization model tested in the preceding sections.

Testing Structural Models against Theory—Free Alternatives

One convenient way of assessing the likelihood of more plausible
models is to test the credibility of the restrictions imposed by
the structural models relative to some unrestricted reduced form.
What if a structural model's restrictions are heavily
rejected by the sample data? We can then conclude either that

24

there must be another structural model with more appropriate, or
fewer, restrictions, or that economic reality is too complex and
varying to be usefully depicted by structural models of the sort
used in macroeconomics. Comparative tests of the factor
utilization model and the structure-free VAR model proposed by
Sims are shown in Table 4. The VAR is shown as equation 4.1, and
the factor utilization model as equation 4.3, with equation 4.2
being the synthetic equation that encompasses them both. The VAR
allows for second—order autoregressive errors and uses
instrumental variables estimation to permit current values of
right-hand-side endogenous variables to be included in the

equation. The F statistics and the standard errors both indicate
that the structural model is to be preferred to the VAR, while
the F statistics also suggest that the structural model and the
unrestricted reduced form each contain some information that is
lacking in the other. How can a structural model with so many
theoretical restrictions, all of which involve errors of
aggregation and approximation, possibly fit better than a reduced
form without restrictions? The reason is that the VAR itself

imposes restrictions, on the functional form and the number and
nature of included variables, that introduce error. In addition,
the lack of parsimony of the VAR means that the additional

variables, while always adding to the uncorrected coefficient of
determination, may well reduce the explanatory power of the
equation after correction is made for the loss of degrees of

freedom. This explains why the restrictions of the structural
model are more easily accepted than those of the VAR, and why the

25

standard error of estimate is lower for the structural model.
Specification Tests of Alternative Models

In the preceding sections, each of the separate model types
(Lucas, Barro, Keynesian, VAR) has been tested against an

encompassing model that includes itself and the factor
utilization model as special cases. In each instance, except for
the VAR, the factor utilization model involved only minor
restrictions on the encompassing model, and these restrictions

were easily accepted. In this section we draw together the basic
equations for each of the model types, test them against a more
comprehensive model that encompasses all of the structural models
as special cases, and subject them to further stability and
specification tests.

These results are shown in Table 5. The first column shows
the standard errors, which are the same as those reported in the
earlier tables in which each equation was first presented. The
second column shows the Chow tests for stability, with the sample
split after 1967 (results shown in the first row) and after 1972
(shown in the second row). The third column shows the results for
the differencing test, using the form proposed by Davidson,

Godfrey and MacKinnon.'7 In the fourth column, we show the F test
on the restrictions required to restrict each of the structural
models against the model that encompasses them all. These
17 As shown in Davidson, Godfrey and MacKinnon (1985), this is
computed as a test for omitted variables with close parallels,
also noted by Nakamura and Nakamura (1981), to the Durbin,
Hausman (1978), and Wu specification tests. We use IV estimation,
since many of the right—hand—side variables, as well as their
differences, are endogenous variables.

26

F—statistics are all smaller than in the preceding tables, since
the jointly encompassing model is less parsimonious than the
earlier ones, and the degrees of freedom are correspondingly
reduced. However, the Lucas, Barro and Darby equations are all
still rejected at the 99% level, and the Keynesian model at the
95% level, while the factor utilization model passes easily.

The results of the tests against the encompassing model are
mirrored by those of the Chow and differencing tests, which the

factor utilization model passes easily The Barro equation also
passes these tests, but remains heavily rejected by the F test
against the encompassing model, and is much inferior in terms of
standard error.

Since all of the above evidence appears very strong in terms
of its support for the factor utilization model relative to both
New Classical and Keynesian models of output determination,
further testing seems to be indicated. If a model is to be of
general importance, and not just applicable to a particular
functional form relating to a certain period of one country's
history, it should be robust to changes in functional form,

sample period, and country. The Chow tests in Table 5 show that
the choice of data period does not seem important, and especially
that there appears to be no break in structure before and after
1973. The evidence in Tables 6, 7 and 8, and the more extensive
tests reported in the supporting paper, address the questions of
functional form, of alternative output concepts, and also report
the results of applying the same models to data from the United
States. In each table, each of the basic structural models is

27

fitted, and the results tested against the jointly encompassing
model, and also against the more restricted model encompassing
each structural model separately with the factor utilization
model.

Table 6 shows the effects of using a translog production
function, instead of the nested CES vintage production function,

to define normal output. These results, which strongly support
those of the earlier tables, are very important, because they
provide the necessary evidence that the significant explanatory
power of the factor utilization model is not simply due to the
use of an insufficiently flexible functional form for the
underlying production function. The results from the translog and
other flexible functional forms18 all show that there is
systematic variation in output beyond that explained by the
production function based on measured factor inputs19, and that
the factor utilization model dominates the New Classical and
Keynesian models in explaining that variation.
All of the analysis so far has made use of a three-factor
production function, and a matching concept of the output of the
energy—using sector, equal to GDP plus net energy imports. Since
18 As developed by Tim Fisher and Alan Chung. The translog
production function fits better than the other flexible
functional forms, whether the comparison is made with or without
the inclusion of the abnormal sales, profitability and inventory
variables.
19 This is easy to test, since the hypothesis that the economy is
always on its aggregate production function is nested within the
factor utilization model. The test is done by restricting the
coefficients on the factor utilization variables to be equal to
zero. The F value for these restrictions is 78.2 for the
translog, compared to 87.7 for the nested CES function. In both
cases this implies strong rejection of the production function
against the more general model.

28

most other aggregate work has made use of GDP, and hence of a
two-factor production function explaining value—added, Table 7
repeats all of the model tests and comparisons using real GDP as
the output variable and total employment and capital as the
factors of production.20 Once again, the ranking of the models is
the same as before, although now there is some evidence that the
data reject the imposed restrictions of the two—factor model for
normal output. This offers further evidence in favour of the
three-factor model of production analyzed previously.

Finally, Table 8 tests all of the same models using United
States data. These tests are of special importance, because the
alternative structural models have been developed in the United
States, and were designed to explain macroeconomic events there.
Since the Lucas, Barro and Darby equations were designed to
explain United States experience, while the factor utilization
model was developed and tested in Canada, it would not be
surprising if some of the rankings in earlier section were
reversed. However, Table 8 shows that the rankings remain as they
were previously, and that the United States data are even
stronger in their rejection of the New Classical and Keynesian
restrictions on the encompassing model, while the restrictions of
the factor utilization model are easily accepted.

Another important feature of the United States data is that
they provide a chance to obtain and apply independent measures of
the rates of utilization of labour and capital, and hence to see
whether the apparent success of the factor utilization model is
20

The GDP version of the model is based on research by Peter

Thur low.

29

really as a backdoor way of explaining hours worked for employees
and equipment. We have fitted21 the model to United States annual
data in two ways, once by using employees and capital as the
inputs on labour and capital (which is what was done with the

Canadian data) and again by using total hours worked (employees
times average hours) as the labour input, and utilized capital
(capital stock times an index of actual relative to average hours

worked by capital) as the capital input. The results from the two
sets of tests are identical in their rankings of the alternative
models. The results using total hours worked and utilized capital
are reported in Table 8, while the supporting paper gives both
sets for comparison. Since the results are so similar, and do not

depend on whether employment and capital are separately
adjusted22 for changes in their rates of utilization, they
provide support for continuing to apply the model using

employment and the capital stock as the measured inputs of labour
and capital.

The factor utilization model has also been applied on a

comparable basis to all seven of the major OECD countries, as
reported in Helliwell, Sturm, Jarrett, and Salou (1986). For
three of the European countries, and for Japan, the ranking of
the alternative models is different from the Canadian and U.S.
21 These results are part of joint research with Shelley Phipps,
with the objective of testing alternative models for jointly
explaining short-term output changes and longer-term productivity
changes in the United States context. The capital utilization
data are from Shapiro(i985).
22 The F value on the restrictions required to determine output
solely from the production function is 217.1 if employees and
capital are used, and 123.0 if total hours and utilized capital
are used instead.

30

rankings reported here, as the Keynesian model is sometimes
'referred to the factor utilization model? with both models
strongly preferred to the Lucas, Barro, and Darby equations.23
Conclusion

The main conclusion from the tests reported in this paper is
that it is possible to develop structural models for output
determination that include New Classical and Keynesian models as
special cases, and which easily dominate them on statistical
grounds. Perhaps more important, the results show that such a
model can be based on an explicit production function, and hence
provide a consistent supply-based explanation of the evolution of
aggregate output over the longer run. Consistent linkage of
short-run and longer-run explanations of aggregate supply was
shown to involve both Keynesian and neoclassical elements in the
short run, and to support the use of an aggregate production
function for the determination of normal output.

How do the models and results relate to what is popularly
known as 'supply—side' economics? Feldstein (1986) has recently
made a distinction between the 'old' supply-side economics, in
which the evolution of output depends on the accumulation of
labour, capital, and know—how, and the 'new' supply-side
23 These preliminary results, by Perry Sadorsky, are reported in
the supporting paper. The results for France support those in
North America, while the model of normal output based on a nested
CES function fits slightly less well than the Keynesian model for
Germany, Japan and Italy, and significantly less well for the
United Kingdom. Using a translog function to define normal output
for the European countries (the data sample for Japan is not
sufficiently long to permit this) gives a factor utilization
model that fits better than the Keynesian model for Germany and
the United Kingdom, leaving only Italy with a slight preference
for the Keynesian framework.

31

economics in which lowering of tax rates is argued to increase
incentives and output by enough to raise output and tax revenues.
Using that classification, the factor utilization model is

clearly 'old' supply—side economics, but with added features, as
it shows that there are important short-term variables, arising
from both the supply and demand sides of the economy, that make
output differ in the short run from the level dictated by the
evolution of the quantities and quality of employed factors of
production.

What are the implications of our results for economic
policy? Some have suggested that the important role for the
unexpected sales variable in the factor utilization model, and
the corresponding lack of evidence for a long—term break in

productivity growth, argue for expansionary demand management in
the Canadian context. However, the main structure of the model
shows that over the longer term the evolution of output depends
solely on the supplies of factors, which in turn depend on the
expected level of profitable output and on the relative costs of
capital, labour and energy. The fact that current demand levels
are below what they were thought likely to be when today's plants

were assembled does not suggest that expansionary fiscal policy
would speed the progress to a new and more fully employed
equilibrium. Such a result is not ruled out by the factor
utilization model, but certainly is not implied by it. Similarly,
the fact that the Barro model is heavily rejected in relation to
the factor utilization model does not mean that monetary policy
has no substantial effect on the level of output; only that the

32

effects of monetary policy are better represented indirectly, via
changes in the level of normal output and in the determinants of
factor utilization, than by simple attempts to explain output by
unexpected or expected changes in the money supply. Nor does the
strong empirical support for the 'old' supply-side economics mean
that the incentive effects emphasized in the 'new' supply-side
economics are without content. Rather, as emphasized by Feldtein,

their relative importance can only be assessed properly when they
are integrated into a complete macroeconomic framework that
permits factor supplies and and output to be determined in a
mutually consistent manner.24

Thus this paper provides nothing dramatic by way of policy
advice, except to the extent that its strong evidence against
some popular simplified models will reduce the temptation for
their policy implications to be taken seriously. The main
implications of this paper are more for the way in which
macroeconometric research ought to be carried out, with more
attempt to develop and test alternative explanations in ways that
permit them to be compared directly to one another and to more
general models that encompass them. The factor utilization model
provided a useful device to bring together New Classical and
Keynesian models of output determination in a comparable form,

and in so doing was seen to have greater claims to data coherence
than any of the alternative equations tested. If that should help
214 A chapter in Canto, Joines and Laffer (1983) uses estimates of
marginal tax rates on labour and capital to explain U.S. real
GNP. Comparing these results to those in Table 8 suggests that
the factor utilization model is preferable, but attempts are
being made to develop data for more precise tests.

33

to increase the long-run supply of two-handed economists, so much
the better. In the meantime, there is lots to do in the
continuing search for even better models.25
REFERENCES

Barro, R.J. (1977) "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment
in the United States." American Economic Review 67,
101—15.

(1978) "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in
the United States. Journal of Political Economy 86,
549—580.

Bruno, M. and J. Sachs (1985) Economics of Worldwide Stagflation
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press)
Canto, V.A., D.H. Joines, and A.B. Laffer (1983) Foundations of
Supply—Side Theory and Evidence (New York: Academic
Press)
Darby, M.R., J.R. Lothian, A.E. Gandolfi, A.J. Schwartz and A.C.
Stockman (1983) The International Transmission of
Inflation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press)
Darrat, A.F. (1985) "Unanticipated Inflation and Real Output: the
Canadian Evidence." Canadian Journal of Economics 18,
146—155.

Davidson, R., L. Godfrey and J.G. MacKinnon (1985) "A Simplified
Version of the Differencing Test." International
Economic Review 26, 639—47.
Doan, T., R. Litterman and C.A. Sims (1984) "Forecasting and
Conditional Projection Using Realistic Prior
Distributions." Econometric Reviews 3, 1—100.
Feldstein, M.S. (1986) "Supply Side Economics: Old Truths and New
Claims." American Economic Review 76(2), 26—30.
Hausman, J. (1978) "Specification Tests in Ecortometrics."
Econometrica 46, 1251—72.
25

Our own continuing efforts include testing the factor
utilization model against a wider range of alternatives,
including some (e.g., those by Bruno and Sachs (1985) and Laidler
and Bentley (1983)) that attempt to combine some supply-side and
demand-side influences in the determination of aggregate output.

34

Helliwell, J.F, and A. Chung (1987) "Aggregate Output With
Variable Rates of Utilization of Employed Factors."
Forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics.
P. Sturm, P. Jarrett, and G. Salou (1986) "The Supply
Side in the OECD's Macroeconomic Model" OECD
Economic Studies No. 6, Spring 1986, 75-129.
Hendry, D.F. and J.-F. Richard (1982) "On the Formulation of
Empirical Models in Dynamic Econometrics." Journal
of Econometrics 20, 3-33.
Laidler, D. and B. Bentley (1983) "A Small Macro—Model of the
Postwar United States." The Manchester School of
Economics and Social Studies 4, 317—340.
Lucas, R.E. (1973) "Some Ihternational Evidence on
Output—Inflation Tradeoffs." American Economic
Review 63, 326—34.
and T.J. Sargent, eds. (1981) Rational Expectations and
Econometric Practice. (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press)
Mishkin, F.S. (1982a) "Does Anticipated Monetary Policy
Matter? An Econometric Investigation." Journal of
Political Economy 90, 22-51.
-—

(1982b) "Does Anticipated Demand Policy Matter? Further

Econometric Results." American Economic Review 72,
788—802.

Mizon, G.E. (1984) "The Encompassing Approach in
Econometrics." In D.F. Hendry and K.F. Wallis,
eds., Econometrics and Quantitative Economics
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell)
and J.-F. Richard (1986) "The Encompassing Principle and
its Application to Non—Nested Hypotheses."
Econometrica 54, (forthcoming).
Muth, J.F. (1961) "Rational Expectations and the Theory of
Price Movements." Econometrica 29, 315—35.
Nakamura, A., and M. Nakamura (1981) "On the Relationship
among Several Specification Error Tests Presented
by Durbin, Wu and Hausman." Econometrica 49,
1583—88.

Shapiro, M.D. (1985) "Capital Utilization and Capital
Accumulation: Theory and Evidence." Cowles
Foundation Working Paper 736.
Sims, C.A. (1980) "Macroeconomics and Reality." Econometrica

35

48, 1—48.

(1982) "Policy Analysis With Econometric Models."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 107-54.

Supply—Side Macroeconomics —
Variable'
lnQ

List

of Variables

Description
Gross output (at factor cost) of the non-energy
sector, billion 1971 $. (Equals real GDP plus net
energy imports minus non-energy indirect taxes)

Time trend
Normal output based on a three factor CES
production function, billion 1971 $
Ratio of the expected to actual price of gross
ln(Pe/P)2
output of the non-energy sector
Ratio of actual to expectd costs, which are the
ln(c/Ce)
cost dual to the nested three-factor CES
production function used to define normal output
Ratio of expected costs to expected price
ln(Ce/Pe)
1nDMA(t-i)3 Anticipated growth of the high powered money
supply, billion $
InDMU(t-i)
Unanticipated growth of the high powered money
suppl', billion $
Transitory income (GNP), billion $
1nYT(t—1)
1nSALES
Final sales, billion $
1nKINV(t—1) Stock of inventories, billion $
Weighted average of the current and lagged values
1nRELP
(t-i and t—2)of the ratio of the import to output
price, 1971=1.0
Ratio of actual to normal sales, normalized by
1nSS
normal output (QSV)
Average unit cost relative to output price for
1nCQ
producing gross output of the non-energy sector
Ratio of the desired to the target level of
1nKGP
business inventories, billion $
Implicit price for gross domestic output, 1971=1.0
1nPQ
Average yield on Government of Canada bonds, 1-3
RS
years, percent
1nRNU
Unemployment rate, percent
Wage rate in the non-energy sector, thousands of
1nWNE
dollars per year per employed person
1nHPM
High powered money, billion $
Net stock of government non—monetary liabilities,
1nLB
billion $
1nMNE
Imports of goods and services (excluding energy,
interest and dividends), billion 1971 $
1nXNE
Exports of goods and services (excluding energy),
billion 1971 $
Ratio of the export to import price of goods and
1nPXN
services in the non—energy sector, 1971=.0
Current account of the balance of payments,
B
billion $
Real output in the major OECD economies, billion
1nYW

QT
1nQSV

Uss
1nPW
RUS

OECD real output deflator, 1971=1.0
Average yield on U.S. government bonds, 5 years

List of Instrumental Variables

Exogenous Variables

mG
1nPW

RMUS

1nYW
1nABUS
1nPAUS

Real government current and capital expenditures
on goods and services, billion 1971 $
O.E.C.D real output deflator, 1971=1.0
Average yield on U.S. government bonds, 5 years,
percent
Real output in the major O.E.C.D. economies,
billion 1972 U.S. $
Real U.S. absorption, billion 1972 $
Implicit price of U.S. absorption, 1972=1.0

Lagged Endogenous Variables
1nNNE

1nEKSTAR
1nINEW
1nPE
1nWNE

1nABS
1nPQ

1nPKE
1nXNE

inK
1nKINV
QT

ELEFFCES

Total employed in the non-energy sector (excluding
armed forces), millions of persons
Optimal energy to capital stock ratio
Re-investment with energy use malleable in the
current year, billion 1971 $
Price of energy to final users, 1971=1.0
Wage rate in the non-energy sector, thousands of
dollars per year per employed person
Real absorption, billion $
Implicit price for gross domestic output,
including imported energy, 1971=1.0
Price of the capital-ener9y bundle
Exports of goods and services (excluding energy),
billion 1971 $
Business fixed capital stock (excluding energy),
billion 1971 $
Stock of inventories, billion 1971 $
Time trend
Labour productivity index for Harod-neutral
technical progress

1 ln denotes the natural logarithm.

2 The expected price is the predicted value from a linear
regression of 1nPQ on an information set comprising the lagged
endogenous variables; 1nNNE, 1nEKSTAR, 1nINEW, lnPE, 1nWNE,
1nABS, 1nPQ, 1nPKE, 1nXNE, inK, 1nKINV, QT, ELEFFCES and 1nHPM,
and predicted values of the exogenous variables G, PW, RMUS, YW,
ABUS, and PAUS generated from equations of the form:
Gto+l3iGt_i+132Gt2+et where
The anticipated growth of the high powered money supply is the
predicted value from a linear regression on the growth rates of
the lagged endogenous variables used to define Pe. The
unanticipated growth is the difference between the actual and
predicted growth.

Table 1
From the Lucas Supply Equation to Factor Utilization
Models of Aggregate Supply
(Dependent Variable is lnQ)f
Equation

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

CONSTANT

QT

.1149
(.55)

1.7

1.6

Factor
Utilization

Lucas

.0010
(.20)

—.0011 —.0010

—.0002 —.0006

(.38)

(.61)

(.15)

(.45)

1,0

1.0

1.0

1.0

.000 1

(.00)

lnQ(t—1)

.9823
(5.20)
1.0

1nQSV
ln(Pe/P)

1.0

—.3452 —.5116 —.2244 —.7530 —.7667 —.9050 —.2604
(1.30) (1.78) (12.06)
(.19) (1.19)
(.26)
(.16)
—.2419 —.2212

ln(c/Ce)

(8.45)

(7.80)

—.2759 —.2604
(9.24) (12.06)

—.2280 —.1932 —.2604
(2.13) (2.09) (12.06)

ln(Ce/Pe)
.4792

1nSS

.4510

.5358

.5446

.5647

(6.60) (11.84) (9.66) (11.02) (19.96)
.1135

1 nKGP

.1037

(3.18) (3.38)

R2
s.e.e.

D—W
F—test

.9947
.02843
1.544
73.139

Equation

Constraints

1.1

.9958
.02537
.540

45.465

.9984
.9996
.01553 .00811
1.798
.655
18.017 2.833

.9996
.00754
1.750
2.246

.9997
.00650
1.769
.147

.9998
.00579
1.171
.485

1.2

1nQSV=ln (c/Ce) =ln(Ce/Pe)=lnSS=1nKGP=0.0
1nQSV=1.0 and QT=lnQ(t—1)=ln(c/Ce)=ln(Ce/Pe)=
1nSS=1nKGP=0 .0

1.3
1.4

1nQSV=1.0 and QT=lnQ(t—1)=ln(c/CE)=ln(Ce/Pe)=1nKGP=0.0
1nQSV=1 .0 and QT=lnQ(t—1 )=ln(Ce/Pe)=1nKGP=0.0

1.5
1.6

1nQSV=1 .0 and QT=lnQ(t—1 )=1nKGP=0.0
1nQSV=1.0 and QT=lriQ(t—1)=0.0

1.7

1nQSV=1.0, QT=lnQ(t—1)=O.0 and ln(Pe/P)=
ln(c/Ce)=ln(Ce/Pe)

t Estimation
1954—1982.

technique is Instrumental Variables. Sample

Table 2
From the Barro Equation to Factor Utilization
Models of Aggregate Supply
(Dependent Variable is lnQ)t

Equation

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

Barro Darby

CONSTANT

1.3326 1.2267 —.0120
(28.73)(24.86) (1.61)

1nQSV

1.0

.0030 —.0053
(.33) (1.28)

2.7
Factor
Utilization

.0032
(.58)

1.0

1.0

1.0

.0300
(.16)

:0194
(.23)

.0048

.9138 .5707
.1302 —.1208 .0846
(2.82) (1.73) (.68) (.61)
(.92)

—.0635

1.0

.0422 .0436

QT

(52.84) (46.14)

1nDMA(t)

1nDMA(t—1)

.1208 —.0064 —.0187
(.39) (.02)
(.09)

(.05)

(.64)

1nDMU(t)

.5949 .4469
.3523 .1422 —.0343 —.0376
(3.21) (2.47) (2.84) (1.01) (.52)
(.58)

1nDMU(t—1)

.5625 .4710
.2480 .1389
(3.31) (2.94) (2.13) (1.23)
.4770

1nYT(t—1)

.0406
(.79)

.0208
(.33)

.3608 .2293 —.2480 —.2014

(2.32) (3.09) (1.96) (3.38) (1.82)
1nSS

.3485
.6313
(2.44) (8.93)

—.2953 —.2945 —.2604

1nCQ

(9.25)

2
s.e.e.

.9984
.02115 .01561
1.847
1.943
52.735 22.888

D—W
F—test

.9965
.02319
1.237
54.143

Equation

Constraints

2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7

t

(9.26) (12.06)

.0339 .1037
(.56) (3.38)

].nKGP

2.1

.6367 .5647
(8.96) (19.96)

.9971

.9987
.9997
.01391 .00620
1.566
1.336
20.756 .525

.9998
.00617
1.254
.640

.9998
.00579
1.171
.435

1nQSV=1nYT(t-1.)=lriSS=1nCQ=1nKGP=O.O
1nQSV=1nSS=1nCQ=1nKGP=O .0
1nQSV=1 .0 and QT=1nSS=1nCQ=1nKGP=O,O

1nQSV=1.O and QT=1nCQ=1nKGP=0.0
1nQSV=1.0 and QT=1nKGP=0.0
1nQSV=1.0 and QT=0.0
1nQSV=1.0, QT=1nYT(t—1)=1nDMA(t—i)=1nDMU(t—i)=0.0, i=0,1

Estimation

technique is Instrumental Variables.Sample 1954—192.

Table 3
From Keynesian to Factor Utilization
Models of Aggregate Supply
(Dependent Variable is lnQ)t
3.1

Equation

3.2

3.3

Keynesian

Constant

—.3118
(3.87)

—.3181 —.0013
(3.80) (.47)
1.0

1nQSV
1nSALES

3.4
Factor
Utilization

1.0

1fl777 1fl7
(20.98) (20.25)

1nKINV(t—1)

1nRELP

—.1238

—.1163

(2.20)

(1.91)

.2490
(4.80)

.2578

.0200

(4.43) (.38)

1nSS

.5854
.5647
(9.54) (19.96)

in CQ

—.0218 —.2561 —.2604
(.36) (10.37) (12.06)

1nKGP

.1034

.1037

(3.26) (3.38)

2
s.e.e.

D—W
F—test
Equation
3.1

3.2
3.3
3.4

.9994
.00958
.637
18.176

.9994
.00975
.632
36.030

.9998
.00599
1.163
.097

.9998
.00579
1.171
.108

Constraints
1nQSV=1nCQ=0 .0
1nQSV=0 .0
1nQSV=1 .0
1nQSV=1 .0 and 1nRELP=0.0

t Estimation

technique is Instrumental
Variables. Sample 1954-1982.

Table 4
Comparison of the Unstructured VAR Equation With
the Factor Utilization Supply Model
(Dependent Variable is lnQ)+
Equation

4.2

4.lt

4.3

VAR

Factor
Utilization

CONSTANT .0403
(.03) —1.8001 (1.19)
lnQ(t—1) .1129
(.75) —.1957 (1.00)
—1.1730 (2.19)
1nPQ
.2040
(.44)
RS
.0123
(2.44)
.0057 (1.06)
1nRNU
—.0384 (1.03)
.0033 (1.40)
1nWNE
1nHPM
1nLB
1nMNE
1nXNE
1nPXM
B

1nYW
1nPW
RUS
1nQSV
1nSS
1nCQ
1nKGP

s.e.e.

D—W
F—test
Equation
4.1

4.2
4.3

.4775

(1.10)

.1164

.9410

(3.84) —.1073
.0701
(1.51) —.0272
—.0804
(.50)
.0750
—.0659
(.74) —.1735
.4200
(2.36) —.2093
—.0012
(.58) —.0001
.1819
(.59)
.4692
—.4184 (2.68) —.0781
.0161
(1.75) —.0008
.8594
.4228

.9992
.01076
2.463
32.040

(.35)
(.73)
(.84)

(1.08)
(1.30)
(1.62)
(.01)

(1.25)
(.84)
(.07)

(2.90)

1.0

(.91)

.5647 (19.96)

—.8434 (2.97)
—.1571 (1.38)

—.2604 (17.06)
.1037
(3.38)

.9999
.00439
2.896

.9998
.00579
1.171

20.570

Constraints
1nQSV=1nSS=1nCQ=lnKGp=O.O
Unconstrained
1nQSV=1 .0 and lnQl=1nPQ=RS=1nRNU=1nWNE=lnHpM=

lnLB=lnMNE=lnXNE=1npxM=B=1nyw=1npwg1 0

+ Sample 1954—1982.
t Estimation technique is Instrumental Variables with
equation 4.1 having a second order autoregressive error
term.

Table 5
Stability and Specification Tests of the Supply Models

DIFFERENCE* ENCOMPASSING+

S .E.E.

CHOWt

Lucas

.02843

2.100
4.360*

Barro

.02319

.218
750

Darby

.02115

.894
1.575

6.272**

Keynesian

.00958

4.288*
7.841**

2.139

2.078

Factor
Utilization

.00579

2.034
2.345

1.274

.520

VAR

.01076

3.572'
.1582

Equation

7.572**
.584

21.445**
16.107**
16.262**

23.280**

The Chow test is done using OLS. The first Chow F-statistic
for each model is for the sample split 1954—67/68—82, the
second split is 1954—72/73—82.

The reported statistic for the differencing test is the
F—statistic for all included test variables. Estimation method
is 2SLS.
*

+ The reported statistic is the joint F—statistic of

restricting the encompassing model to each special case.
1 Dummy variables were used for testing the VAR model for
structural stability. The variables were split into three
groups for testing (group 1 lnQ(t-1), 1nPQ, RS, 1nRNU, and
1nWNE, group 2 1nHPM, 1nLB, 1nMNE, 1nXNE, and 1nPXM, and group
3 B, lnYW, lnPW and RUS). The F-values for group 1 are
reported above, for group 2 and 3 they are 5.187* and 2.251
respectively for the sample split 1954—67/68—82, and 1.503,
and .245 for the sample split 1954—72/73—82.

2 The differencing test was done on the same variable grouping
as the stability test. The F—statistic for group 1 is given
above, for group 2 and 3 they are 23.278** and 32.345**
respectively.
* = significant at the 95% level.
** = significant at the 99% level.

*' indicate rejection of the null hypothesis of stability
and/or difference specification.

Table 6
Comparing Structural Supply Models Using a Translog
Production Function to Define Normal Output
(Dependent Variable is lnQ)t
Model

Lucas

Barro

Darby

CONSTANT

.1013
(.48)

1.3400
(28.27)

QT

—.0006

.0421

(51.51)

lnQ(t—1)

(.06)
.9951
(5.16)

1.2688
(24.04)
.0436
(44.47)

Keynesian

—.3115
(3.75)

1nQSTL
ln(Pe/P)

Factor
Utilization

1 .0

—1.0507
(.69)

1nDMA(t)
1nDMA(t—1)
1nDMU(t)
1nDMU(t—1)
lnYT(t—1)

.0680
(.21)
.9970
(2.94)
.5123
(2.64)
.5767
(3.29)

(—.0598)
(.17)

.6144
(1.76)
.3454
(1.81)
.4912
(2.98)
.5038
(2.39)

1nSALES

1.0777
(20.38)
—.1239
(2.14)
.2485
(4.73)

1nKINV(t—1)

1nRELP
1nSS

.5258
(15.65)
—.2866

1 nCQ

(ii .39)

1nKGP

.0702
(2.10)

.9945
.9964
.9970
.9994
.02900
.02343
.02151
.00958
D—W
1.664
1.232
1.871
.636
F—test'
70.012
44.165
36.116
15.805
F—test2
11.012
8.334
6.905
1.425
1F—tests of Specific Models vs. Factor Utilization:

.9997
.00643
1.054
.876
.614

s.e.e.

Lucas
Barr o

Darby
Keynesian
Factor
Utilization

1nQSTL=1nSS=lnCQ=1nKGP=O .0
1nQSTL=1nSS=1nCQ=1nKGP=0 .0
1nQSTL=lnSS=lnCQ=1nKGP=O .0
1nQSTL=1nCQ=0 .0
1nQSTL=1.0 and QT=lnQ(t-1)=0.0

2 Encompassing Constraints (ie. All variables were included, with
variables inappropriate to the particular model constrained to
zero.)

j. Estimation technique is Instrumental Variables. Sample 1954—82.

Table 7
Tests of the Structural Supply Models With GDP
as the Dependent Variablet
Model

Lucas

Barro

Darby

CONSTANT

.0811
(.42)

GT

—.0017

1.2146
(24.10)
.0443
(49.26)

1nGDP(t—1)

(.20)
1.0180
(5.53)

1.2909
(24.93)
.0427
(48.55)

Keynesian

—.3261
(4.09)

1.0

1nGDPS
.8951
(.46)

ln(Pe/P)

.5756
(I 'O)
.5710
(1.16)
.4319
(2.64)
.6038
(3.50)

1nDMA(t)
1nDMA(t—1)
1nDMU(t)
1nDMU(t—1)
lnYT(t—1)'

.6739
(1

—.0599
(.13)

.3056
(2.11)
.3869
(2.38)
.6460
(3.08)

1nSALES

1 .0832

(20.64)
—.1318
(2.26)
.2300
(4.84)

1nKINV(t—1)
1nRELP

.6522
(22.84)
—.2911
(11.55)
.0958
(2.89)

1nSS
in CQ

1nKGP
.9966
.9975
.02313
.01961
D-W
1.153
1.905
F-test2
80.365
58.141
F-test3
13. 456
10.179
7.743
1
GDP is used as the income measure.
R2
s.e.e.

2 F—tests

Factor
Utilization

.9948
.02862
1.525
68.830

.9994
.00994
.571

14.600
.922

.9997
.00655
.894
1.974
1.546

of Specific Models vs. Factor Utilization:

Lucas
Barro
Darby
Keynesian
Factor
Utilization

1nGDPS=lnSS=lnCQ=1nKGP=0.0
1nGDPS=lnSS=lnCQ=1nKGP=0.0
1nGDPS=1nSS=lnCQ=1nKGP=0.0
1nQGDPS=1nCQ=0 .0

1nGDPS=1.0 and GT=1nGDP(t—1)=O.0

Encompassing Constraints (see footnote 2 Table 6).
f

Estimation

technique is Instrumental Variables. Sample 1954—82.

Table 8
Structural Supply Models for the United States
Constant Growth — Effective Factorsf
Model

Lucas

CONSTANT

1.3880
(1.60)
.0065
(1.02)
.7403
(3.95)

QT
lnQ(t—1)

Barro

Darby

4.9716

4.9318

(60.11)
.0273
(19.19)

(80.50)
.0285
(26.05)

Keynesian

.2013
(1.81)

1nQSV

1.0
1.9157
(.97)

ln(Pe/P)
1nDMA(t)

2.2167
(4.09)
.9148

1nDMU

(1 .30)

1nYT(t—1)

1.4186
(3.11)
1.0308
(2.01)
.5721
(3.48)

1nSALES
1nKINV(t—1

Factor
Utilization

1.0376
(20.85)
-.0929
(2.03)
.0095

)

1nRELP

(.49)

1nSS

.8593
(18.15)

—.1659

1nCQ

(16.14)
.0570
(2.61)

1nKGP

2
s.e.e.
D—W
F—test'
F—test2

.9845
.02484
1.768

235.395
97.278

.9834
.02573
1.416
323.836
86.837

.9912
.01872
1.525
160.327
47.115

.9991

.00604
.748
26.696
5.671

.9998
.00287
1.975
1.259
.771

Tests of Specific Models vs. Factor Utilization:

Lucas
Barro
Darby
Keynesian
Factor
Utilization

1nQSV=1nSS=lnCQ=1nKGP=0.0
1nQSV=1nSS=lnCQ=1nKGP=0 .0
1nQSV=1nSS=1nCQ=1nKGP=0. 0
1nQSV=1nCQ=0 .0

1nQSV=1.0 and QT=lnQ(t—1)=0.0

2 Encompassing Constraints (see footnote Table 6).
t

Estimation

technique is Instrumental Variables. Sample 1960—82.

