                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE EFFECTS OF MEDICARE ON MEDICAL EXPENDITURE RISK AND FINANCIAL
                              STRAIN

                                      Silvia Helena Barcellos
                                         Mireille Jacobson

                                       Working Paper 19954
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19954


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2014




This work was funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA R21-AG044737), the Commonwealth
Fund’s Affordable Health Insurance Program, RAND’s Center for the Study of Aging (NIA P30 AG012815),
and USC’s Resource Center for Minority Aging Research (NIA P30AG043073) and USC’s Roybal
Center for Financial Decision Making (NIA P30AG024962). We thank Mahshid Abir, M.D., Abby
Alpert, Sanjay Arora, M.D., Maria Casanova, Eileen Crimmins, Mark Friedberg, M.D., Dana Goldman,
Arie Kapteyn, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Michael Menchine, M.D., Kathleen Mullen, David Powell,
James P. Smith, Neeraj Sood, Daniel Waxman, M.D., Julie Zissimopoulos and participants of the monthly
USC Resource Center for Minority Aging Research (RCMAR) meetings, the Society of Econometrics
annual summer meeting, the NBER Summer Institute Aging workshop, the All-California Labor Economics
conference, and the European Conference on Household Finance for many helpful comments. Mikhail
Zaydman provided excellent research assistance. All mistakes are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Silvia Helena Barcellos and Mireille Jacobson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Medicare on Medical Expenditure Risk and Financial Strain
Silvia Helena Barcellos and Mireille Jacobson
NBER Working Paper No. 19954
March 2014
JEL No. I13

                                            ABSTRACT

We estimate the current impact of Medicare on medical expenditure risk and financial strain. At age
65, out-of-pocket expenditures drop by 33% at the mean and 53% among the top 5% of spenders. The
fraction of the population with out- of-pocket medical expenditures above income drops by more than
half. Medical- related financial strain, such as problems paying bills, is dramatically reduced. Using
a stylized expected utility framework, the gain from reducing out-of-pocket expenditures alone accounts
for 18% of the social costs of financing Medicare. This calculation ignores the benefits of reduced
financial strain and direct health improvements due to Medicare.


Silvia Helena Barcellos
University of Southern California (USC)
12015 Waterfront Drive
Playa Vista, CA 90094-2536
sbarcell@usc.edu

Mireille Jacobson
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-3195
and NBER
jacobson@nber.org
I. Introduction
               A key goal of health insurance is to protect individuals against the risk of
large unexpected medical expenditures. This function is particularly important for
seniors, as nearly half of lifetime medical expenses are incurred after age 65
(Alemayehu and Warner 2004). Simulations suggest that in 2009 an age 65
household had a 5 percent chance of lifetime medical expenditures over $310,000
and an average expenditure of almost $200,000 (Webb and Zhivan 2010). Given
the potentially devastating financial consequences of a health shock, it is
surprising that we have a relatively poor understanding of the protection health
insurance, and in particular Medicare, offers against medical expenditure risk.
               Existing studies of the risk protective effects of health insurance tend to
focus on relatively young populations (Baicker et al 2013; Finkelstein et al 2012;
Gross and Notowidigdo 2011; Mazumder and Miller 2013). These studies find
important impacts on financial well-being but cannot address the potentially
larger effects at older ages. Only a few studies focus on the medical expenditure
risk protection afforded to seniors by Medicare. Those most similar in spirit to
ours focus on its introduction in the 1960’s or specific components of the
program, such as Medicare Part-D. Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) show that
within 5 years of its introduction, Medicare decreased out-of-pocket medical
spending by 40% among those in the top quartile of spending.1 Using a very
different approach – a dynamic random utility model of the demand for health
insurance – Khwaja (2010) concludes that the primary benefit of Medicare is
insurance against high expenditures with smaller benefits in terms of improved
health and longevity. Englehardt and Gruber (2011) study the introduction of

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1
 Although not centrally focused on medical expenditure risk, McWilliams et al. (2007) uses
propensity score methods to compare changes in a range of outcomes, including expenditures, for
previously (before age 65) insured and uninsured beneficiaries. This paper finds that as the
previously uninsured gain Medicare coverage at age 65, they have a significant differential
decrease in the odds of incurring high out-of-pocket medical spending.




                                                                2
!
Part-D and find substantial reductions in out-of-pocket drug spending,
concentrated among a small group of beneficiaries. The role of Medicare as a
whole in reducing exposure to catastrophic medical spending and related financial
stress remains poorly understood and even more so for the elderly today, who
likely have much larger exposure to spending risk, given well-documented
increases in medical costs and the near tripling of health spending as a share of
GDP over the past 50 years (Gruber and Levy 2009).
               To fill the gap in our knowledge, we estimate the recent impact of
Medicare on expenditure risk and related financial stress among the young elderly
(ages 65 to 80) relative to the near elderly (ages 50 to 64). This comparison lends
itself to a credible research design – a regression discontinuity (RD) exploiting
age-based eligibility for Medicare.2 Because Medicare provides nearly universal
health insurance coverage for those ages 65 and over, it creates a discontinuity in
insurance coverage and generates “as good as random” assignment of coverage
for individuals near the age-eligibility threshold.
               The primary contribution of this paper is to combine (1) this highly
credible RD research design with (2) high quality data to analyze the current
impact of Medicare on medical expenditure risk and related financial strain.
Although the age 65 RD strategy has been used to estimate the effects of
Medicare on health care utilization and health outcomes (Card et al. 2008 and
2009), the current application is both novel and important for understanding the
benefits and costs of Medicare, the second largest social insurance program in the
United States. We use 15 years (1996-2010) of the Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey (MEPS), a nationally representative dataset containing information on
health insurance coverage, and total and out-of-pocket medical spending. Our

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
2
  The only other paper we know of that uses a RD strategy to estimate the effect of health
insurance on medical expenditure risk is Shigeoka (2012), which analyses the effect of a patient
cost-sharing program in Japan.




                                                                3
!
primary interest is data from the more recent period (2007-2010), which allows us
to compare the contemporary costs and benefits of the Medicare program. To
operationalize expenditure risk, we analyze changes in the observed distribution
of out-of-pocket spending (excluding premiums since this is a cost that occurs
with certainty, i.e. involves no risk). We also consider the share of the population
with medical expenditures that exceed income.
               To more fully investigate the impact of Medicare on financial well-being,
we use measures of financial strain related to medical expenditures. Specifically,
we use 3 waves (2003, 2007 and 2010) of the Health Tracking Household Survey
(HTHS), a nationally representative survey that captures information on medical-
related financial strain such as difficulty paying medical bills, the amount owed in
medical bills, and contact with a collections agency as a result of these bills.
              Ultimately, the impact of Medicare on medical expenditure risk and
financial strain is an empirical matter. On the one hand, by providing coverage for
previously uninsured individuals, Medicare might decrease exposure to medical-
related financial risk. On the other hand, the transition to Medicare might increase
exposure to medical expenditure risk for individuals who previously had generous
employer sponsored health insurance, particularly those who lack retiree or other
wrap-around Medicare coverage. 3 Therefore, we interpret our findings as
capturing changes due to both the increase in coverage and the transition to a new
benefits package, where no specific effect sign is predicted by economic theory.4
In practice, however, since 90% of Medicare beneficiaries have very generous
supplemental insurance (KFF 2010; Baicker and Levy 2012), the increase in
coverage at age 65 combined with the effective (if not the default) benefits
package likely reduces exposure to medical expenditure risk.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
3
  In addition, if doctors overprovide expensive, high-tech care to insured patients (Wagstaff and
Lindelow 2008), then medical expenditure risk could increase with coverage.
4
  Because Medicare affects two dimensions of insurance at age 65 – coverage and generosity – we
cannot use an IV strategy.




                                                                4
!
               Using the 2007-2010 MEPS data, we find that the distribution of out-of
pocket spending shifts significantly to the left at age 65. For example, out-of-
pocket expenditures (all in 2010 dollars) drop by 32% ($326) at the mean and by
53% ($1730) among the top 5% of medical spenders. The fraction of the
population with out-of-pocket medical expenditures that exceed income drops by
54%, from a base of 7.4%. The declines are smaller, but still significant, if we
consider the full 1996-2010 period: out-of-pocket spending at age 65 drops by
almost 20% at both the mean ($209) and among the top 5% of medical spenders
($722). The larger impact of Medicare after 2006 is consistent with Englehardt
and Gruber (2011), which finds an increase in risk protection due to the
introduction of Medicare Part-D.
               One potential concern in comparing out-of-pocket spending for those just
under versus just over age 65 is that individuals may delay medical care and thus
spending in anticipation of gaining Medicare coverage.5 Although, as we show
below, we find little evidence of deferral in our data (i.e., health care utilization is
smooth across the age 65 threshold), “doughnut RD” estimates that exclude
individuals right at this age threshold show that our results are robust to deferral
of medical spending around age 65.6 To the extent that we cannot account for
deferral, this should bias our results against finding reductions in out-of-pocket
medical spending due to Medicare.
               The implication that Medicare offers substantial protection against large
out-of-pocket health expenses is supported by analysis of self-reported financial
strain. Using HTHS data, we find that the transition to Medicare at age 65 reduces
the likelihood of reporting problems paying medical bills in the past 12 months
(by 35%) and the amount owed in medical bills (by 33%). The likelihood of being
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
5
  Deferral or what looks like deferral could be caused by decreased treatment costs, increased
income due to Medicare subsidies, and/or greater access to providers at age 65.
6
  Likewise, sensitivity analyses that focus on individuals with non-deferrable medical conditions
show a similar pattern of results (available upon request).




                                                                5
!
contacted by collections agency about medical bills declines by 28% and
borrowing to pay these bills declines by 35%.
               To better interpret the economic significance of our expenditure risk
estimates, we perform a welfare analysis, similar to Feldstein and Gruber (1995)
and Finkelstein and McKnight (2008), that combines a stylized expected utility
framework with the RD estimates of changes in the distribution of out-of-pocket
medical spending at age 65. We find that the out-of-pocket expenditure risk
protection afforded by Medicare translates into an average welfare gain that
covers 18% of the program’s social costs. This calculation does not include the
stress benefits of reduced financial strain or any health benefits associated with
transitioning to Medicare at age 65 (see Dobbie and Song 2013; Card et al. 2009).

II. Study Data
               We use pooled data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS),
a nationally representative two-year rotating household panel containing
information on health insurance coverage, and total and out-of-pocket medical
spending. While our primary focus is on the most recent, post Part-D data, 2007-
2010, we also use the full 15 years of data (1996-2010).
               MEPS’s main advantage is its high quality data on health care spending.
The MEPS gathers detailed information about health care visits, hospital stays,
prescription drug fills, other medical services, out-of-pocket expenses and sources
of other payments (Stanton and Rutherford 2006). A provider component obtains
follow-up data on payments by private insurance, Medicaid, Medicare and other
sources.7 Because MEPS is a household survey, it misses extreme spending by
individuals in institutional settings (Aizcorbe et al. 2010, Zuvekas and Olin 2009).
Since institutional spending is relatively low for those near age 65 (Federal

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
7
  Unfortunately, while the follow-up surveys supplement self-reported payment information, they
do not update self-reported utilization (Zuvekas and Olin 2009). That is, the quantity of care from
the household survey is taken as given and it is only expenditures that get updated/validated.




                                                                6
!
Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics 2012), this omission may not be
too problematic. Out-of-pocket spending, our primary interest, is quite accurate in
the MEPS, with aggregate estimates understating the National Health Expenditure
Accounts (NHEA) by only about 5.5% (Bernard et al 2012).8 Sample sizes are
relatively large – with about 7,000 to 9,000 individuals ages 50 to 80 in any given
survey year. Finally, in the MEPS we can calculate age in quarters and thereby
precisely estimate the age profiles of spending.
               Our measure of financial risk from the MEPS – the distribution of out-of-
pocket spending – provides only limited insight into medical-related financial
stress. To gain additional insight into the financial well-being afforded by
Medicare, we use restricted-access data from the Health Tracking Household
Survey (HTHS), formerly the Community Tracking Survey, a nationally
representative survey conducted by the Center for Studying Health System
Changes. We use 3 waves of the HTHS -2003, 2007 and 2010 – that include
information on health insurance, use of services and medical-related financial
strain, such as difficulty paying medical bills and contact with a collection
agency.9 The restricted data allow us to analyze reports of the exact amount of
medical bills owed (top-coded at $70,000).10 Together these survey waves capture
about 19,000 individuals ages 50-64 and 11,000 individuals ages 65-
80. Unfortunately, the HTHS provides age only in years but despite this cruder
measure, the visual analysis shows striking changes in financial strain at age 65.

Insurance Coverage and Generosity
               We investigate the relationship between Medicare eligibility and health
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
8
  These comparisons adjust the NHEA to account for the MEPS sample frame, i.e., non-
institutionalized households. Still some dispute how well the MEPS captures the distribution of
out-of-pocket medical spending, with Hurd and Rohwedder (2009) treating it as the gold-standard
and Marshall, McGarry and Skinner (2010) suggesting that the Health and Retirement Survey,
which shows higher out-of-pocket spending in the right tail of the distribution, is more accurate.
9
  Earlier years of this survey do not ask directly about medical-related financial strain.
10
   The publicly available data categorizes the amounts into 4 bins, top-coded at $10,000.




                                                                7
!
insurance status in two main dimensions: coverage and generosity. Across both
surveys, health insurance coverage is measured as an indicator for whether the
respondent reported having any type of health insurance at any month during the
year preceding the survey. In the MEPS, we measure health insurance generosity
using an approach from the literature (Card et al. 2008) – an indicator for whether
the respondent reported having two or more health insurance policies in the year
preceding the survey. This measure, which says little about generosity prior to age
65, captures reported supplemental insurance coverage, which many consider
overly generous since it not only provides additional benefits but often fully
covers the high cost-sharing and deductibles in traditional Medicare (Baicker and
Levy 2012). 11 The HTHS data ask explicitly about supplemental coverage,
therefore we can better assess the extent to which individuals transition to a
generous source of coverage at age 65.

Medical Expenditure Risk Measures

               We use the empirical distribution of out-of-pocket spending in the MEPS
to characterize medical expenditure risk. Although risk is fundamentally an ex-
ante concept, the distribution of expenditure realizations is one way for an
individual to understand the likelihood of facing extreme out-of-pocket costs. We
measure changes in the distribution of out-of-pocket spending at age 65, including
the mean, different percentiles and the share of total expenditures paid out-of-
pocket. We also consider the share of the population with out-of-pocket expenses
that exceed income, an unexplored measure of financial strain. The MEPS defines
medical expenditures as the sum of direct payments for care, including out-of-
pocket payments and payments by private insurance, Medicaid, Medicare, and

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
11
  Because it does not capture Medicare Advantage (MA), this measure is likely to underestimate
the generosity of insurance benefits at age 65. In 2006, for example, the average net value of an
MA plan exceeded traditional Medicare by $55 to $71 per month, depending on the plan type. See
Merlis (2008) for details.




                                                                8
!
other sources. Payments for health insurance premiums and over-the-counter
drugs are not included. All medical expenditures are adjusted for inflation using
the medical care services (MCS) component of the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
and expressed in 2010 dollars.12 Results using the full CPI are very similar. All
age-specific means are calculated taking into account survey design.

Financial Strain Measures
               We use the HTHS to get at subjective measures of financial strain. All 3
waves of the HTHS ask respondents whether in the past 12 months they: 1) had
any problems paying medical bills, 2) were contacted by a collections agency, 3)
had to borrow because of problems paying medical bills or 4) had to take money
out of savings because of these problems. In the last 2 survey waves, they ask
respondents about the amount owed in medical bills, the event that caused
medical bill problems (e.g., an illness, accident, medical test or surgical
procedure) and whether the respondent filed or thought about filing for
bankruptcy in the past 12 months. In general, the rate of bankruptcy filing or
thoughts of filing are too low to provide meaningful information. Therefore we
focus on items (1)-(4) and on changes in the amount owed in medical bills.13

III. Empirical Strategy: Regression Discontinuity Design
               To understand the impact of health insurance on medical expenditure risk
and financial strain, we would, in principle, estimate the following reduced-form
equation:
                                       !! = ! + ! !"#! ; ! + !!! + !! ! + !!        (1)
where !! is a measure of medical-related financial exposure (e.g. out-of-pocket
spending or difficulty paying medical bills) for individual ! ; !! is a set of

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12
  For details of the MCS, see http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpifact4.htm
13
  In ongoing work, we are collecting primary data on individual perceptions of medical
expenditure risk as well as reports of ability to make these expenditures.




                                                                9
!
demographics characteristics of individual ! ; ! !"#! ; ! is a smooth function
representing the age profile of outcome !! ; !! !is an indicator for whether
individual ! has health insurance coverage and !! is an unobserved error. A
fundamental and well-known problem in interpreting ! as the causal effect of
health insurance on medical expenditure risk is that coverage is endogenous; it
both affects and is affected by financial risk, confounding observational
comparisons of people with different insurance status.
       To circumvent this problem, we exploit the age 65 threshold for Medicare
eligibility as a credible source of exogenous variation in insurance status. We
adopt a RD design, taking advantage of the fact that individuals just above or
below age 65 (e.g., 64 or 66) should be similar on observable and unobservable
characteristics that affect medical expenditure risk – that is, these characteristics
should have smooth age profiles. This strategy relies on the fact that in the
absence of Medicare our outcomes of interest should not change discontinuously
at 65; therefore any estimated discontinuities are attributed to Medicare. This age
65 Medicare RD offers a well-established research design, albeit one that has
been used largely to understand the impact of Medicare on health care use,
diagnoses, mortality, and job lock (e.g., see Card et al. 2008; Card et al. 2009;
Fairlie et al. 2012; Kadiyala and Strumpf 2012). As discussed above, because
those who had health insurance prior to transitioning on to Medicare experience
some change in their benefits package, the analysis will capture a weighted
average effect due to the increase in insurance coverage and the change in
benefits package at age 65.
       Formally, health insurance coverage can be summarized by:
                       I i = γ + g(agei ; µ ) + π Ti + Xiϕ + υi                  (2)
where coverage depends on individual characteristics, a smooth function of age
and an indicator !! for age 65 or older, due to Medicare eligibility. Combining




                                            10
!
equations (2) and (1) the resulting reduced form model for outcome !! is
                                !! = ! + ℎ !"#! ; ! + !!! + !! ! + !!                              (3)

where!!! = ! + !"; ℎ !"#! ; ! = ! ∙ + !" ∙ and ! = !".14!Assuming the age
profiles!! ∙ and ! ∙ !are both continuous at age 65, any discontinuities in !! at
that age can be attributed to discontinuities in insurance. In other words, if we
assume that the age profiles of financial risk are continuous at age 65 in the
absence of Medicare’s age-based eligibility rule, then, once we empirically
control for such profiles, any estimated discontinuity in our risk measures can be
attributed to discontinuities in Medicare coverage.! Using the MEPS and the
HTHS, we show below that the rate of insurance coverage rise discontinuously at
age 65. This discontinuity in coverage at age 65 will enable us to estimate the
reduced form effect of Medicare on financial risk protection. The magnitude of
this effect ! depends on the size of the insurance changes at age 65, !, and the
causal effect of insurance on !! , !.15
               Equation (3) is our main estimating equation. We allow the age profiles,
ℎ !"#! ; ! , to vary on either wise of the age 65 cutoff. For analyses of insurance
coverage, mean out-of-pocket spending, the share of total spending paid out-of-
pocket, and reports and sources of medical bill problems, we use Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) regressions. To account for potential misspecification of the age-
profiles, we adjust our standard errors to allow for an arbitrary correlation at the
level of age in quarters in the MEPS or age in years in the HTHS (Lee and Card
2008). Analyses of different points in the distribution of out-of-pocket spending –
e.g., spending at the median, 75th and 95th percentile – are estimated using
quantile regressions. Standard errors for quantile models are estimated using an

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14
  Assuming covariate smoothness holds, an assumption we partially test, individual
characteristics, X i , are not needed but can be included to increase precision.
15
  The variable age is measured as a deviation from age 65, therefore τ can be interpreted as the
discontinuous change on outcome !! at age 65.




                                                                11
!
age-based block bootstrap, analogous to age-based clustering, that randomly
samples with replacement the data within each age group and estimates the
models on these random samples (Efron and Tibshirani 1994). When an age-block
is randomly selected all respondents of this age are included in the estimation.
The standard errors are then calculated simply as the standard deviation of the
coefficient estimates from 500 bootstrap samples.
               All regressions (OLS and quantile) employ survey weighting. In order to
increase precision, we pool together several years of data. Importantly, the MEPS
samples in most years are not completely independent because households are
drawn from the same sample geographic areas and many people are in the sample
for two consecutive years.16 Despite this lack of independence, it is valid to pool
multiple years of MEPS data and keep all observations in the analysis because
each year of the MEPS is designed to be nationally representative.17

Other Changes at Age 65
               A key assumption of the RD is that observable and unobservable
characteristics that affect outcomes have a smooth age profile at the arbitrary
threshold used for identification (age 65 for Medicare). An obvious concern in our
context is employment, since 65 is a traditional age of retirement. Card et al.
(2008) demonstrates that the estimated jumps in employment-related outcomes at
age 65 are small in magnitude and statistically insignificant in both the NHIS and
the March CPS. In the MEPS and HTHS, we find similar smoothness in
employment and retirement rates,18 educational attainment, family income and
geographic location (Figures 1a-1b and Table 1).
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16
   See MEPS-HC Methodology Reports for more details at http://www.meps.ahrq.gov.
17
   Bootstrapped standard errors that specify a common variance structure to reflect the complex
sample design of the MEPS are generally smaller than those obtained from either clustering by age
or the age-block bootstrap. Thus, we opt for a more conservative approach to inference.
18
   The retirement question in the MEPS measures the fraction that reports having ever retired from
any job or business. It is asked only of those ages 55 and older. Given it is not conditional on ever
working the question yields somewhat low fractions retired, even at older ages.




                                                                12
!
       Across most outcomes, including the shares male, Hispanic and with less
than a high school degree (see Table 1), we cannot reject zero discontinuity at age
65. An important exception in both the 2007-2010 MEPS and the HTHS is the
share married, where we find a discontinuous increase at age 65. However, using
the 2007-2010 March CPS we do not find a similar discontinuity in marriage at
age 65 (available upon request). Across all 11 outcomes in the 2007-2010 MEPS,
the change in marriage is the only outcome that is significantly different from
zero. In the HTHS, we find a discontinuity in the share married, the share male
and the share with less than a high school degree. However, as reflected by the F-
statistic, the fit for this parametric model is poor: the coarseness of the data, which
capture age in years instead of quarters, limits the parametric model fit. If we use
the full 1996-2010 MEPS sample in order to maximize the power to detect
discontinuities, we cannot reject the hypothesis of no discontinuity for any
covariate, including the share married (see Appendix Figure 1 and Appendix
Table 1). Given the general smoothness in the data, our analysis satisfies the
continuity assumption of the RD design. And, as discussed below, controlling for
marital status and, in the HTHS, gender and education, has little effect on our
estimates. Thus, we attribute discrete changes in our measures of risk at age 65 to
the change in Medicare eligibility at this age.

Sensitivity Checks
       We test the sensitivity of our main estimates in several ways. First, we
experiment with alternate specifications of the control function, i.e. the age-
specific polynomials. While our main specification uses a quadratic in age, which
seems to mimic the plots of the outcomes of interest reasonably well,
specifications that employ linear or cubic age terms yield quite similar results.
Second, we show that narrowing the age window to respondents 55 to 75 years
old, and thereby limiting the contribution of observations far from the age-65




                                          13
!
Medicare threshold, generates similar findings.

               One concern in comparing the distribution of health spending above and
below age 65 is that individuals may choose to defer some health spending until
they become eligible for Medicare (or alternatively others with very generous
insurance may schedule elective procedures prior to their transition to Medicare).
Although some previous work demonstrates that hospitalizations increase once
individuals transition to Medicare (Card et al. 2008), we find little evidence of
deferred care in our sample as a whole, as shown in section IV. Moreover, an
increase in health care utilization, particularly costly inpatient stays, at age 65
biases us against finding an effect of Medicare on financial risk protection. Since
we might be underpowered to detect changes in utilization, however, we perform
“doughnut-RD” estimates that drop observations right around age 65. Although
we see no evidence of heaping, the typical rationale for the “doughnut-RD”
(Barecca et al. 2011), this approach helps with potential deferral of medical care,
since those right around age 65 are the most likely to defer care in anticipation of
insurance coverage. These estimates are quite similar to our main results.19

IV. Results
Medicare Eligibility and Health Insurance Coverage and Generosity
               Figure 2 shows the age profile of health insurance coverage and generosity
for the MEPS sample and the HTHS sample. The figures also show smooth
functions fitted to the data before and after age 65. As discussed above, Figure 2
demonstrates quite clearly that health insurance coverage rises discontinuously at
age 65, from 87% to 99% in the MEPS and from 87 to 98% in the HTHS (see

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19
  We have also performed analyses with a sample of those with unanticipated and non-deferrable
health events in order to isolate the effect of Medicare on medical expenditure risk from any
behavioral effect on the timing of elective care. These results show even larger risk-protective
effects of Medicare (available upon request). Because we are interested in the risk-protective value
of Medicare for the whole population and not simply those who had a bad health shock, this
analysis is not presented here.




                                                                14
!
Table 2). Likewise, we find large increases in our measures of generosity at age
65. In the MEPS sample, the fraction covered by 2 or more plans increases by
about 59 percentage points off a base of only 6 percent. In the HTHS, where we
have a direct measure of supplemental coverage, the increase is 64 percentage
points off a base of just 6.3 percent. Medicare Advantage and supplemental
coverage (not shown) increase at age 65 by 67 percentage points off a base of 6.6
percent. 20 While still below the 90% supplemental coverage found in the
Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (KFF 2010), these figures suggest that most
individuals transition to a generous package of insurance benefits at age 65. As
shown in Table 2, all these increases at age 65 are statistically different from zero
and stable across alternative specifications of the age polynomial. We will use this
discontinuous change in coverage and generosity at age 65 to identify the effect of
Medicare on medical expenditure risk and financial strain.

Total Spending and Utilization
               Here we consider the change in total spending and utilization at age 65. As
shown in Figure 3 and Table 3, total medical spending actually declines at age 65
by about $2200 or almost 35%. We find similar estimates if we use different age
polynomials (Panels B and C), narrower age bands or doughnut RDs (Appendix
Table 2). The 1996-2010 sample results imply a smaller but still significant
decline of $850 or 14% (Appendix Table 3).
               Importantly, the decline in total medical spending at age 65, which runs
contrary to the idea of deferability assuming constant prices, does not appear to
come from a change in utilization. Figure 3 and Table 3 show that the likelihood
of a physician visit, an outpatient hospital visit or an inpatient stay is essentially
unchanged at age 65. This is true across alternate specifications of the age

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
20
  Specifically, the HTHS allows us to look at Medicare plus a supplemental public or private plan
or Medicare Advantage coverage. Restricting to just supplemental coverage, we still see a 64
percentage point increase in generosity off a base of 6.4% in the HTHS data (not shown).




                                                                15
!
polynomials (Panels B and C) and when we narrow the age window to 55 to 75 or
perform donut RD estimates (Appendix Table 2). Likewise, we find no clear
evidence to support a change in utilization at age 65 in the full 1996-2010 MEPS
(Appendix Table 3). These conclusions are unchanged if we analyze the total
number of visits or the log (or inverse hyperbolic sine) of visits (not shown for
brevity). A key implication is that deferability may not be a big issue in the
sample overall – a fact that is consistent with Card et al.’s (2008) findings for
outpatient care, where changes in the likelihood of a doctor’s visit at age 65 were
on the order of 1 percentage point or 1.5% relative to the pre-65 mean.21 Since we
may be underpowered to detect deferability and, perhaps more importantly, Card
et al. (2008) do find a 10% increase in hospitalizations that we do not find here,
we conclude that to the extent such behavior exists it will cause us to
underestimate the risk protective benefit of Medicare. Moreover, in section V
below, we show that the moral hazard costs implied by the Card et al. (2008)
estimates are small relative to the risk protection benefits of Medicare.

Medicare Eligibility and Medical Financial Risk Exposure
               Next, we analyze changes in the distribution of out-of-pocket medical
spending at age 65. Figure 4 presents the regression discontinuity graphs for
different parts of the distribution of spending and Table 4 the corresponding RD
estimates. We find a discontinuous drop of $326 in mean of out-of-pocket
spending at age 65, a drop of almost 33% relative to the mean prior to age 65. The
sharp drop in out-of-pocket spending at age 65 increases as we move to higher
percentiles of the distribution. At the median, the decline is small – roughly $47.
At the 75th percentile the decline is about $210 or almost 18% relative to the pre-
65 mean while at the 90th and 95th percentiles, the declines are $865 (36%) and
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
21
  Another important implication is that changes in medical spending at age 65 may be driven by
lower prices negotiated by Medicare. Since we do not observe the type (e.g., specialist vs. non-
specialist) or content (e.g., test use) of care, we hesitate to draw this conclusion but note that this is
an important area for further study.




                                                                16
!
$1730 (52%), respectively. Together with Figure 5, which shows all the RD
centile estimates, these estimate imply that the effects of Medicare on out-of-
pocket costs are concentrated at the top quartile of the spending distribution. As
one might expect, Medicare offers risk protection through declines in high,
catastrophic medical spending.
       Also in Table 4 and illustrated in Figure 6 are the estimated changes in the
share of total expenditures paid out-of-pocket and the share of the population with
out-of-pocket spending that exceeds income at age 65. The share of spending paid
out-of-pocket drops by approximately 2 percentage points or about 6% off the
mean share of 33% below age 65, although this estimate is not statistically
distinguishable from zero (Table 4). The share of the population with out-of-
pocket expenditures that exceed income, a proxy for “catastrophic” out-of-pocket
medical costs, drops precipitously –by more than 50%, from a pre-65 mean of
7.4% to 3.4% (Table 4).
       Estimates using linear or cubic age trends (Panels B and C of Table 4)
tend to straddle those from our preferred specification with quadratic age trends.
With linear age trends, the declines in out-of-pocket spending are $255 (25%) at
the mean and $843 (35%) and $1391 (37%) at the 90th and 95th percentiles,
respectively. The decline in the share of spending paid out-of-pocket is
statistically significant and almost 4 percentage points or 33%. Using cubic age
trends, the declines in out-of-pocket spending are $349 (35%) at the mean and
$1145 (48%) and $2091 (64%) at the 90th and 95th percentiles, respectively. The
estimated decline in the share with out-of-pocket spending that exceeds income is
just over 3 percentage points (or about 40%) in both specifications.
       Estimates in Appendix Table 4 that control for marital status are virtually
identical as are those in Appendix Table 5, based on the narrower age band (Panel
A) or the doughnut RDs (Panels B-D). Estimates from the full 1996-2010 MEPS
(Appendix Table 6 and Appendix Figure 4) are considerably smaller in




                                        17
!
magnitude. Using all 15 years of data, the estimated decline in out-of-pocket
spending is only about two-thirds of the 2007-2010 decline at the mean and 55%
of the 2007-2010 decline at the 90th percentile. The implied smaller effects prior
to 2007 are consistent with Englehardt and Gruber (2011), which find that the
introduction of Medicare Part-D in 2006 improved medical expenditure risk
protection. Separately analyzing categories of spending and time periods, we find
that about 41% ($69 of $169) of the larger decline in out-of-pocket spending in
2007-2010 relative to 1996-2006 is attributable to prescription drugs (available
upon request).
Medicare Eligibility and Financial Strain
       While the observed changes in out-of-pocket spending at age 65,
particularly those at the right tail of the distribution, indicate that Medicare offers
important risk-protection to seniors, the precise numbers are difficult to put into
context. To provide further meaning to these changes, we use the HTHS to
measure changes in self-reported measures of financial strain.
       Figure 7 and the corresponding estimates in Table 5 show discontinuous
changes at age 65 in reported problems paying medical bills, medical-bill related
collections agency contact, borrowing to pay these bills and using savings to pay
these bills. Prior to age 65, 17% of respondents report problems paying medical
bills. At age 65, the fraction reporting problems declines by 6 percentage points or
35%. Estimates using linear or cubic age terms (in Panels B and C) suggest
smaller declines in medical bill problems, although in both cases they are still
sizeable. Estimates controlling for marital status, gender and education in
Appendix Table 7 are also quite similar. Estimates using only respondents ages 55
to 75 or from the doughnut RDs in Appendix Table 8 are roughly the same as the
main estimates or ever larger.
       Consistent with the decline in perceived problems paying medical bills,
the fraction being contacted by collection agencies about these bills declines by




                                          18
!
2.8 percentage points or almost 30% off a base of 9.9%. The declines are a bit
smaller (17-22%) using alternative polynomials but still meaningful in magnitude,
while the narrower age band and doughnut RDs yield even larger declines (32-
36%). The fraction borrowing to pay these bills declines by 2.9 percentage points
(or 35% off a mean of 8.2%; significant at the 10% level). The fraction using
savings to pay medical bills declines by 4 percentage points (or 38% off a mean
of 10.5%; significant at the 1% level). Estimated declines in borrowing or using
savings from the more restricted age group or from the doughnut RDs are quite
similar to the main results and in many cases a bit larger.
       Interpreting declines in the likelihood of borrowing or using savings to
handle medical bills is somewhat difficult. The implications of borrowing to
smooth consumption may be quite different from borrowing that depletes a
retirement nest egg. Since we find large declines in the likelihood that individuals
delay major purchases as a result of medical bills at age 65 (4 percentage points
off a base of just 9% prior to age 65; see col (5), Table 5), these changes in
borrowing and savings do not seem to reflect attempts to smooth consumption.
However, more detail is needed to fully understand these patterns.
       Finally, we analyze changes in the amount owed in medical bills (see
Figure 8 and the last 3 columns of Table 5). Even though medical debt is a stock,
the rate at which individuals acquire debt or at which existing debt grows can still
change at age 65. We find a change at the mean on the order of $120 off a base of
$936 owed in medical bills prior to age 65, but the estimate is too noisy to
statistically distinguish from zero. At the 90th percentile, the change is more than
2.5 times larger or $306, although this estimate is also quite imprecise. We also
analyze the inverse hyperbolic sine, IHS(Y) = ln(Y + (Y2+1)½), of the amount
owed. This transformation is used because it is defined for zero owed and like the
natural log yields a parameter that can be interpreted as an elasticity (Pence 2006).
With this specification, we estimate a 33% percent decline in the amount owed in




                                         19
!
medical bills at age 65, further evidence that the estimated changes in out-of-
pocket spending in the MEPS have meaningful impacts on medical liabilities
faced by seniors. Using a cubic in age yields an almost identical decline (33%)
while linear age trends yield a far smaller but still sizeable decline of 23% (Panels
B and C). In contrast, estimates using the narrower age band or from the doughnut
RDs (Appendix Table 8) indicate declines of about 40%. The larger doughnut
RDs estimates may reflect the fact that deferred medical care should increase the
likelihood of medical bill problems and amounts owed in medical bills and failing
to account for such deferral will understate Medicare’s protection against
medical-related financial strain.

V. Welfare Gain from Reductions in Out of Pocket Expenditure Risk
       To interpret the economic significance of the RD estimates of changes in
out-of-pocket medical expenditures we use a stylized expected utility framework
to simulate the insurance value of the estimated change in medical expenditure
risk exposure associated with Medicare. This approach is similar to the one used
by Feldstein and Gruber (1995), Finkelstein and McKnight (2008), Engelhardt
and Gruber (2011) and Shigeoka (2012). It assumes a utility u (c) where c is
non-health consumption and a budget constraint of c = y − m , where y is income
and m out-of-pocket expenditure. m is a random variable with probability
density function f (m) and support [0, m ]. f (m) depends both on random health
shocks and the nature of health insurance held (if any). Expected utility is given
by
                           m
                       ∫       u ( y − m) f (m)dm                              (5)
                        0


       To calculate the welfare change associated with Medicare, we compare an
individual’s risk premium (or certainty equivalence) under the pre- and post-65
spending distributions f (m) . Following the literature, f (m) is based on the




                                              20
!
empirical distribution of medical spending in the MEPS. The risk premium (π ) is
the maximum amount that a risk averse individual would be willing to pay to
completely insure against the random variable m :
                                                                    m
                                             u(y − π ) =        ∫       u(y − m) f (m)dm        (6)
                                                                    0


A decrease in risk exposure for the elderly relative to the near elderly due to
Medicare would appear as a decline in the risk premium; this decline provides a
dollar measure of the insurance value (and hence welfare gain) from Medicare
coverage:

                                        Δπ = π post−65 − π pre−65.                               (7)

               We use quantile estimates from (3) to simulate the expenditure distribution
faced by individuals just below and above age 65 and to calculate the risk
premium for both groups using (6). We focus on the results from the 2007-2010
sample in order to compare the contemporary costs and benefits of the program.22

               As shown in Table 4 and Figure 4, Medicare shifts both the variance and
mean level of out-of-pocket spending. However, the change in the mean of out-of-
pocket spending for those just above relative to just below age 65 represents a
transfer from the government to the insured and not a change in risk. To calculate
a mean-preserving change in risk due to Medicare, we subtract out from the
distribution of out-of-pocket spending at age 65 the mean reduction in out-of-
pocket spending due to Medicare.
               In practice, the computation of (7) is done as follows. First, we use the
estimates of the parameters in (3), shown in Figure 5, to simulate for each
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
22
  This analysis carries the limitations of a static framework that ignores savings or borrowing to
pay for a negative health shock and the idea that Medicare may affect savings and consumption
decisions over the life cycle. Given that our estimates are cross-sectional – we don’t take into
account serially correlated health shocks, for example – the static framework is an appropriate
simplification and allows us to compare our results to the existing literature.




                                                                           21
!
individual i in the sample the conditional (on individual’s characteristics X )
quantiles (superscript j ) of the out-of-pocket spending distribution pre-65
(without Medicare),
                                                            !
                                                       !!! = ! ! + !! ! ! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!    (8)

And post-65 (with Medicare):
                                                            !            !
                                                       !!! = !!! + ! !                                              (9)

for i=1,.., N and j=1,...,99. The coefficients are estimated using 50-80 year-olds,
but we focus on 64-66 year-olds for the prediction in order to better estimate the
change in risk premium around the age 65 threshold. We set the very bottom of
the distribution (j=0) equal to zero so that each person has 100 points of equal
probability of occurrence in the out-of-pocket spending distribution. Following
the literature, we truncate predicted out-of-pocket spending from below at zero
and from above at 99% of individual income. We use this truncation because
marginal utility goes to infinity as consumption goes to 0 in the CRRA model.
Since out-of-pocket health spending can exceed income and, as discussed above,
the share of such cases drops precipitously at age 65 (see Figure 5 and Table 4),
this truncation underestimates the welfare value of Medicare.23

               We calculate the risk premium without Medicare for each person using
                                                                !        !!               !
                                   ! ! − !!! =                       ∙   !!! !    ! − !!! !!!!!!!!!!!!!            (10)
                                                                !!

where j indexes the quantile from the distribution. Similarly, the risk premium
with Medicare for each person is
                                                        !        !!                 !
                          ! ! − !!! =                       ∙    !!! !       ! − !!! − ! !!!!!!!!!!!!!             (11)
                                                       !!



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
23
  Using larger truncations of 80% or 60% of income, as is done in the literature, further
exacerbates this bias.




                                                                             22
!
where ! is the estimate in Table 4 of the change in the mean out-of-pocket
expenditures from Medicare ($326) for the 2007-2010 sample. Following the
literature, we specify a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function, i.e.
                ! !!!
! ! =                    –, where!! is the Arrow-Pratt relative-risk aversion parameter. There
                 !!!

is no consensus on what the coefficient of risk aversion is but the literature uses 3
as the benchmark, which McClellan and Skinner (2006) determine to be the value
that best replicates observed spending among the low-income pre-Medicare
population using the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics.24 For this reason, we
focus on the results for a CRRA of 3 but discuss the sensitivity of the results.
               Using this method and a CRRA of 3, we find an average decline in risk
premium (or welfare gain) associated with Medicare of $312 per person. As
expected, the higher the coefficient of risk aversion, the higher the welfare gain;
the gain varies from a negative $77 with a CRRA of 1 to $458 with a CRRA of 5.
                To put these welfare gains from expenditure risk reduction into
perspective, we compare them to the social costs of the program. These costs
include: (1) the cost of raising revenue for the program and (2) the efficiency
costs from the moral hazard effect of health insurance. CBO estimates that
increasing the Medicare eligibility age (MEA) by 1 year (to age 66) would save
$21 billion dollars or $5,882 per Medicare beneficiary (CBO 2012).25 Using the
consensus value for the deadweight loss per dollar of revenue raised of 30 cents
(Poterba, 1996), these figures imply an annual social program cost of $1,765 per
recipient. Therefore, using the $312 average gain from reducing expenditure risk,
the risk-protection afforded by Medicare at age 65 accounts for about 18% of the
social costs of financing the program.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
24
   As McClellan and Skinner (2006) point out, the simulation and determination of 3 as the best
measure of relative-risk aversion, also relies on parameter choices related to the relative value of
medical spending in bad health and the "necessary" medical spending in bad and good health.
25
   In 2012, there were 3.57 million 65 year olds (Census bureau’s American Fact Finder).




                                                                23
!
               The results in this paper suggest no moral hazard costs related to health
insurance. That is, we fail to reject zero change in utilization at age 65 (see Table
3) and the “doughnut-RD” exercise points to limited strategic timing in health
care utilization. However, since we may be underpowered to detect changes in
utilization we use estimates from the literature to calculate the moral hazard costs
of Medicare. Card et al. (2008) use hospital discharge data and find an increase of
8% in the discharge rate. 26 Off an average discharge rate of 1,443 per 10,000
people in their sample, this implies an increase of roughly 0.01 stays per person at
age 65.Using our 2007-2010 MEPS sample, we find that the average price for a
hospital stay (calculated as total spending divided by number of stays) at age 64 is
$2,052. Therefore, based on these estimates, the moral hazard costs associated
with Medicare are relatively low – about $21 per person – and would not
significantly change the cost-benefit analysis above.
              Finally, it is important to bear in mind that this calculation ignores the
stress-lowering benefits from reduced financial strain at age 65 that we
documented in section IV, any impact this stress-reduction has on health and any
direct health improvements from Medicare. Dobbie and Song (2013), for
example, find that bankruptcy protection decreases five-year mortality by 1.1
percentage points, suggesting that reduced medical financial strain has potentially
important effects on health. In addition, Card et al. 2009 document significant
Medicare-induced mortality declines among those with emergent, non-deferrable
conditions. Using standard value of life estimates, an extension of life by just one
extra week would mean that the welfare gains from Medicare at age 65 fully
balance the program’s social costs.

VI. Conclusion
               We use the discontinuity in Medicare coverage at age 65 to estimate the
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
26
  Card et al. (2008) find an increase in doctor visits as well. Since the increase is small (1.3pp or
1.5%) and doctor visits are cheap compared to hospital stays, this negligibly affects our estimates.




                                                                24
!
impact of Medicare on medical expenditure risk among those just eligible versus
just ineligible for the program based on age. Those just eligible for Medicare
based on age are 14% more likely to have health insurance and 10 times more
likely to be covered by two or more policies than those just ineligible (i.e. slightly
younger than 65).
       Our analyses suggest that Medicare plays an important role in protecting
against medical expenditure risk for those aged 65 and older. Using the 2007-
2010 MEPS data, we find that the distribution of out-of pocket spending shifts
significantly to the left at age 65. For example, out-of-pocket expenditures (all in
2010 dollars) drop by 33% ($326) at the mean and by 53% ($1,730) among the
top 5% of medical spenders. The declines are smaller, but still significant, if we
consider the 1996-2010 period: out-of-pocket spending at age 65 drops by almost
20% at both the mean ($200) and among the top 5% of medical spenders ($722).
These results are robust to different strategies that deal with misspecification of
functional form. They also appear unlikely to be substantially affected by
potential deferability in health care utilization. A welfare calculation indicates that
the reductions in out-of-pocket expenditure risk at age 65 translate into a welfare
gain of 18% of Medicare’s social costs, not including any stress reducing benefits
from lower financial strain or direct health improvements.
       Results for medical-related financial strain corroborate the importance of
changes in out-of-pocket spending for the financial well-being of seniors. Both
the fraction reporting medical bill problems and collection agency contacts
associated with these bills decline by about a third at age 65. Likewise, the
amount owed in medical bills declines by 33% (with a pre-65 mean amount owed
of about $900). To the extent that we cannot account for bias due to the deferral
of medical care until age 65 by some respondents, our estimated changes in
several measures of medical related-financial stress likely provide a lower bound
on the true effects of Medicare on medical expenditure risk.




                                          25
!
       How do our findings of the risk protective benefits of Medicare today
compare to the Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) – referred to as FM – estimates
of the effect of the introduction of Medicare in 1965 on out-of-pocket spending?
Both studies find similar relative reductions in out-of-pocket spending attributable
to Medicare (on the order of 30-40%). In addition, both find that the effects are
concentrated in the top quartile of the spending distribution. However, key
differences in the studies suggest some important nuances. FM uses a different
empirical strategy – a difference in differences (DID) in contrast to the Regression
Discontinuity (RD) approach use here. The difference in empirical strategy
suggests that Medicare provides greater risk protection today than when it was
first introduced almost 50 years ago for two reasons. First, the fraction of the
population affected (or the “first stage”) in the FM exercise is larger than in ours.
At its introduction Medicare raised health insurance coverage for the elderly by
75 percentage points (Finkelstein 2007), while the corresponding increase in
coverage at the age 65 threshold today is only 12 percentage points. Therefore,
the change in out-of-pocket spending we estimate is coming from a smaller share
of the population. Said differently, one would need to rescale our expenditure
results upwards to make them comparable to FM. Second, our estimates provide
average treatment effects for those right around the age 65 cutoff only. In
contrast, in their DID, FM calculate the average treatment effect of Medicare for
individuals ages 65 to 74. Given that medical expenditure (and risk) is increasing
in age one would expect the risk protection from Medicare to be greater at later
ages. That Medicare’s expenditure risk protection has increased since 1965 is
consistent with the rapid rise in total medical spending during the past five
decades (Gruber and Levy 2009) and the fact that we estimate larger effects for
the 2007-2010 than the overall 1996-2010 period.
       Our findings also have important implications for policy. Specifically,
several recent proposals to address rising Medicare spending and long-term




                                         26
!
federal budget shortfalls have involved increasing the Medicare Eligibility age
(MEA) (see, for example, Emanuel 2012, Murray and King, 2012 and Herger
2012). Based on our findings, if this policy is implemented, those 65 and 66 year-
olds who are no longer eligible for Medicare could face substantial drops in
insurance coverage and large increases in out-of-pocket expenditures and
medical-related financial stress. This is especially true for those in the right tail of
the expenditure distribution who, according to our estimates, would see an
increase of several thousand dollars per year in out-of-pocket medical
expenditures and a consequent substantial financial loss. If we take into account
the persistence in health status, something we do not do here, those faced with a
negative health shock might face large expenditures for multiple years, increasing
the policy’s financial consequences. While the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
should attenuate the medical expenditure risk consequences of increasing the
MEA, its success in doing so will be limited by the decision of many states,
including large states such as Texas, Florida and Louisiana, to opt-out of the
Medicaid expansion. If those individuals ages 65 and 66 years old who would
have become eligible for insurance via Medicaid expansions are unable to afford
private options, increasing the MEA would increase their exposure to medical
expenditure risk.



REFERENCES

Alemayehu, B. and K. E. Warner. 2004. The Lifetime Distribution of Health Care
Costs, Health Services Research, 39(3): 627-642.
Aizcorbe A, Liebman E, Pack S, et al. 2012. Measuring health care costs of
individuals with employer-sponsored health insurance in the U.S.: A comparison
of survey and claims data. Statistical Journal of the IAOS, 28(1/2): 43-51
Baicker, K., H. Levy, 2012. The Insurance Value of Medicare, The New England
Journal of Medicine, 367: 1773-1775.




                                          27
!
Baicker, K., S.L. Taubman, H.L. Allen et al., 2013. The Oregon Experiment –
Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes, The New England Journal of
Medicine, 368: 1713-1722.
Barecca, A.I., J.M. Lindo, and G.R. Waddell, 2011. Heaping Induced Bias in
Regression Discontinuity Designs, NBER Working Paper No. 17408.
Bernard, D, Cowan, C. A., Selden, T. M., Cai L & Caitlin, A. 2012. Reconciling
Medical Expenditure Estimates from the MEPS and NHA, 2007, Medicare &
Medicaid Research Review, 2(4): E1-E20.
Card, D., C. Dobkin and N. Maestas, 2008. The Impact of Nearly Universal
Insurance Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare.
American Economic Review, 98 December.
Card, D., C. Dobkin and N. Maestas, 2009. Does Medicare Save Lives? The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2): 597-636.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO), 2012. Raising the Ages of Eligibility for
Medicare    and     Social     Security,      Issue    Brief,   January 2012.
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/01-10-2012-
Medicare_SS_EligibilityAgesBrief.pdf
Dobbie, Will and Jae Song. 2013. Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring
the Effects of Consumer Bankruptcy Protection. Available at
http://scholar.princeton.edu/wdobbie/files/Dobbie_Song_Bankruptcy.pdf
Efron, B and R. Tibshirani, 1994. An Intrduction to the Bootsrap, in Applied
Statistics and Probability,no 557 Chapman and Hall (New York).
Emanuel, E.J. 2012. Entitlement Reform for the Entitled. The New York Times
Opinionator,                   May                    20,                  2012.
http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/05/20/entitlement-reform-for-the-
entitled/

Engelhardt, G. V., and Gruber, J. (2010). Medicare Part D and the financial
protection of the elderly (No. w16155). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Farlie, R.W., K. Kapur and S.M. Gates, 2012. Is Employer-Based Health
Insurance A Barrier To Entrepreneurship? RAND Working Paper, WR-637-1-
EMKF.
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics 2012. Older Americans
2012: Key Indicators of Well-Being. Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-
Related Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. June 2012.
http://www.agingstats.gov/Main_Site/Data/2012_Documents/docs/EntireChartbo




                                      28
!
ok.pdf
Feldstein, M., & Gruber, J. (1995). A major risk approach to health insurance
reform. In Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 9 (pp. 103-130). MIT Press.
Finkelstein, Amy, 2007. The aggregate effects of health insurance: evidence from
the introduction of Medicare. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1), 1-37.
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright et al. 2012. The Oregon Health Insurance
Experiment: Evidence from the First Year. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming (published online first).
Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight, 2008. What did Medicare do? The initial
impact of Medicare on mortality and out of pocket medical spending. Journal of
Public Economics, 92(7):1644-1668.
Gross, T. and M. Notowidigdo, 2011. Health Insurance and the Consumer
Bankruptcy Decision: Evidence from Expansions of Medicaid, Journal of Public
Economics, 95(7-8): 767-778.
Gruber, J and H. Levy, 2009. The Evolution of Medical Spending Risk, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23(4): 25-48.
Herger, Wally. Medicare Reform Crucial for Economic Health, The Washington
Times, December 11, 2012.
Hurd, M., Rohwedder, S. 2012. The Level and Risk of Out-of-Pocket Health Care
Spending, MMRC WP 2009-218
http://www.mrrc.isr.umich.edu/publications/papers/pdf/wp218.pdf
Kadiyala S. and E. Strumpf, 2012. Does Health Insurance Affect Health?
Evidence of Medicare’s Impact on Cancer Outcomes. Available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2138454.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). The Uninsured: A Primer, 2011.
http://www.kff.org/uninsured/upload/7451-07.pdf
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). Medicare Chartbook. 2010; Fourth Edition.
http://w.ww.kff.org/medicare/upload/8103.pdf
Khwaja, Ahmed. 2010. Estimating the willingness to pay for Medicare using a
dynamic life-cycle model of demand for health insurance. Journal of
Econometrics 156: 130-147.
Lee, D.S and D. Card, 2008. Regression Discontinuity Inference With
Specification Error, Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 655-674.
Marshall, S., McGarry, KM, Skinner, JS, 2010. The Risk of Out-of-Pocket Health
Care Expenditure at the End of Life, NBER WP No. 16170.




                                      29
!
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16170.pdf?new_window=1
Mazumder, B. and S. Miller, 2013. “The Effects of the Massachusetts Health
Reform on Financial Well Being” Working paper.
McClellan, M., & Skinner, J. (2006). The incidence of Medicare. Journal of
Public Economics, 90(1), 257-276.
McWilliams, J., Ellen Meara, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and John Z. Ayanian, 2007.
Use of Health Services by Previously Uninsured Medicare Beneficiaries, The
New England Journal of Medicine, 357(2), 143-153.
Merlis, M. 2008. The Value of Extra Benefits Offered by Medicare Advantage
Plans      in       2006,      The       Kaiser     Family      Foundation,
http://www.kff.org/medicare/upload/7744.pdf
Murray, S. and King Jr., N. Romney Offers Medicare Plan, The Wall Street
Journal, February 25, 2012.
Pence, Karen M., 2006. The Role of Wealth Transformations: An Application to
Estimating the Effect of Tax Incentives on Savings, The B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis and Policy, 5.1.
Poterba, J. M. (1996). Government intervention in the markets for education and
health care: how and why?. In Individual and social responsibility: Child care,
education, medical care, and long-term care in America (pp. 277-308). University
of Chicago Press.
Shigeoka, H. 2012. The Effect of Patient Cost-sharing on Utilization, Health and
Risk Protection: Evidence from Japan. Working paper.
Stanton, MA, Rutherford MK. 2006. The High Concentration of US Health Care
Expenditure, Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality;
2005. Research in Action Issue 19. AHRQ Pub. No.06-0060
Wagstaff, A. and M. Lindelow, 2008. Can insurance increase financial risk?: The
curious case of health insurance in China, Journal of Health Economics, 27(4):
990-1005.
Webb, A. and N. Zhivan. 2010. What is the Distribution of Lifetime Health Care
Costs from Age 65?, Center for Retirement Research working paper number 10-4.
Zuvekas, S.H. and G.L. Olin, 2009. Accuracy of Medicare expenditures in the
medical expenditure panel survey. Inquiry 46(1):92-108.!




                                       30
!
Figure'1a.'Smoothness'of'Covariates:'MEPS,'2007=2010'
'
                      Share Employed by Age in Quarters: 2007-2010                                                    Share Retired by Age in Quarters: 2007-2010




                                                                                                 .6
  .8
  .6




                                                                                                 .4
  .4




                                                                                                 .2
  .2




                                                                                                 0
  0




           50    55                    60          65         70                      75    80           50     55                       60         65         70                        75    80
                                               age_quarters                                                                                     age_quarters

                          MeanShae
                                 rEmpo
                                     l yed                         FitedValue                                              MeanShae
                                                                                                                                  rRee
                                                                                                                                     rit d                      FitedValue




                       Share Married by Age in Quarters: 2007-2010                                             Mean Personal Income by Age in Quarters: 2007-2010




                                                                                                 50000
  .7




                                                                                                 40000
  .6




                                                                                                 30000
  .5




                                                                                                 20000
  .4




                                                                                                 10000
  .3




                                                                                                 0




           50    55                    60          65         70                      75    80           50     55                       60         65         70                        75    80
                                               age_quarters                                                                                     age_quarters

                           MeanShae
                                  rMae
                                     ird                       FitedValue                                                MeanPesronan
                                                                                                                                    Il come                         FitedValue



                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
'
Figure'1b.'Smoothness'of'Covariates:'HTHS:'2003,'2007,'2010'
'
                               Share Married by Age in Years                                                                 Share Employed by Age in Years
                                             HTHS Data                                                                                        HTHS Data
   .75




                                                                                                   .8
   .7




                                                                                                   .6
   .65




                                                                                                   .4
   .6




                                                                                                   .2
   .55
   .5




                                                                                                   0




            50    55                    60         65         70                      75   80             50     55                      60         65         70                    75       80
                                             HP1:a301:Age                                                                                     HP1:a301:Age

                       Mean Share Married                             Fitted Value                                   Mean Share Employed                                  Fitted Value




                                Mean Income by Age in Years
                                             HTHS Data
   55000
   50000
   45000
   40000
   35000




            50    55                    60         65         70                      75   80
                                             HP1:a301:Age

                      Mean Faimily Income                              Fitted Value



                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
Figure'2a.'Change'in'Health'Insurance'Coverage'at'Age'65,'MEPS:'2007=2010'
'
                                     Insured by Age in Quarters                                                            Medicare Insured by Age in Quarters
                                        2007-2010 Survey Years                                                                       2007-2010 Survey Years
  1




                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                            .8
  .95




                                                                                                            .6
  .9




                                                                                                            .4
  .85




                                                                                                            .2
  .8




                                                                                                            0
        50             55               60              65         70                  75              80        50   55            60           65         70                  75   80
                                                    age_quarters                                                                             age_quarters

                            Mean Share Insured                          Fitted Value                                   Mean Share Medicare                       Fitted Value




                Covered by Two or More Policies by Age in Quarters
                                        2007-2010 Survey Years
  1
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0




        50             55               60              65         70                  75              80
                                                    age_quarters

                     Mean Share Two+ Policies                                Fitted Value



                                                                           '
'
Figure'2b.'Change'in'Health'Insurance'Coverage'at'Age'65,'HTHS:'2003,'2007,'2010'
'
                                        Insured by Age in Years                                                              Medicare Insured by Age in Years
                                                 HTHS Data                                                                                   HTHS Data
  1




                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                            .8
  .95




                                                                                                            .6
  .9




                                                                                                            .4
  .85




                                                                                                            .2
  .8




                                                                                                            0




        50             55               60              65         70                  75              80        50   55            60           65         70                  75   80
                                                    HP1:a301:Age                                                                             HP1:a301:Age

                            Mean Share Insured                          Fitted Value                                   Mean Share Medicare                       Fitted Value




                             Supplmental Coverage by Age in Years
                                                 HTHS Data
  1
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0




        50            55                60              65         70                  75              80
                                                    HP1:a301:Age

             Mean Share with SupplementalCoverage                                       Fitted Value



                                                                                                                                                                                          '
Figure'3.'Impact'of'Medicare'on'Total'Spending'and'Any'Utilization'
'
                                         Mean Expenditures by Age in Quarters                                                                                                               Any Doctor Visits by Age in Quarters
                                                                     2007-2010 Survey Years                                                                                                                         2007-2010 Survey Years
  14000




                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                      .95
  12000




                                                                                                                                      .9
  10000




                                                                                                                                      .85
  8000




                                                                                                                                      .8
  6000




                                                                                                                                      .75
  4000




                                                                                                                                      .7
           50               55                             60                    65             70                         75    80                   50                  55                              60                    65            70                     75    80
                                                                             age_quarters                                                                                                                                   age_quarters

                                           MeanExpendu
                                                     ti e
                                                        rs                                      FitedValue                                                                          MeanShae
                                                                                                                                                                                           rwih
                                                                                                                                                                                              t MDVissti                                           FitedValue




                                         Any Outpatient Visits by Age in Quarters                                                                                                         Any Inpatient Stays by Age in Quarters
                                                                     2007-2010 Survey Years                                                                                                                         2007-2010 Survey Years
  .5
  .45




                                                                                                                                      .25
  .4




                                                                                                                                      .2
  .35




                                                                                                                                      .15
  .3
  .25




                                                                                                                                      .1
  .2




                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                                                                      0




           50               55                             60                    65             70                         75    80                   50                  55                              60                    65            70                     75    80
                                                                             age_quarters                                                                                                                                   age_quarters

                             MeanShae
                                    rwih
                                       t Oup
                                           t ae
                                              it nVi
                                                  t ssti                                                      FitedValue                                                       MeanShae
                                                                                                                                                                                      rwih
                                                                                                                                                                                         tn
                                                                                                                                                                                          I pae
                                                                                                                                                                                              it nSt
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t ays                                                 FitedValue



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
'
Figure'4.'Impact'of'Medicare'on'the'Distribution'of'Out=of=Pocket'Spending'
'
                       Mean OOP Expenditures by Age in Quarters                                                                                                      50th and 75th Percentiles of OOP Expenditure
                                                           2007-2010 Survey Years                                                                                                                              2007-2010 Survey Years
                                                                                                                                      500 1000 1500 2000 2500
  2000




                                                                                                                                          Expenditures
  1500
  1000




                                                                                                                                                  0
  500




                                                                                                                                                                50              55                             60            65               70                     75   80
             50             55                             60               65                 70                          75   80                                                                                     Age in quarters
                                                                        age_quarters
                                                                                                                                                                     OOP Expenditure, 50th perc.                                           OOP Expenditure, 75th perc.
                            Mean OOP Expenditures                                                            Fitted Value
                                                                                                                                                                2007-2010 MEPS data



                       90th and 95th Percentiles of OOP Expenditure
                                                             2007-2010 Survey Years
          8000
           6000
  Expenditures
  4000    2000




                  50             55                             60            65               70                          75   80
                                                                        Age in quarters

                       OOP Expenditure, 90th perc.                                          OOP Expenditure, 95th perc.
                  2007-2010 MEPS data


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
Figure'5.'Impact'of'Medicare'on'Centiles'of'Out=of=Pocket'Spending,'2007=2010'
'




                                                                                                                                              '
'
Figure'6.''Impact'of'Medicare'on'Relative'Out=of=Pocket'Health'Care'Costs'
''
        Share of Health Care Costs Paid OOP by Age in Quarters Share with OOP Costs that Exceed Income by Age in Quarters
                            2007-2010 Survey Years                                              2007-2010 Survey Years
                                                                          .15
  .4
  .35




                                                                          .1
  .3




                                                                          .05
  .25
  .2




                                                                          0




        50       55        60         65         70         75       80         50   55         60        65         70        75        80
                                  age_quarters                                                        age_quarters

                 Share Expenditures OOP               Fitted Value                   Share Extreme OOP Costs              Fitted Value


                                                                                                                                                  '
Figure'7.''Impact'of'Medicare'on'Medical'Bill'Problems'and'Collections'Activity''
'
                               Medical Bill Problems by Age in Years                                                               Collections Agency Contact by Age in Years
   .25




                                                                                                            .15
   .2




                                                                                                            .1
   .15




                                                                                                            .05
   .1
   .05




                                                                                                            0
          50             55               60              65        70                  75             80          50             55               60                 65         70        75                80
                                                     HP1:a301:Age                                                                                                 HP1:a301:Age

               Mean Share with MedicalBilProblems                                       Fitted Value                    Mean Share Contacted by Collections Agency                            Fitted Value




                           Borrowed for Medical Bills by Age in Years                                                            Used Savings for Medical Bills by Age in Years
   .15




                                                                                                            .15
   .1




                                                                                                            .1
   .05




                                                                                                            .05
   0




                                                                                                            0




          50             55               60              65        70                  75             80          50             55               60                 65         70        75                80
                                                     HP1:a301:Age                                                                                                 HP1:a301:Age

               Mean Share Borrowed for MedicalBils                                      Fitted Value                    Mean Share Used Savings for MedicalBils                              Fitted Value



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '
'
Figure'8.''Impact'of'Medicare'on'the'Amount'Owed'in'Medical'Bills'
'
                       Amount Owed in Medical Bills by Age in Years                                                        90th Percentile of Medical Bills Owed by Age in Years
   1500




                                                                                                            2500
                                                                                                            2000
   1000




                                                                                                            1500
                                                                                                            1000
   500




                                                                                                            500
   0




                                                                                                            0




          50             55               60              65        70                  75             80          50             55               60                  65        70        75                80
                                                     HP1:a301:Age                                                                                                 HP1:a301:Age

                              Mean Share Owed                            Fitted Value                                         Amount Owed, 90th percentile                            Fitted Value




           Inverse Hyperbolic Sine of Amount Owed in Medical Bills by Age
  1.5
  1
  .5
  0




          50            55                60             65         70                  75             80
                                                     HP1:a301:Age

                              IHS Amount Owed                            Fitted Value



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
Table 1. Smoothness of Covariates
                                                                                                                                                             Share with
                       Share                                                                  Share BA or                        Share living in                                     Share       Share living
                                      Share Retired Share Married             Income                            Family Size                      Share Male less than HS
                      Employed                                                                  Higher                               South                                          Hispanic     in the West
                                                                                                                                                               degree
Panel A: MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+             0.01                  -0.036           0.052**            2,287.05          -0.019              0.023             -0.02            0.005          0.001           0.006         -0.001
                  (0.039)                 (0.032)           (0.02)           (4017.75)          (0.023)            (0.057)           (0.021)          (0.036)        (0.023)         (0.011)        (0.019)
Mean pre 65         0.69                  0.087             0.665              44154             0.308              2.42             0.359            0.490           0.153          0.092           0.226
F-statistic         1.25                   1.51              1.45               1.31             1.165              1.53              1.17             1.76            1.10           0.75            1.20
Observations       32569                  32241             32569              32569             32569             32569             32569            32569           32569          32569           32569
Panel B: HTHS 2003, 2007, 2010
Age 65+            -0.014                                   0.043*             1,163            -0.028             0.045+                            -0.090**       -0.036**         -0.021
                  (0.015)                                   (0.017)           (1381.)           (0.032)            (0.026)                            (0.011)        (0.016)         (0.02)
Mean pre 65             0.588                               0.692             51,419             0.308              2.07                              0.486           0.128          0.087
F-statistic              1.48                                3.9               1.12               2.74              2.31                               1.23            3.46           4.51
Observations            30172                               30172             30172              30172             30172                              30172           30172          30172
Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1% Data in panel A are from the 2007-2010 Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys. B. Panel B data are from the 2003, 2007 and 2010 HTHS. Both panels
include respondents ages 50 to 80 respondents. All regressions include a constant, an indicator for ages 65 and above. Regressions in Panels A include a 5th order polynomial, Panel B uses a fourth order
polynomial rather than a fifth order polynomial because of the sparser data, the availability of age in years only and what appeared to be better parametric fits. Standard errors are clustered at the level of
age in quarters in the MEPS and by age in years in the HTHS.
Table 2. Impact of Medicare on Health Insurance coverage and generosity
                                             Medicare Covered by                      Medicare Covered by                       Medicare Covered by
                                Insured                                   Insured                                  Insured
                                             Covered 2+ Policies                      Covered 2+ Policies                       Covered 2+ Policies
                                          Quadratic in Age                          Linear in Age                             Cubic in Age
Panel A: MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                         0.124**       0.821**        0.586**     0.112**       0.862**       0.576**       0.130**       0.787**       0.599**
                                (0.006)       (0.018)        (0.019)     (0.005)       (0.011)       (0.014)       (0.008)       (0.026)       (0.024)
Mean pre 65                  0.865             0.064         0.059        0.865         0.064         0.059         0.865         0.064         0.059
Relative Effect (%)          14.34            1282.81        993.22       12.95        1346.88        976.27        15.03        1229.69       1015.25
Observations                 32569             32569         32569        32569         32569         32569         32569         32569         32569
Panel B: CTS 2003, 2007, 2010
Age 65+                    0.106**            0.730**        0.639**     0.080**       0.767**       0.650**       0.074*        0.712**       0.642**
                            (0.022)           (0.016)        (0.178)     (0.016)       (0.015)       (0.013)       (0.037)       (0.018)       (0.024)
Mean pre 65                      0.869        0.089           0.063       0.869         0.089         0.063         0.869        0.089          0.063
Relative Effect (%)              12.20        820.22         1014.29       9.21         861.80       1031.75         8.52        820.22        1019.05
Observations                     30172        30172           30172       30172         30172         30172         30172        30172          30172
Notes: + significant at the 10% level; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data in panel A are from the 2007-2010 Medical Expenditure Panel
Surveys and in Panel B are from the 2003, 2007 and 2010 HTHS. Both panels include respondents ages 50 to 80. All regressions include a constant, an
indicator for ages 65 and above and a polynomial in age in quarters in the MEPS and in years in the HTHS that is allowed to vary on either side of age
65.The first three columns show the main specification using a quadratic in age. The next three columns use linear age trends and the last three cubic age
terms. Standard errors are clustered by age in quarters for the MEPS samples and age in years in the HTHS..
Table 3. Impact of Medicare on Total Spending and Utilization: MEPS 2007-2010


                                                   Any Physician Any outpatient Any Inpatient
                                 Total spending
                                                      Visits     Hospital Visits   Visits

Panel A: Quadratic in Age
Age 65+                           -2,168.354*            0.009            -0.012             -0.003
                                    (672.43)            (0.011)           (0.013)            (0.014)

Mean pre 65                      6375.7       0.805                        0.228             0.081
Relative Effect (%)              -34.01        1.12                        -5.26             -3.70
Observations                     32569        32569                        32569             32569
Panel B: Linear Trend in Age, MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                        -1128.43*      0.011                        0.003             0.013
                                (498.01)     (0.008)                      (0.011)            (0.01)

Mean pre 65                     6375.7         0.805                       0.228             0.081
Relative Effect (%)             -17.70          1.42                        1.47             16.12
Observations                    32569          32569                       32569             32569
Panel C: 3rd Order Polynomial, MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                      -2,629.336*       0.007                      -0.022             -0.009
                               (785.37)       (0.013)                     (0.017)            (0.017)

Mean pre 65                          6375.7             0.805              0.228             0.081
Relative Effect (%)                  -41.24              0.87              -9.65             -11.11
Observations                         32569              32569              32569             32569

Notes: + significant at the 10% level; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data are from the
2007-2010 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey and include respondents ages 50 to 80. All regressions
include a constant and an indicator for ages 65 and above and a poynomial in age that is allowed to
vary on either side of age 65. Panel A uses a quadratic in age while Panel B a linear trend and Panel C a
cubic in age in quarters. Standard errors are clustered by age in quarters.. Standard errors are clustered
by age in quarters.
Table 4. Impact of Medicare on Out-of-Pocket Spending in the MEPS: 2007-2010
                                                                                                                             Share out-of-
                                                                 75th            90th           95th         Share out-of- pocket costs that
                                  Mean           Median        Percentile      Percentile     Percentile        pocket      exceed income
Panel A: Quadratic in Age
Age 65+                         -326.420*        -46.705       -209.544*      -865.020** -1,729.822**            -0.02             -0.04**
                                 (97.48)         (42.27)        (102.34)        (165.6)     (398.33)            (0.015)            (0.009)
Mean pre 65                  1002.98     463.68                   1188          2402.87         3723.85          0.327              0.074
Relative Effect (%)           -32.55     -10.07                  -17.64          -36.00          -52.84          -6.12              -53.86
Observations                  32569       32569                  32569           32569           32569           29378              32569
Panel B: Linear Trend in Age, MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                    -255.17**    -66.62*                -242.40**       -843.45**      -1390.76**       -0.037**           -0.032**
                             (60.77)     (26.75)                 (65.24)        (108.05)       (265.89)         (0.011)            (0.006)
Mean pre 65                1002.98       463.68                   1188          2402.87         3723.85          0.327              0.074
Relative Effect (%)          25.44       -14.37                  -20.40          -35.10          -37.35          -11.31             -43.94
Observations                32569        32569                   32569           32569           32569           29378              32569
Panel C: 3rd Order Polynomial, MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                   -348.501*    -141.135*              -352.174** -1,144.957** -2,091.466**               -0.019           -0.031**
                           (125.25)     (55.78)                (124.67)     (239.86)     (470.24)                (0.02)            (0.011)
Mean pre 65                      1002.98         463.68           1188          2402.87         3723.85          0.327              0.074
Relative Effect (%)               -34.75         -30.44          -29.64          -47.65          -63.88          -5.81              -41.41
Observations                      32569          32569           32569           32569           32569           29378              32569
Notes: + significant at the 10% level; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1% Data are from the 2007-2010 Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey and include respondents ages 50 to 80. All regressions include a constant, an indicator for ages 65 and above and a polynomial in age
in quarters that is allowed to vary on either side of age 65. Panel A uses a quadratic in age while Panel B a linear trend and Panel C a cubic in
age in quarters. Standard errors for OLS regressions (mean out-of-pocket spending and share out of pocket) are clustered by age in quarters.
Standard errors for quantile regressions are based on a block bootstrap with 500 draws, where the block is age in quarters.
Table 5. Impact of Medicare on Medical Bill Problems in the Past 12 Months: HTHS 2003, 2007, 2010
                                                                                                  Delayed Major                                 90th
                                              Collections        Borrowed to         Used Savings Purchase due                              Percentile of
                      Medical Bill             Agency            Pay Medical        to Pay Medical to Medical                 Amount          Amount IHS Amount
                       Problems                Contact              Bills                Bills        Bills                    Owed            Owed       Owed
Panel A: Quadratic in Age
Age 65+                -0.060**                 -0.028**            -0.029**           -0.040**            -0.044**            -117.96         -305.88         -0.330**
                        (0.012)                  (0.009)             (0.01)             (0.009)             (0.011)           (197.58)        (355.751)         (0.07)
Mean pre 65                   0.171               0.099               0.082              0.105               0.092             936.05           1000            936.05
Relative Effect (%)
                         -35.09                  -28.28              -35.37              -38.10              -47.83            -12.60           -30.59           33
Observations             30088                   30079               30088               30065               30067             14072            14072           14072
Panel B: Linear Trend in Age
Age 65+                -0.041**                  -0.017*              -0.011           -0.038**            -0.028**            -51.52          -111.35         -0.230**
                        (0.008)                  (0.007)             (0.008)            (0.007)             (0.009)           (153.42)        (209.92)          (0.054)
Mean pre 65                   0.171               0.099               0.082              0.105               0.092             936.05           1000            936.05
Relative Effect (%)
                              -23.98             -17.17              -13.41              -36.19              -30.43            -5.50            -11.14           23
Observations                  30088              30079               30080               30065               30067             14072            14072           14072
Panel C: Cubic in Age
Age 65+                     -0.042**             -0.022+             -0.017             -0.022*             -0.032*            -333.6          65.15           -0.334**
                             (0.01)              (0.011)             (0.012)             (0.01)             (0.013)          (213.508)        (459.87)          (0.095)
Mean pre 65                   0.171              0.099               0.082               0.105               0.092             936.05           1000            936.05
Relative Effect (%)           -24.56             -22.22              -20.73              -20.95              -34.78            -35.64            6.52             33
Observations                  30088              30079               30080               30065               30067             14072            14072           14072
Notes: + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data are from the 2003, 2007 and 2010 waves of the Health Tracking Household Survey and are
restricted to respondents ages 50 to 80. Questions about amounts owed were only asked in 2007 and 2010. All regressions include a constant, an indicator for ages 65 and
above and a polynomial in age in quarters that is allowed to vary on either side of age 65. Panel A uses a quadratic in age while Panel B a linear trend and Panel C a cubic
in age in quarters. Standard errors are clustered by age in years.
Appendix(Figure(1.(Smoothness(of(Covariates:(MEPS,(1996@2010(
                       Share Employed by Age in Quarters: 1996-2010                                                          Share Retired by Age in Quarters: 1996-2010
  .8




                                                                                                        .6
  .6




                                                                                                        .4
  .4




                                                                                                        .2
  .2




                                                                                                        0
  0




         50       55                    60            65         70                         75     80           50     55                       60           65         70                       75    80
                                                  age_quarters                                                                                           age_quarters

                           MeanShae
                                  rEmpo
                                      l yed                           FitedValue                                                  MeanShae
                                                                                                                                         rRee
                                                                                                                                            rit d                        FitedValue




                        Share Married by Age in Quarters: 1996-2010                                                   Mean Personal Income by Age in Quarters: 1996-2010
  .8




                                                                                                        50000
                                                                                                        40000
  .7




                                                                                                        30000
  .6




                                                                                                        20000
  .5




                                                                                                        10000
  .4




                                                                                                        0




         50       55                    60            65         70                         75     80           50     55                       60           65         70                       75    80
                                                  age_quarters                                                                                           age_quarters

                            MeanShae
                                   rMae
                                      ird                         FitedValue                                                    MeanPesronan
                                                                                                                                           Il come                           FitedValue




                                                                          (
(
(
Appendix(Fig(2.(Change(in(Health(Insurance(Coverage(at(Age(65,(MEPS:(1996@2010(
(
                                    Insured by Age in Quarters                                                                  Medicare Insured by Age in Quarters
                                         1996-2010 Survey Years                                                                                 1996-2010 Survey Years
   1




                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          .8
   .95




                                                                                                          .6
   .9




                                                                                                          .4
   .85




                                                                                                          .2
   .8




                                                                                                          0




          50       55                    60           65         70                        75     80             50     55                      60           65         70                       75   80
                                                age_quarters                                                                                           age_quarters

                        Mean Share Insured                               Fitted Value                                       Mean Share Medicare                                   Fitted Value




               Covered by Two or More Policies by Age in Quarters
                                         1996-2010 Survey Years
   1
   .8
   .6
   .4
   .2
   0




          50       55                    60           65         70                        75     80
                                                age_quarters

                 Mean Share Two+ Policies                                          Fitted Value



                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
Appendix(Figure(3.(Impact(of(Medicare(on(Total(Spending(and(Any(Utilization,(
MEPS:1996@2010(
                                                    Mean Expenditures by Age in Quarters                                                                              Any Doctor Visits by Age in Quarters
                                                                 1996-2010 Survey Years                                                                                          1996-2010 Survey Years
       14000




                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                    .95
       12000




                                                                                                                                    .9
       10000




                                                                                                                                    .85
       8000




                                                                                                                                    .8
       6000




                                                                                                                                    .75
       4000




                                                                                                                                    .7
                                  50           55                60              65            70                  75         80                50              55              60             65            70             75      80
                                                                             age_quarters                                                                                                  age_quarters

                                                    Mean Expenditures                               Fitted Value                                              Mean Share with MDVisits                              Fitted Value




                                                  Any Outpatient Visits by Age in Quarters                                                                           Inpatient Discharges by Age in Quarters
                                                                 1996-2010 Survey Years                                                                                          1996-2010 Survey Years
       .5




                                                                                                                                    .4
       .45




                                                                                                                                    .3
       .4
       .35




                                                                                                                                    .2
       .3




                                                                                                                                    .1
       .25
       .2




                                                                                                                                    0




                                  50           55                60              65            70                  75         80                50              55              60             65            70             75      80
                                                                             age_quarters                                                                                                  age_quarters

                                        Mean Share with Outpatient Visits                                      Fitted Value                                   Mean Inpatient Discharges                            Fitted Value



                                                                          (
(
Appendix(Figure(4.(Change(in(Out@of@Pocket(Spending(at(Age(65,(MEPS:(1996@2010(
(
                                        Mean OOP Expenditures by Age in Quarters                                                                          50th and 75th Percentiles of OOP Expenditure
                                                                 1996-2010 Survey Years                                                                                           1996-2010 Survey Years
                                                                                                                                          2500
   2000




                                                                                                                                   1000 1500 2000
   1500




                                                                                                                                    Expenditures
   1000




                                                                                                                                          500
   500




                                                                                                                                                    50           55               60            65           70             75      80
                           50                 55                60              65             70                  75         80                                                          Age in quarters
                                                                            age_quarters
                                                                                                                                                          OOP Expenditure, 50th perc.                     OOP Expenditure, 75th perc.
                                              Mean OOP Expenditures                                     Fitted Value
                                                                                                                                                     1996-2010 MEPS data



                                        90th and 95th Percentiles of OOP Expenditure
                                                                  1996-2010 Survey Years
  2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
           Expenditures




                                   50            55               60              65           70                  75         80
                                                                            Age in quarters

                                        OOP Expenditure, 90th perc.                         OOP Expenditure, 95th perc.
                                   1996-2010 MEPS data


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
Appendix(Figure(5.(Impact(of(Medicare(on(Relative(Out@of@Pocket(Health(Care(Costs,(
MEPS:(1996@2010(
(
             Share Expenditures OOP by Age in Quarters                   Share with OOP Costs that Exceed Income by Age in Quarters
                           1996-2010 Survey Years                                              1996-2010 Survey Years




                                                                         .15
  .38
  .36




                                                                         .1
  .34
  .32




                                                                         .05
  .3
  .28




                                                                         0




        50      55         60        65         70         75       80         50   55         60        65         70        75        80
                                 age_quarters                                                        age_quarters

                Share Expenditures OOP               Fitted Value                   Share Extreme OOP Costs              Fitted Value


                                                                                                                                             (
Appendix Table 1. Covariate Checks for 1996-2010 MEPS
                                                                                                       Share                    Share less                       Share
                   Share          Share         Share                    Share BA       Family                       Share                  Share
                                                             Income                                  living in                   than HS                       living in
                  Employed        Retired      Married                   or Higher       Size                        Male                  Hispanic
                                                                                                       South                      degree                       the West
Panel A: MEPS 1996 -2010
               -0.005    -0.035                  0.011       2,403.53      -0.015        0.043         0.008        -0.002        0.007        -0.003          -0.006
               (0.021)   (0.024)                (0.011)     (1621.13)      (0.011)      (0.043)       (0.013)       (0.017)      (0.012)       (0.007)         (0.017)
Mean pre 65          0.653         0.112        0.684         47663         0.285        2.42          0.356        0.486         0.179         0.084           0.220
F-statistic           1.11         0.967        1.56           1.04         1.02         1.04          1.42          1.58          1.71          0.92            0.97
Observations        109806        108595       109806        109806        109806       109806        109806       109806        109806        109806          109806
Notes: + significant at the 10% level; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1% Data are from the 2007-2010 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey and include
respondents ages 50 to 80 Age is measured in quarters. Regressions include a fifth order polynomial in age that is allowed to vary on either side of age 65.
Appendix Table 2. Robustness Checks on Impact of Medicare on Total Spending and Utilization

                                                                                      Any
                                                                    Any            outpatient
                                                    Total         Physician         Hospital      Any Inpatient
                                                  spending          Visits           Visits          Visits
Panel A: Ages 55-75 in MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                               -2,404.972*                    0.008           -0.017           -0.003
                                        (764.97)                    (0.013)          (0.015)          (0.016)

Mean pre 65                                       7224.21           0.828            0.249            0.088
Relative Effect (%)                                -33.29            0.97            -6.83            -3.41
Observations                                       21398            21398            21398            21398

Panel B: Ages 50-80 but without Age 65 in MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                                  -1,942.007*    0.008                        -0.009            0.005
                                          (688.013)    (0.012)                       (0.014)          (0.014)

Mean pre 65                                       6375.70           0.805            0.228            0.081
Relative Effect (%)                                -30.46            0.99            -3.95             6.17
Observations                                       32305            32305            32305            32305

Panel C: Ages 50-80 but without Ages 64.75 to 65.25 in MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                                 -1,880.551**      0.004       -0.009                           0.009
                                          (790.266)      (0.013)      (0.016)                         (0.015)

Mean pre 65                                        6375.7           0.805            0.228            0.081
Relative Effect (%)                                -29.50            0.50            -3.95            11.11
Observations                                       31757            31757            31757            31757

Panel D: Ages 50-80 but without Ages 64.5 to 65.5 in MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+                                 -1,952.899**      0.005                      -0.015            0.015
                                          (888.523)      (0.015)                     (0.018)          (0.017)

Mean pre 65                                       6375.70           0.805            0.228            0.081
Relative Effect (%)                                -30.63            0.62            -6.58            18.52
Observations                                       31267            31267            31267            31267

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1% Data in all Panels are from the 2007-2010 Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey. All regressions include a constant, an indicator for ages 65 and above and a
quadratic in age in quarters that is allowed to vary on either side of age 65. Standard errors are clustered by
age in quarters.
Appendix Table 3. Full MEPS - spending and utilization
                                                                          Any
                                                         Any           outpatient         Any
                                          Total        Physician        Hospital        Inpatient
                                        spending         Visits          Visits           Visits
Panel A: MEPS 1996-2010
Age 65+                               -854.632**          0.012           0.008          -0.007
                                        (394.6)          (0.007)          (0.01)         (0.008)

Mean pre 65                             6091.09           0.802           0.241           0.085
Relative Effect (%)                      -14.03           1.50            3.32            -8.24
Observations                            109806           109806          109806          109806
Notes: Panel A is based on the full 1996-2010 MEPS and Panel B restricts to the sample of respondents
from 1996-2010 with non-deferrable conditions in the past year. See Appendix Table 4 for conditions
included in this group. Across both panels, we restrict to respondents ages 50 to 80. Regressions
include a quadratic in age that is allowed to vary on either side of age 65.
Appendix Table 4. Sensitivity of MEPS Results to Marriage Control
                                                       Medicare      Covered by
Panel A: Insurance                       Insured
                                                       Covered       2+ Policies
Age 65+                                 0.125**         0.820**        0.586**
                                        (0.007)         (0.017)        (0.019)
Mean pre 65                              0.865           0.064           0.059
Relative Effect (%)                      14.45          1281.25         993.22
Observations                             32569           32569          32569
                                                                                                                                  Share out-of-
Panel B: Out-of-pocket Spending                                                                                                   pocket costs
                                                                        75th            90th           95th         Share out-of- that exceed
                                          Mean          Median        Percentile      Percentile     Percentile       pocket        income
Age 65+                                -325.73**        -54.22+       -223.89**       -854.96**     -1,713.08**         -0.02        -0.039**
                                        (97.16)         (32.17)        (72.56)         (153.92)       (314.24)         (0.015)        (0.009)
Mean pre 65                             1002.98          463.68          1188          2402.87         3723.85         0.327           0.074
Relative Effect (%)                      -32.48          -11.69         -18.85          -35.58          -46.00          6.12           52.70
Observations                             32305           32305          32305           32305           32305          29127           32569
Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data in all Panels are from the 2007-2010 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. All
regressions include a constant, an indicator for married, an indicator for ages 65 and above and a quadratic in age in quarters that is allowed to
vary on either side of age 65. Standard errors are clustered by age in quarters.
Appendix Table 5. Robustness Checks of Impact of Medicare on Out-of-Pocket Spending

                                                                                             Share out-of-
                                                                                             pocket costs
                                                   75th       90th       95th     Share out- that exceed
                       Mean     Median           Percentile Percentile Percentile of-pocket    income
Panel A: Ages 55-75 in MEPS 2007-2010
Age 65+              -349.302* -110.38*          -328.70** -998.37** -1790.95**           -0.017       -0.030**
                      (117.01)  (53.61)           (126.79) (218.86)    (431.2)            (0.018)       (0.01)

Mean pre 65           1114.79    540.033 1318.348 2626.778                    4084        0.319         0.076
Relative Effect (%)    -31.33     -20.44    -24.93     -38.01                -43.85       -5.33         -39.47
Observations           21398      21398      21398     21398                 21398        19568         21398
Panel B: Ages 50-80 but without Age 65 in MEPS 2007-2010

Age 65+                -340.319*      -41.266    -186.647+ -882.78** -1,789.61** -0.031**              -0.041**
                        (102.82)      (44.31)     (102.55) (180.21) (426.41)      (0.014)               (0.009)

Mean pre 65          1002.98      463.68       1188     2402.87   3723.85                 0.327         0.074
Relative Effect (%)   -33.93       -8.90      -15.71     -36.74    -48.06                  9.48         -55.41
Observations          32305       32305       32305      32305     32305                  29127         32305
Panel C: Ages 50-80 but without Ages 64.75 to 65.25 in MEPS 2007-2010

Age 65+                -404.832*      -60.765    -215.334+ -909.33** -2,116.46** -0.042*               -0.044**
                        (110.64)      (47.86)     (113.78) (206.57) (452.43)     (0.015)                (0.011)

Mean pre 65          1002.98       463        1182.53   2394.97   3707.83                 0.327         0.074
Relative Effect (%)   -40.36      -13.12       -18.21    -37.97     -57.08                -12.84        -59.46
Observations          31757       31757        31757     31757      31757                 28622         31757
Panel D: Ages 50-80 but without Ages 64.5 to 65.5 in MEPS 2007-2010

Age 65+                -419.968*      -43.841     -186.20 -893.776** -1,899.16** -0.047*               -0.042**
                        (125.92)      (50.87)     (124.67) (236.47) (546.28)     (0.015)                (0.01)

Mean pre 65             1002.98        460        1175.77      2382.59      3680.05       0.327         0.074
Relative Effect (%)      -41.87       -9.53        -15.84       -37.51       -51.61       14.37         -56.76
Observations             31267        31267        31267        31267        31267        28173         31267

Notes: * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data in all Panels are from the 2007-2010 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey. All regressions include a constant, an indicator for ages 65 and above and a quadratic in age in
quarters that is allowed to vary on either side of age 65. Standard errors are clustered by age in quarters.
Appendix Table 6. Impact of Medicare on Out-of-Pocket Spending in the 1996-2010 MEPS
                                                                                                                                      Share out-of-
                                                                                                                                      pocket costs
                                                                          75th            90th             95th         Share out-of- that exceed
                                         Mean           Median          Percentile      Percentile       Percentile       pocket        income
Panel A: MEPS 1996-2010
Age 65+                               -208.584*         -55.781        -114.679+       -473.294** -722.422**              -0.016+         -0.038**
                                       (75.61)          (145.51)         (65.78)        (181.84)   (221.15)               (0.009)          (0.01)
Mean pre 65                             1127.65         527.86           1318.28         2675.94          4051.9           0.361            0.072
Relative Effect (%)                      -18.50         -10.57            -8.70           -17.69          -17.83           -4.43            52.78
Observations                            109806          109806           109806          109806           109806          100044           109806
Notes: Panel A is based on the full 1996-2010 MEPS and Panel B restricts to the sample of respondents from 1996-2010 with non-deferrable conditions
in the past year. See Appendix Table 4 for conditions included in this group. Across both panels, we restrict to respondents ages 50 to 80. Regressions
include a quadratic in age that is allowed to vary on either side of age 65.
Appendix Table 7. Impact of Medicare on Medical Bill Problems in the Past 12 Months with Mariage, Gender and Education Controls
                                             Medicare        Covered by
Panel A: Insurance            Insured
                                             Covered         2+ Policies
Age 65+                      0.100**          0.735**          0.640**
                             (0.021)          (0.017)          (0.183)
Mean pre 65                   0.869             0.089           0.063
Relative Effect (%)           11.51            825.84          1015.87
Observations                  30172            30172            30172
                                                                                 Delayed
Panel B: Financial                                                     Used        Major                                            90th
Strain                                      Collections Borrowed to Savings to Purchase due                                     Percentile of
                          Medical Bill       Agency     Pay Medical Pay Medical to Medical                        Amount          Amount IHS Amount
                           Problems          Contact        Bills      Bills       Bills                           Owed            Owed         Owed
Age 65+                    -0.055**          -0.025*     -0.027**    -0.039**    -0.042**                          -77.72          108.37     -0.289**
                            (0.011)          (0.009)       (0.01)     (0.009)     (0.011)                         (188.59)        (350.98)     (0.071)
Mean pre 65                   0.171            0.099            0.082            0.105            0.092           936.05            1000            936.05
Relative Effect (%)           -32.16           -25.25           -32.93           -37.14           -45.65           -8.30            10.80             29
Observations                  30088            30079            30088            30065            30067           14072             14072           14072
Notes: + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data are from the 2003, 2007 and 2010 waves of the Health Tracking Household Survey
and are restricted to respondents ages 50 to 80. Questions about amounts owed were only asked in 2007 and 2010. All regressions include a constant, separate
indicators for married, male and less than high school education, an indicator for ages 65 and above and a polynomial in age in quarters that is allowed to vary
on either side of age 65.
Appendix Table 8. Impact of Medicare on Medical Bill Problems in the Past 12 Months, Ages 55-75 and Doughnut
                                                                                  Delayed
                                                                        Used        Major                                              90th
                                             Collections Borrowed to Savings to Purchase due                                       Percentile of
                     Medical Bill             Agency     Pay Medical Pay Medical to Medical                          Amount          Amount IHS Amount
                       Problems               Contact       Bills       Bills       Bills                             Owed            Owed       Owed
Panel A: Ages 55-75 in the HTHS
Age 65+                 -0.060**               -0.033**         -0.031**          -0.041**         -0.049**          -294.05          -61.704          -0.393**
                         (0.011)                (0.012)          (0.011)           (0.006)          (0.011)         (178.921)         (380.03)          (0.086)
Mean pre 65              0.165         0.09      0.075                             0.103            0.088            805.65             700             805.65
Relative Effect (%)     -36.36       -36.67     -41.33                             -39.81           -55.68           -36.50            -8.81              -39
Observations             20367       20361      20361                              20348            20352             9792             14072             9792
Panel B: Ages 50-80 but without Age 65 in HTHS
Age 65+                -0.067**     -0.033**   -0.036**                           -0.044**         -0.049**           -66.8           -305.88          -0.405**
                        (0.015)       (0.01)    (0.011)                            (0.011)          (0.012)         (303.852)         (317.37)          (0.083)
Mean pre 65              0.171        0.099       0.082                            0.104            0.092            936.05             1000            936.05
Relative Effect (%)     -39.18        -33.33      -43.90                           -42.31           -53.26            -7.14            -30.59            -41
Observations             29155        29146       29147                            29133            29134            13602             14072            13602
Panel C: Ages 50-80 but without Ages 64-66 in HTHS
Age 65+                -0.070**      -0.032*     -0.029*                          -0.038*           -0.038*          387.26           -476.92          -0.424**
                        (0.025)      (0.015)     (0.012)                          (0.017)           (0.018)          (265.)           (723.48)          (0.148)
Mean pre 65                    0.172              0.1             0.083            0.105            0.092            947.89             1000            947.89
Relative Effect (%)            -40.94           -32.00            -34.94           -36.19           -41.30            40.83            -47.69            -42
Observations                   27238            27229             27230            27218            27217            12647             14072            12647
Notes: + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data are from the 2003, 2007 and 2010 waves of the Health Tracking Household Survey.
Panel A restricts to respondents ages 55 to 75. Panel B and C includes respondents ages 50 to 80 with the exception of those age 65 (Panel B) or those ages 64
to 66 (Panel C). All regressions include a constant, an indicator for ages 65 and above and a quadratic in age in quarters that is allowed to vary on either side of
age 65. Standard errors are clustered by age in years.
