                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EXPORTERS AND SHOCKS:
                DISSECTING THE INTERNATIONAL ELASTICITY PUZZLE

                                       Doireann Fitzgerald
                                         Stefanie Haller

                                       Working Paper 19968
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19968


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2014, Revised May 2017




This work makes use of data from the Central Statistics Office, Ireland, which is CSO copyright.
The possibility for controlled access to confidential micro data sets on the premises of the CSO is
provided for in the Statistics Act 1993. The use of CSO data in this work does not imply the
endorsement of the CSO in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the data. This work uses
research datasets which may not exactly reproduce statistical aggregates published by the CSO.
We thank the staff of the CSO for making this project possible. Expert research assistance was
provided by Jackie Chan and Adrian Corcoran. Doireann Fitzgerald is grateful for financial
support from the NSF under grant number 0647850. Stefanie Haller is grateful for financial
support from the IRC under the grant titled "Exporters and Shocks." We are grateful for
comments and suggestions from Costas Arkolakis, Ina Jäkel, Richard Rogerson, Kim Ruhl and
Jim Tybout. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Doireann Fitzgerald and Stefanie Haller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Exporters and Shocks: Dissecting the International Elasticity Puzzle
Doireann Fitzgerald and Stefanie Haller
NBER Working Paper No. 19968
March 2014, Revised May 2017
JEL No. F14,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

We use micro data for Ireland to estimate how export participation and the export revenue of
incumbent exporters respond to tariffs and real exchange rates. Both participation and revenue,
but especially revenue, are more responsive to tariffs than to real exchange rates. Our estimates
translate into an elasticity of aggregate exports with respect to tariffs of between -3.8 and -5.4,
and with respect to real exchange rates of between 0.45 and 0.6, consistent with estimates in the
literature based on aggregate data. We argue that forward-looking investment in customer base
combined with the fact that tariffs are much more predictable than real exchange rates can explain
why export revenue responds so much more to tariffs.


Doireann Fitzgerald
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Ave
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
doireann.fitzgerald@gmail.com

Stefanie Haller
University College Dublin
School of Economics
Belfield
Dublin 4
Ireland
stefanie.haller@ucd.ie




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19968
                            Exporters and Shocks∗
                        Doireann Fitzgerald†                   Stefanie Haller‡

                                               May 2017



                                                Abstract
            We use micro data for Ireland to estimate how export participation and the ex-
        port revenue of incumbent exporters respond to tariffs and real exchange rates. Both
        participation and revenue, but especially revenue, are more responsive to tariffs than
        to real exchange rates. Our estimates translate into an elasticity of aggregate exports
        with respect to tariffs of between -3.8 and -5.4, and with respect to real exchange rates
        of between 0.45 and 0.6, consistent with estimates in the literature based on aggregate
        data. We argue that forward-looking investment in customer base combined with the
        fact that tariffs are much more predictable than real exchange rates can explain why
        export revenue responds so much more to tariffs.



1       Introduction
Many important economic policy questions require an explicit comparison of the response of
exports to trade policy and the response of exports to real exchange rates. The debate on
whether “currency manipulation” is equivalent to trade protection through tariffs or trade
    ∗
      The views expressed here are those of the authors and not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
neapolis or the Federal Reserve System. This work makes use of data from the Central Statistics Office,
Ireland, which is CSO copyright. The possibility for controlled access to confidential micro data sets on the
premises of the CSO is provided for in the Statistics Act 1993. The use of CSO data in this work does
not imply the endorsement of the CSO in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the data. This work
uses research datasets which may not exactly reproduce statistical aggregates published by the CSO. We
thank the staff of the CSO for making this project possible. Expert research assistance was provided by
Jackie Chan, Adrian Corcoran and Matt Shapiro. Doireann Fitzgerald is grateful for financial support from
the NSF under grant number 0647850. Stefanie Haller is grateful for financial support from the IRC under
the grant titled “Exporters and Shocks.” This paper has benefited from extensive discussions with Yaniv
Yedid-Levi. We are also grateful for comments and suggestions from Costas Arkolakis, Ina Jäkel, Richard
Rogerson, Kim Ruhl and Jim Tybout. An online appendix to the paper is available at www.doireann.com.
    †
      Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis MN 55401, doire-
ann.fitzgerald@gmail.com
    ‡
      School of Economics, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, stefanie.haller@ucd.ie



                                                     1
promotion through export subsidies is one example.1 The debate on whether exchange rate
movements might offset the impact of border adjustment of corporate taxation on U.S. trade
is another.2
      Motivated by these policy questions, we use firm and customs micro data to document
how export entry, exit and the export revenue of incumbent exporters respond to tariffs
and real exchange rates. We find that export entry and especially export revenue are much
more responsive to tariffs than to real exchange rates. This runs contrary to the prediction
of workhorse models of international trade and international business cycles, which assume
that changes in tariffs and changes in real exchange rates have similar effects on incentives
to engage in international trade. We argue that the key feature missing from these models
is forward-looking investment in customer base. Since tariffs are more predictable than real
exchange rates, firms optimally increase investment in customer base more in response to
favorable changes in tariffs than in response to similar favorable movements in real exchange
rates, thus making export revenue more responsive to tariffs. Our findings suggest that
policy makers should be very cautious about assuming an equivalence between trade and
exchange rate policy.
      To estimate how export entry, export exit and export revenue conditional on participation
respond to tariffs and real exchange rates, we make use of fourteen years (1996-2009) of
panel data on firms, products and exports for Ireland. We estimate entry, exit and revenue
responses conditional on a rich set of fixed effects which control for marginal cost. We
identify responses to both tariffs and real exchange rates using only time-series variation
in these variables over our sample period. This allows us to eliminate the possibility that
different responses are due to focusing on long-run responses in the case of tariffs, and short-
run responses in the case of real exchange rates.
      We find that although entry into export markets is four times more responsive to tariffs
than it is to real exchange rates, the absolute level of entry responses to both variables is
very modest. We do not find statistically significant responses of exit to either variable. On
the other hand, the export revenue of incumbent exporters is six times more elastic with
respect to tariffs than it is to real exchange rates. Taking account of the dynamics of entry,
exit and export revenue, our estimates translate into an elasticity of aggregate exports with
respect to tariffs of between -3.8 and -5.4, and with respect to real exchange rates of between
0.45 and 0.6. These aggregate elasticities are in line with estimates based on aggregate data
summarized in Ruhl (2008). The first-order difference between these responses is due to the
  1
      See Staiger and Sykes (2010) and Gagnon (2012) for contrasting positions on this issue.
  2
      See Freund and Gagnon (2017) for a discussion.


                                                      2
behavior of export revenue, not entry and exit.
       To shed light on why the export revenue of incumbents responds so differently to tariffs
and real exchange rates, we decompose revenue responses into the responses of quantities and
the responses of markups (we hold marginal cost fixed throughout). We use the estimated
responses to show that conditional on markups, quantities respond a lot to tariffs, but very
little to real exchange rates. This implies that differential stickiness of prices in response to
tariff and real exchange rate changes cannot explain why revenue responses are so different.
       Instead, we hypothesize that forward-looking nature of investment in customer base is
likely to be key. This hypothesis builds on a growing literature in macroeconomics and
international trade on the importance of customer base,3 as well as evidence in our data that
export revenue is the outcome of forward-looking decisions. If customer base is something
firms invest in, then decisions today affect not just revenue and profits today, but also revenue
and profits in the future. As a result, firms are more likely to adjust investment in customer
base (and hence export revenue) in response to variables like tariffs, which are predictable,
than variables like real exchange rates, which are unpredictable.4
       We investigate this hypothesis by simulating the responses of firms in a model with
customer base to processes designed to resemble the tariff and real exchange rate processes
faced by firms in our data. The main source of tariff variation in our data is tariff reductions
agreed under the Uruguay Round in 1994, and phased in over the period 1995-2005. We
mimic this in the model with a pre-announced path of tariff reductions. To mimic the real
exchange rate, we use an AR(1) with parameters estimated using data on real exchange
rates. We find that although the real exchange rate shock is very persistent, the elasticity
of model export revenue with respect to the model tariff shock is nearly four times bigger
than its elasticity with respect to the model real exchange rate shock.
       While we are the first to provide an integrated empirical treatment of exporter responses
to both tariffs and real exchange rates, micro-level responses to these two variables have been
previously explored by two separate lines of research. Campa (2004) estimates the responses
of export participation and the export revenue of continuing exporters to real exchange rates.
Our findings are similar to his. They are also similar to those of Berman, Martin and Mayer
(2012) who use French data to estimate participation, quantity, and price elasticities to
exchange rates. In the trade literature, empirical work estimating micro responses to tariffs
   3
     See e.g. Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008, 2016), Arkolakis (2010), Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz
(2011), Drozd and Nosal (2012), Gourio and Rudanko (2014) and Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016).
   4
     The intuition for this explanation is similar to that of Ruhl (2008), who focuses on sunk costs rather
than customer base as the source of forward-looking behavior.



                                                    3
has focused on export participation. Lileeva and Trefler (2010) find a statistically significant
impact of CAFTA tariff reductions on participation of Canadian firms in the US. Bustos
(2011) estimates the response of export participation of Argentine firms to reductions in
tariffs associated with Mercosur, and finds substantially bigger responses than we do.5 We
are not aware of any prior work that uses micro data to estimate export revenue responses
to tariffs.
       As already noted, our work is also very closely related to Ruhl (2008), who coins the
term the “International Elasticity Puzzle” to describe the fact that workhorse models of
international trade and business cycles cannot simultaneously match responses of aggregate
exports to trade liberalizations and business cycle comovements of real exchange rates and
relative quantities. A more recent contribution to this literature is Arkolakis, Eaton and
Kortum (2012). They propose a model where customers shift relative demand slowly in
response to relative price changes. Their model can explain why short-run and long-run
aggregate responses to the same variable differ, but it cannot explain why over the same
time horizon, exports respond differently to real exchange rates and tariffs. Feenstra, Luck,
Obstfeld and Russ (2014) also try to rationalize different elaticities. They estimate that
for some sectors, the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods is different
from the elasticity of substitution between goods from pairs of foreign countries. However
this cannot explain why, as we document, the elasticity of relative exports across pairs
of destination markets at the firm level responds differently to movements in relative prices
depending on the source of price variation. In a related paper, Imbs and Mejean (2015) argue
that different elasticities are due to estimation at different levels of aggregation. However
we find evidence of different elasticities with respect to tariffs and real exchange rates at the
(same) most disaggregated level possible.
       In the next section of the paper, we frame our analysis using a model of the exporter’s
problem. In the third section, we describe our data. In the fourth section, we document styl-
ized facts about export dynamics in our data. In the fifth section we describe our empirical
strategy for estimating micro responses to tariffs and real exchange rates. In the sixth section
we describe our results, and combine them with the stylized facts about export dynamics to
calculate elasticities of aggregate exports with respect to tariffs and real exchange rates. In
the seventh section, we report our simulation results. The final section concludes.
   5
    In both cases, it is cross-firm variation in tariffs that identifies participation responses. We only use
variation over time within a given firm-product-market.




                                                     4
2         Model
To frame our analysis, we describe a state-of-the art model of the exporter problem. We
build on a substantial empirical literature, both reduced form and structural, that shows
the importance of dynamic considerations for exporter behavior. The first generation of this
literature emphasizes sunk costs as the source of dynamic decision making. More recent
work downplays the quantitative importance of sunk costs, and highlights instead customer
base accumulation and learning.6
        The particular model we describe is based on Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016),
who show that it can match a rich set of facts about exporter dynamics. The key elements of
the model are as follows. Firms face the same cost of production irrespective of the market
they are serving. They face sunk costs of export entry at the market level. In addition, they
are uncertain about their idiosyncratic demand in each market, and must participate in a
market in order to learn whether their demand is high or low. Once in a market, firms can
attract customers in two ways: by charging low prices, and by investing in market-specific
customer base through expenditures on marketing and advertising. These investments may
be subject to adjustment costs. The combination of sunk costs of entry, learning about
demand, and accumulation of customer base make the firm’s problem forward-looking.
        In what follows, i indexes firms, j indexes products, and k indexes markets. Firm i
producing good j faces marginal cost of production Wt Ctij expressed in some numeraire.
This is the same for all markets the firm serves. Wt is an aggregate variable (the “wage”)
which shifts all home firms’ marginal cost. Ctij follows an exogenous process known to the
firm. Ctij may be autocorrelated, and marginal cost draws for different products produced by
the same firm may be correlated with each other. The marginal cost of actually delivering a
unit of the good to market k is given by djk Wt Ctij , where djk ≥ 1 is a product-market-specific
iceberg trade cost common to all firms. Firms observe Wt and Ctij at the time they take
decisions, and they also know djk . We treat the set of firms in existence and the products
each firm can produce as exogenous, and focus purely on decisions related to exporting.
        In order to sell product j in market k, firm i must first pay a sunk cost of entry, Wt Stijk ,
expressed in the same units as marginal cost. Stijk is drawn i.i.d. from a fixed distribution,
the same for all firms. Modeling sunk cost in this way is consistent with the fact that entry
is rare, synchronization of entry across firms within a market or across markets within a firm
is limited, and there is considerable overlap in the size distribution of exporters and non-
    6
    See Roberts and Tybout (1997), Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007), Eaton et al (2014), Ruhl and Willis
(2017), and Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016).


                                                    5
exporters. There is also a per-period fixed cost of participating in a market, Wt Ftijk , expressed
in the same units as marginal cost. Ftijk is also drawn i.i.d. from a fixed distribution, the
same for all firms. It is this cost which generates export exit in the model.
       A firm’s demand in market k has four components. It depends on aggregate demand
in market k, and on the consumer price of its good relative to the aggregate price level
in market k. In addition, it depends on the fraction of customers it reaches, which is a
function of its “customer base.”7 Finally, there is an idiosyncratic component to demand.
To learn about this component of demand, firms must actually sell in the market. Fitzgerald,
Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016) show that when own-price elasticity of demand is constant,
these assumptions are consistent with stylized facts about the post-entry behavior of export
quantities and prices. Based on their formulation we write demand for firm i’s product j in
market k as follows:
                                                −θ
                                      1 + Tt Ptijk
                                            jk
                                                                  
                        Qijk
                         t
                                  k
                               = Qt          k
                                                         ijk
                                                       Φ Dt     exp εijk
                                                                     t   .                                    (1)
                                          Pt


Here, Qkt is aggregate real demand in market k, Ptk is the aggregate price level in market k,
and Ptijk is the price the firm charges to customers from market k, net of tariffs. Both prices
are expressed in the same units as marginal cost. Ttjk is the ad valorem tariff on product j
in market k.8 Dtijk is a state variable of the firm’s problem which we refer to as customer
base, and Φ Dtijk is the fraction of customers in market k reached by the firm. εijk     t is
idiosyncratic demand.
       We assume that Φ (0) = 0, Φ0 (·) > 0, and Φ00 (·) < 0, which guarantees that the optimal
customer base conditional on export participation is finite and positive. Customer base
accumulates as follows:9                                   
                                      Dtijk = d Dt−1
                                                 ijk
                                                     , Xtijk + Aijk
                                                                t ,                                           (2)

where Xtijk ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator for participation in market k by firm i selling product
j at date t, and Aijk
                  t   is the increment to customer base due to marketing and advertising
activities
          undertaken
                      by the firm. We assume d (·, ·) is increasing in its first argument, but
     ijk    ijk      ijk
d Dt−1 , Xt       ≤ Dt−1 . The rate of depreciation may depend on whether or not the firm
actually sells in the market in the current period. Expressed in the same units as marginal
   7
    This follows Arkolakis (2010) and Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011).
   8
    The impact of specific tariffs on the incentives to export is quite different from that of ad valorem tariffs.
We restrict attention to ad valorem tariffs in the empirical analysis.
  9
    This is a dynamic extension of Arkolakis (2010).


                                                        6
                                                                              
cost, expenditure on investment in customer base is given by Wt c Aijk
                                                                   t   , Dt
                                                                           ijk
                                                                                 , with c (·, ·)
increasing in its first argument. This formulation allows for the possibility of irreversibility
and other costs of adjustment.
   When making choices about participation, investment, n      and prices    o or quantities, firms
observe the current values of individual state variables Ctij , Ftijk , Stijk and aggregate state
         n                    o
                 k    k    jk
variables Wt , Qt , Pt , Tt , as well as knowing the processes from which these are drawn.
They do not observe current idiosyncratic demand εijk
                                                  t   at the time choices are made. They
know the process for εijk                                            ijk
                      t , and may have some additional information, It , that they use to

form conditional expectations of εijk
                                  t . This information may evolve over time and depend on

past realizations of idiosyncratic demand.10
   Firms set prices rather than quantities in the face of uncertainty about the idiosyncratic
component of current demand.11 Because demand is CES and there are no strategic interac-
                                                                                       θ
tions with other firms, the optimal price is equal to the statically optimal markup ( θ−1 ) over
the marginal cost of delivery, independent of the firm’s participation history, information
set, or customer base.                             n                    o
                         θ−1
   Let θ̃ = (θ − 1)              θ
                               /θ and let   Zjk
                                             t
                                                          k     k
                                                  = Wt , Qt , Pt , Ttjk
                                                                          be the vector of aggregate state
variables, which follows a joint process known to all firms. Note that Ptk can be interpreted as
the real exchange rate between the home market and market k, and Wt can be interpreted as
real wages in the home market. The intertemporal optimization problem for firm i, product
j and market k (assuming discounting at rate β) is as follows:
                                                                                   
                                    ijk    ijk
                                 V Xt−1 , Dt−1 , Iijk
                                                  t   , Ft
                                                          ijk
                                                              , St
                                                                  ijk
                                                                      , Ct
                                                                          ij
                                                                             , Z jk
                                                                                 t    =

                                                −θ                                                  
                                     (1+Ttjk )djk
                                                                                              
                         ijk                               ij 1−θ       ijk             ijk    ijk
                                 k
                                                             
                       X     θ̃Q                      W  C        Φ   D          exp  ε      |I
                                                                                                      
                     
                     
                        t       t      Ptk             t t            t     E          t      t
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                     
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                     
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                     
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                                                                                       
          max                    −Xtijk Wt Ftijk + 1 − Xt−1
                                                        ijk
                                                            Stijk − Wt c Aijk  ijk                         (3)
                                                                          t , Dt
  Xtijk   ∈ {0, 1}
                     
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                     
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                      
          Aijk
                     
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
           t                                                                                      
                                 +βE V Xtijk , Dtijk , Iijk     ijk     ijk     ij    jk      ijk
                                                                                                      
                     
                                                        t+1 , Ft+1  , St+1  , Ct+1 , Zt+1   |It
                                                                                                       

subject to (a) the accumulation of customer base Dtijk and (b) the evolution of information
Iijk
 t   about idiosyncratic demand. The solution to this problem yields two policy functions
  10
     Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016) examine the performance of specific assumptions about how
this information evolves in matching the behavior of exports.
  11
     This assumption allows the model to match quantity and price as well as revenue dynamics.



                                                           7
for the firm:                                                                                        
                                Xtijk = X Xt−1 ijk      ijk
                                                    , Dt−1   , Iijk
                                                                 t   , F t
                                                                          ijk
                                                                              , S t
                                                                                   ijk
                                                                                       , C t
                                                                                            ij
                                                                                               , Z jk
                                                                                                   t           (4)
                                                                                                    
                                Aijk
                                  t   = A   X ijk
                                              t−1  , D ijk
                                                       t−1 t, I ijk
                                                                    ,  Ft
                                                                         ijk
                                                                             ,  St
                                                                                  ijk
                                                                                      ,  Ct
                                                                                           ij
                                                                                              ,  Zjk
                                                                                                  t            (5)

Given these policy functions, export revenue is:
                                                   −θ
                                1+   Ttjk       djk                 1−θ                              
 Rtijk   =   Xtijk θ̃Qkt                                  Wt Ctij             ijk    ijk
                                                                           Φ d Dt−1 , Xt        ijk
                                                                                             + At     exp εijk
                                                                                                           t   (6)
                                     Ptk

   There are two main points to take away from the model. First, gross ad valorem tariffs
1 + Ttjk and the real exchange rate Ptk enter the firm’s current payoff as a ratio, just as in
workhorse models of international trade and international business cycles. In the workhorse
models, firms’ decisions are static, so optimal responses to identical changes in tariffs and
the (inverse of the) real exchange rate are identical. But here, participation and revenue
are the outcome of forward-looking decisions. This means that firms’ responses to current
realizations of tariffs and real exchange rates depend on their beliefs about future realizations.
And the impact of current realizations on future beliefs depends on the stochastic processes
followed by these variables. This implies that firms in this model may respond differently
to changes in tariffs and real exchange rates if they follow processes which differ in their
forecastability, persistence, or volatility. Moreover, it is not just participation which responds
differently. Investment in customer base also responds differently, and this carries over to
export revenue.
   Second, though direct evidence on the sunk costs, learning, and investment in consumer
base that are the source of forward-looking decision-making is hard to come by, the forward-
looking nature of participation and investment decisions is reflected in history dependence
                                       ijk
of participation and revenue. Through Dt−1 and Iijk
                                                t−1 , both participation and revenue may
depend on the entire history of past participation. Identifying history dependence in the data
is tricky, because persistent unobserved heterogeneity (in marginal cost Ctij and idiosyncratic
demand εijk
        t ), and selection on this unobserved heterogeneity, may generate patterns that

look like history dependence. But if we can successfully control for the unobserved hetero-
geneity, history dependence of both participation and revenue is suggestive evidence of the
forward-looking nature of firms’ decisions.




                                                                  8
3        Data
We now turn to the data, and describe in turn the three micro data sets we use, as well as
the tariff and macro data we obtain from publicly available data sets. We make use of three
sources of confidential micro data made available to us by the Central Statistics Office (CSO)
in Ireland: the Census of Industrial Production (CIP), customs records, and the Prodcom
survey.


3.1       Micro data
3.1.1      Census of Industrial Production

The CIP is an annual census of firms and establishments in manufacturing, mining and
utilities. Firms with 3 or more persons engaged are required to file returns.12 We make
use of data for the years 1996 through 2009, and for NACE Revision 1.1 sectors 10-40
(manufacturing, mining and utilities). Of the variables collected in the CIP, those relevant
for our purposes are total revenue, employment, NACE sector, and country of ownership.
We use these data to construct the set of potential export participants for our analysis of
export entry, and also to condition on firm characteristics in our analysis of export entry,
exit, and revenue.
       In constructing the sample for our analysis, we drop firms with a zero value for total
revenue, or zero employees in more than half of their years in the sample. We perform some
recoding of firm identifiers to maintain the panel dimension of the data, e.g. in cases where
ownership changes. Further details on the data and how we have cleaned them are provided
in the Appendix.

3.1.2      Customs records

Our second source of data is customs records of Irish merchandise exports for the years
1996 through 2009. These records consist of the value (in Euros) and volume (in tonnes) of
exports at the level of the VAT number, the Combined Nomenclature (CN) 8-digit product,
and the export market (country). For most of our analysis we use only the value data. We
make use of the volume data (for which coverage is more limited) only in robustness checks.
These data are aggregated by the CSO to an annual frequency, and then matched by them
to CIP firms using a correspondence between VAT numbers and CIP firm identifiers, along
  12
    Multi-plant firms also fill in returns at the level of individual plants, but we work with the firm-level
data since this is the level at which the match with the customs data can be performed.


                                                     9
with other confidential information. In the Appendix, we provide summary statistics on
this match. We classify firms as exporters if they are matched with positive exports from
the customs data. Match quality appears to be poor in 1996, so in our baseline empirical
analysis we assume that export participation is censored in 1996.
       A key feature of customs in the EU is that data for intra-European and extra-European
trade are collected separately, using two different systems, called Intrastat and Extrastat. For
Ireland, the reporting threshold for intra-European exports (635,000 Euro per year in total
shipments within the EU) is much higher than the reporting threshold for extra-European
exports (254 Euro per transaction).13 However the intra-European threshold applies to total
intra-European exports, not at the individual country level, and it is common for firms to
report exports to individual EU countries which are well below the 635,000 Euro threshold.
In our baseline analysis we pool both Intrastat and Extrastat exports, ignoring the fact that
export participation may be censored for Intrastat markets. We check that our results are
robust to restricting the sample in various ways to take account of potential censoring in
Intrastat markets.
       In our analysis of responses to tariffs and real exchange rates, we restrict attention to
30 of Ireland’s largest export markets, with the exact choice of markets governed by tariff
availability. These markets account for 94% of total exports in the sample period. Table 1
reports the breakdown by market. The main export markets for our firms are the US, the
UK and the large economies of the Euro Zone.

                               Table 1: Percentage of exports by destination
                    1996    1997    1998    1999   2000    2001    2002    2003   2004    2005    2006   2007    2008    2009
        Australia      1       1       1       1     1       1       1      1       1       1      1       1      1        1
          Canada       0       0       0       0     0       1       0      1       0       0      0       0      0        1
            China      0       0       0       0     0       0       1      1       1       1      1       2      2        2
         Denmark       1       1       1       1     1       1       1      1       1       1      1       1      1        0
            Japan      2       3       3       3     4       4       3      3       3       3      3       2      2        2
          Norway       1       1       1       1     1       1       1      1       1       1      1       1      0        0
          Sweden       2       2       2       2     2       2       1      1       1       1      1       1      1        1
     Switzerland       2       2       2       2     3       3       4      4       4       5      4       4      4        4
              UK      24      24      21      18    18      17      16      15     16      16      17     17      17      15
               US     11      12      16      16    20      19      21      23     21      16      16     17      18      22
           Euro 9     43      41      43      47    42      41      43      42     44      47      45     43      43      44
            Other      5       4       3       4     4       5       4      4       4       3      4       4      5        4
  Total in-sample     93      92      93      95    93      94      95      95     94      94      93     93      94      95
Notes: We use only customs export records which match to our cleaned dataset of CIP firms. The Euro 9 includes Austria,
Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal and Spain. Other includes Brazil, Hong Kong, India, Malaysia,
Mexico, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. Source: CSO and authors’
calculations.
  13
    Intra-European exports below the threshold are recovered based on VAT returns. The destination within
the EU is not recorded for these returns. Since we do not know the exact destination, we do not make use
of these exports other than in our summary statistics on exporters vs non-exporters.


                                                            10
   A final important feature of the customs data is that the 8-digit CN classification system
changes every year. We concord the product-level export data over time at the most disag-
gregated level possible following the approach of Pierce and Schott (2012) as implemented
by van Beveren, Bernard and Vandenbussche (2012). We make use of these concorded data
in our analysis of export revenue. For our analysis of export participation we further concord
the trade data with production data, as described below.

3.1.3   Prodcom survey

Our third source of data is the Prodcom survey for the years 1996 to 2009. This is an annual
survey of the value (in Euros) and volume (in tonnes) of all products manufactured by the
firm and sold in the relevant year. We use only the value data. The survey basis is all firms in
the CIP, excluding some mining sectors. Not all CIP firms respond to the survey (the share
of firms participating is 64% on average over the sample), but it covers 94% of total CIP
revenue. Products are classified at the 8-digit level according to the Prodcom classification.
These data allow us to construct the set of products a firm might potentially export.
   As with the CN 8-digit classification, the 8-digit Prodcom classification system changes
from year to year. We first concord the Prodcom data over time at the most disaggregated
level possible. We then concord the time-concorded Prodcom data to the time-concorded
CN data. In doing so, we follow van Beveren, Bernard and Vandenbussche (2012). There are
fewer Prodcom 8-digit products than there are CN 8-digit products, so this involves some
aggregation at the CN8 level.
   To obtain the set of (concorded) products a firm might potentially export in any given
year, we collapse across years to find the set of products that it produces at least once
during its lifetime in the CIP. If the firm does not export one of these products to a particular
destination market in a particular year, we code this as non-participation at the firm-product-
market-year level.


3.2     Tariff data
Our analysis requires data on the tariffs faced by Irish firms in the 30 destination markets
we focus on. As Ireland is a member of the EU, Irish exporters do not face tariffs in
EU markets. In countries for which there is no preferential trade agreement with the EU,
Irish exporters face the Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariff. We obtain MFN tariff data
from the WTO for the following countries: Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Hong Kong,
India, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Thailand, United

                                               11
Arab Emirates and the US. The EU has preferential trade agreements with Switzerland,
Norway, Turkey, South Africa and Mexico for some or all of our sample period. We obtain
information on the relevant preferential tariffs from the WTO and other sources (detailed in
the Appendix). For several of the countries in which Irish exporters face tariffs, especially
developing countries, tariff data are not available for all of the sample years. Under limited
circumstances we interpolate tariffs for the years for which data is not available. Full details
of the sources, construction and coverage of the tariff data are in the Appendix.
       Since the EU is a customs union, in all of the countries where Irish exporters do face
tariffs, the actual level of tariffs is determined by bargaining between the EU and the relevant
counterparties. Given that Ireland is one small member of the EU, this makes us fairly
confident that reverse causality is not a problem in estimating export participation and
revenue responses to destination market tariffs.
       The tariff data are reported using the Harmonized System (HS) 6-digit classification. This
is used by all countries as the basis for their tariff lines, and is the most disaggregated level
at which tariffs, export, and production data can be matched across countries. We restrict
attention to HS6 product-market-years for which there are no non-ad-valorem tariffs,14 and
for which there is no sub-HS6 variation in ad valorem tariffs.15 The HS6 classification
changes in 2002 and 2007. We concord the classification over the period 1996-2009 following
the approach of Pierce and Schott (2012). When this implies joining multiple HS6 categories
together in a given period, we take the simple average of tariffs to construct tariffs at the
concorded product-market-year level.
       Finally, to make use of the tariff data, we concord it with our export and production data.
At a 6-digit level, the CN (export) and Prodcom (production) classifications correspond to
the HS classification. In some cases, our concordance of the CN and Prodcom classifications
results in “products” that cover multiple HS6 categories. In our analysis of export entry
and exit, we take the simple average of tariffs across the relevant HS6 categories to obtain
a tariff at the concorded product-market-year level in these cases. In our analysis of export
revenue, we use revenue at the firm-HS6-market-year level to construct a weighted average
of tariffs across the relevant HS6 categories.
       To identify responses to tariffs, in our baseline analysis we rely on time-series variation
only.16 The main source of time-series variation in tariffs faced by Irish exporters in this
  14
      Unlike ad-valorem tariffs, non-ad-valorem tariffs affect incentives to export differently depending on the
firm’s export price.
   15
      We test robustness to relaxing this requirement.
   16
      There is considerable cross-sectional variation in tariff levels, but we restrict ourselves to using similar
sources of variation to identify responses to tariffs and real exchange rates.


                                                       12
period is the gradual phasing-in over the period 1996-2005 of MFN tariff reductions agreed
in the context of the Uruguay Round of the WTO, which was signed in 1994. We illustrate
the nature of this variation
                            byperforming country-by-country regressions of the log gross ad
valorem tariff, i.e. ln 1 + Ttjk , on HS6 fixed effects and year dummies for some important
markets, and plotting the coefficients on the year dummies in Figure 1. Additional summary
statistics on the tariff data are reported in the Appendix.            0
                           avg log deviation of gross tariff from 1996
                       −.03           −.02            −.01




                                                                           1995         2000              2005          2010
                                                                                                Year

                                                                                  USA    JPN        AUS          CAN   NZL




              Figure 1: Average evolution of tariffs for five rich destination markets
                                                                                               
Notes: Figure shows coefficients on year dummies in country-by-country regression of ln 1 + Ttjk on HS6 fixed effects and
year dummies. Source: WTO and authors’ calculations.



3.3      Macro data
Our analysis requires measures of the real consumption exchange rate and real local currency
demand in the 30 destination markets we focus on. We construct real exchange rates between
Ireland and these markets using data on annual average nominal exchange rates and CPIs
from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (IFS). We proxy real demand using GDP
less exports plus imports, all measured in current local currency, with this aggregate deflated
by the relevant country’s CPI. The National Accounts data are taken from the OECD’s
National Accounts Statistics where available, and otherwise from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. The CPIs are taken from IFS.
    The bulk of the variation in real exchange rates is driven by nominal exchange rates. This
is illustrated in Figure 2, which contrasts the evolution of real exchange rates with selected


                                                                                               13
non-Euro markets with the evolution of real exchange rates with the nine Eurozone markets
we work with.
       For most of the sample period (i.e. 1998-2009), monetary policy is decided at the Euro-
zone level by the ECB, mitigating concerns about reverse causality. In a robustness check,
we exclude markets which use the Euro so as to further mitigate concerns about reverse
causality.

                                                                                      Non−Euro countries              Eurozone countries
                                                                       .5
                       log deviation of real exchange rate from 1996
                                                                       0
                                                                       −.5
                                                                       −1




                                                                             1995      2000        2005    20101995    2000       2005     2010
                                                                                                           Year
                                                                       Graphs by Eurozone status




    Figure 2: Evolution of real exchange rates in selected non-Euro and Eurozone markets

Notes: Figure shows log deviation of annual average real exchange rate from 1996 level for selected Non-Euro and Eurozone
countries. The Non-Euro countries are Australia, Brazil, China, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UK and USA. The
Eurozone countries are Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and Portugal. Source: IMF and
authors’ calculations.




4        Summary statistics on exporter dynamics
In this section, we show how in our data, export behavior depends on firm characteristics and
past export history.17 There are three reasons to do this. First, we lay the foundation for the
empirical strategy we use to estimate responses of export participation and export revenue to
tariffs and real exchange rates. Second, our estimates of the post-entry dynamics of exports
will allow us to translate these estimates into aggregate responses. Third, by providing
evidence that is consistent with the predictions of the model about history dependence (albeit
without structurally estimating the model), we lay the foundation for our explanation for
why firms respond differently to tariffs and real exchange rates.
  17
       For export exit and revenue, our approach closely follows Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016).


                                                                                                           14
                Table 2: Summary statistics: Firms and exports, averages 1996-2009
                           Number of firms per year                4729
                           Employees per firm                       51
                           Firm age (years)                         17
                           Share of firms foreign owned            0.13
                           Share of multi-plant firms              0.03
                           Export participation rate               0.42
                           Export entry rate                       0.09
                           Export exit rate                        0.12
                           Exporter size premium (employees)       3.29
                           Exporter size premium (revenue)         5.20
                           Export share conditional on exporting 0.33
                           Number of markets per exporter           6.9
Notes: Statistics are for our cleaned data set of CIP firms. Firms are defined as exporters if they are matched to positive
concorded product exports from customs data. Export intensity is calculated as total concorded product exports from customs
divided by sales reported in the CIP. Values greater than 1 are replaced by 1. The set of potential entrants used to calculate the
entry rate in year t includes firms born in year t. The set of potential exiters used to construct the exit rate in year t includes
firms present in the CIP in year t − 1 but not in year t. Entry and exit rate averages are calculated over 1998-2009. Source:
CSO and authors’ calculations.


    We start by confirming that Irish exporters look like exporters in other countries. Table 2
shows that exporters are on average bigger than firms which sell exclusively to the domestic
market, though there is substantial overlap in the size distributions, as illustrated in Figure
3. Export participation and export intensity for exporters are both relatively high, as is
typical of small open economies in Europe (see ISGEP (2008)). Export participation is quite
persistent, a fact which is again typical of other countries for which micro data on exporting
is available.
    Next, we turn to export behavior at the firm-market and firm-product-market level.
From this point forward, we restrict attention to the 30 export markets for which we collect
tariff and macro data. Table 3 reports average participation, entry, and exit rates across all
30 markets. It also reports average participation, entry, and exit rates by firm size, along
with rates for a few selected markets. Participation and entry rates are increasing in firm
size. Participation and entry rates at the level of individual markets are low. Persistence of
exporting overall conceals considerable churn at the level of individual markets: exit rates
in individual markets above 30% are not unusual.
    We now document history dependence in export participation and revenue, using the
firm-product-market-year as the unit of analysis. Because the average probability of export
participation differs dramatically based on lagged participation, we examine entry and exit
separately. We take a reduced form approach, estimating linear probability models for




                                                               15
            Figure 3: Distribution of log employment for non-exporters and exporters



                                .4
                                .3
                             Density
                               .2
                                .1
                                0




                                        0        2            4           6            8            10
                                                              Log employment

                                                       Nonexporters            Exporters


Notes: Firms are defined as exporters if they are matched to positive exports from customs data. Figure plots kernel density
estimates of the distribution of log employment for non-exporters and exporters, pooling across 1996-2009. Source: CSO and
authors’ calculations.




                   Table 3: Average participation, entry and exit rates, 1998-2009
     Rate        All firms       Small†       Med†   Large†  USA Japan China                 UK∗         Germany∗    France∗
                                                            Firm-market level
   Particip.       0.051               0.03   0.18    0.29    0.11   0.05     0.03           0.17          0.10        0.10
    Entry          0.012               0.01   0.04    0.07    0.03   0.01     0.01           0.03          0.02        0.02
     Exit          0.226               0.26   0.21    0.17    0.25   0.26     0.33           0.12          0.17        0.16
                                                        Firm-product-market level
   Particip.       0.028               0.01   0.07    0.12    0.05   0.02     0.02           0.12          0.06        0.06
    Entry          0.008               0.00   0.02    0.03    0.02   0.01     0.01           0.02          0.01        0.01
     Exit          0.261               0.29   0.25    0.22    0.30   0.34     0.41           0.16          0.20        0.20
Notes: Products are defined based on the concordance of Prodcom and CN product definitions as described in Sections 3.1.2
and 3.1.3. The set of potential entrants used to calculate the entry rate in year t includes firms and firm-products born in
year t. The set of potential exiters used to construct the exit rate in year tincludes firms present in the CIP in year t − 1 but
not in year t. † Small firms are those with fewer than 100 employees. Medium firms have 100-249 employees. Large firms
have 250+ employees. ∗ Participation in EU markets is censored by the higher reporting threshold. Source: CSO and authors’
calculations.




                                                                16
                                          Table 4: Entry and past participation
                                                                   coeff.  s.e.
                                              evpartijk
                                                     t             0.091   (0.002)**
                                              firm-prod-yr f.e.           yes
                                              prod-mkt-yr f.e.            yes
                                              N                        2,785,844
                                              R2                          0.33
                                              R2 -adj                     0.21
Notes: Products are defined based on the concordance of Prodcom and CN product definitions as described in Sections 3.1.2
and 3.1.3. Only potential entrants are included in the regression. The set of potential entrants includes firms born at date t.
Dependent variable is an indicator for entry at the firm-product-market level. Sample period is 1998-2009. Omitted category
is observations with no past export experience. Robust standard errors calculated. ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.
Source: CSO and authors’ calculations.


entry and exit,18 controlling for marginal cost using firm-product-year fixed effects, and
using indicator variables to capture past export history, rather than imposing a particular
functional form. In the case of export revenue, we are careful to separate history dependence
from selection on idiosyncratic demand. Since our focus at this point is history dependence,
not responses to tariffs and real exchange rates, we control for tariffs and real exchange rates
(and other shocks) using product-market-year fixed effects.
       We start with export entry. We define a firm-product-market observation as a potential
entrant at date t if the firm is present in the CIP at date t, and did not export that product
to that market in t − 1.19 As in Section 2, Xtijk is an indicator variable for participation by
firm i in market k with product j at time t. For each potential entrant, we also construct
an indicator variable for participation prior to t − 1. Our estimating equation is then:
                              h                           i
                         Pr       Xtijk   =      ijk
                                              1|Xt−1   = 0 = cij   jk   0      ijk  ijk
                                                              t + γt + λ evpartt + εt                                     (7)

where cij                                      jk
       t is a firm-product-year fixed effect, γt is a product-market-year fixed effect, and

evpartijk
      t   is the indicator variable for past participation. The results are reported in Table
4. Even conditional on the fixed effects, a history of participation is a strong predictor of
entry, increasing the probability of entry by 9%.20
       We turn next to exit. We define a firm-product-market observation as a potential exiter
at date t if it had positive exports in year t−1.21 For each observation currently participating
  18
      This is a convenient way of characterizing average marginal effects conditional on a rich set of fixed
effects.
   19
      Entering firms are categorized as potential entrants in all markets.
   20
      In results reported in the Appendix, we show that a more recent history of participation is a stronger
predictor of entry than a more distant history of participation.
   21
      Exiting firms are included.



                                                                  17
                                           Table 5: Exit and past participation
                                             Market tenure        coeff.   s.e.
                                             2 years              -0.147   (0.010)**
                                             3 years              -0.206   (0.012)**
                                             4 years              -0.241   (0.013)**
                                             5 years              -0.218   (0.014)**
                                             6 years              -0.263   (0.015)**
                                             7+ years             -0.265   (0.013)**
                                             censored             -0.272   (0.009)**
                                             firm-prod-yr f.e.           yes
                                             prod-mkt-yr f.e.            yes
                                             N                          47,592
                                             R2                          0.65
                                             R2 -adj                     0.47
Notes: Products are defined based on the concordance of Prodcom and CN product definitions as described in Sections 3.1.2
and 3.1.3. Only potential exiters are included in the regression. This includes exiting firms. Dependent variable is an indicator
for exit at the firm-product-market level in the next year. Omitted category is observations with market tenure equal to 1 year.
Censored indicates that market tenure is censored because exporting was ongoing at the start of the sample. This is extended
also to observations observed to “enter” in 1997, because of the poor quality of the match between CIP and customs data in
1996. Robust standard errors calculated. ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. Source: CSO and authors’ calculations.


for which entry is observed in the sample, we calculate market tenure, where market tenure
is defined as the number of years of continuous exporting for the firm-product-market triplet
in question. We top-code market tenure at 7 years.22 We also create an indicator variable
for market tenure being censored because exporting was already ongoing at the beginning
of the sample. Our estimating equation is:
                           h                           i
                      Pr       Xtijk   =      ijk
                                           0|Xt−1   = 1 = cij   jk   0 ijk       ijk    ijk
                                                           t + γt + λ at−1 + censt−1 + εt                                   (8)

where cij                                      jk
       t is a firm-product-year fixed effect, γt is a product-market-year fixed effect, and

aijk
 t−1 is a vector of indicator variables for lagged market tenure, i.e. firm i’s tenure with
product j in market k as of period t − 1. The excluded category is observations with lagged
market tenure of 1. censijk
                        t−1 is the indicator for lagged market tenure being censored. The
results are reported in Table 5. Exit rates are broadly declining with tenure in a market.
Exit rates for observations where tenure is censored are comparable to those for observations
with market tenure of 6 years or more.
    Finally, we examine export revenue conditional on participation. To separate history
dependence from selection on idiosyncratic demand, we define an additional concept: export
  22
     We top-code because the behavior of the exit hazard at long horizons cannot be distinguished from
cohort effects. The Appendix to Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016) shows that results are robust to
varying the level at which market tenure is top-coded.



                                                                 18
spell length. An export spell is a continuous episode of exporting by the same firm-product-
market triplet. Export spell length is the number of years from entry to exit in such an
episode of continuous export participation. For each observation currently participating, we
calculate the length of the relevant export spell, top-coding at 7 years.23 We then allow the
evolution of revenue with market tenure to differ across export spells of different length. Let
rtijk be log export revenue of firm i selling product j to market k at time t. Our estimating
equation is:                                                                        
                         rtijk   =   cij
                                      t    +   γtjk   +δ   0
                                                                   aijk
                                                                    t     ⊗   sijk
                                                                               t         + censijk  ijk
                                                                                               t + εt      (9)

where cij                                         jk
       t is a firm-product-year fixed effect and γt is a product-market-year fixed effect.

aijk
 t   is a vector of indicator variables for firm i’s tenure with product j in market k at time
t, while sijk
          t   is a vector of indicator variables for the length of the relevant export spell. The
symbol ⊗ indicates the Kronecker product, but redundant interactions between aijk
                                                                              t   and sijk
                                                                                       t

are dropped. Meanwhile, censijk
                            t   contains indicators for censored entry and censored exit.
       Full results from estimating equation (9) are reported in the Appendix. Figure 4 graphs
the export trajectories obtained by taking the exponents of our estimates of δ. Broadly
speaking, export spells that start bigger last longer, consistent with selection on idiosyncratic
demand. Because we condition on export spell length, the growth patterns in this figure are
not due to selection, but provide evidence of history dependence. There is substantial growth
of export revenue in the first five years of the longest-lasting export spells, while short-lived
export spells grow more slowly, and exhibit hump-shaped dynamics.
       The three take-aways from Tables 4 and 5, and Figure 4 are as follows. First, there
are robust patterns in entry, exit, and export revenue that are not due to changes in tariffs
and real exchange rates. To obtain clean estimates of responses to tariffs and real exchange
rates, we must control for these patterns. Second, the precise patterns we document imply
that in the short run, responses of export entry and exit to tariffs and exchange rates will
have only a modest impact on aggregate exports, because as Figure 4 shows, entrants and
exiters are small compared to long-time participants. In the longer term, entry responses can
have a bigger effect, as a few successful entrants grow rapidly in new markets. However the
“longer term” is quite long. Observations with market tenure of less than 6 years account for
just over 50% of observations, but only 25% of total exports in the sample.24 Third, these
patterns confirm the prediction of the model that export history matters, and matters not
  23
      Spell length may be censored in two ways: because the spell is ongoing at the beginning of the sample
(censored entry), or because it is still ongoing at the end of the sample (censored exit). In spells where exit
is censored, but market tenure is at least 7 by the end of the sample, we assign the topcoded spell length.
   24
      See the Appendix for details.


                                                                     19
                                                                       Figure 4: Post-entry dynamics of revenue

                                                                            ongoing




                                                                  15
                                                                              spells




                           Ratio of revenue to 1−year spell revenue
                                                                                                                      7+ yr spells




                                     5             10




                                                                           1 yr spell
                                                0




                                                                       0                1   2          3          4   5          6
                                                                                                Years in market


Notes: Figure shows evolution of revenue at the firm-product-market level with market tenure, allowing trajectories to differ
by export spell length. Ongoing spells are spells for which entry is censored by the beginning of the sample.Trajectories are
conditional on firm-product-year and product-market-year effects. 95% confidence intervals are plotted. Source: CSO and
authors’ calculations.


just for export participation, but also for export revenue. This is evidence that firms are
forward-looking, which is key to our explanation of responses to tariffs and real exchange
rates.


5        Empirical strategy
In this section we describe our empirical strategy for estimating entry, exit and revenue
responses to tariffs and real exchange rates.


5.1      Entry and exit
We start with the linear probability models for entry and exit equations from the previous
section. But instead of using product-market-year fixed effects to absorb the effects of
shocks, we include the log of tariffs, real exchange rates and foreign demand, along with
product-market fixed effects. This means that the coefficients on the variables of interest
can be interpreted as the marginal effects of percentage deviations from average levels over
the sample for the relevant product-market. Since tariffs vary at the product-market-year
level, and real exchange rates and foreign demand at the market-year level, only time-series
variation is used to identify the coefficients on all three variables.



                                                                                                  20
       The baseline specification for entry is as follows:
                    h                  i
                  Pr Xtijk = 1|Xt−1
                                ijk
                                    = 0 = cij
                                           t +γ
                                                jk
                                                   + λevpartijk    0 ijk  ijk
                                                            t−1 + β zt + ηt                            (10)

As in the previous section, Xtijk = 1 is an indicator for participation, cij
                                                                          t is a firm-product-

year fixed effect, and γ jk is a product-market fixed effect. The variable evpartijk
                                                                                 t−1 is, as in
the previous section, an indicator variable equal to one if firm i participated in market k
                                                     ik
          j in some year prior to t − 1. Finally, zt is a vector, the elements of which are
with product
τtjk = ln 1 + Ttjk , which is the log gross ad valorem tariff faced by exporter i in market
k, pkt , which is the log of an index of the real exchange rate between the home market and
market k, and qtk , which is the log of an index of real aggregate demand in market k. The
construction of tariffs and macro variables is described above in sections 3.3 and 3.2. We
use robust standard errors to deal with the standard heteroskedasticity issue in estimating
linear probability models.
       The baseline specification for exit is as follows:
                      h               i
                        ijk    ijk
                    Pr Xt = 0|Xt−1 = 1 = cij
                                          t +γ
                                               jk
                                                  + λ0 aijk    0 ijk  ijk
                                                        t−1 + β zt + νt                                (11)

Firm-product-year and product-market fixed effects are exactly as in the entry equation. As
in the previous section, aijk
                          t−1 is a vector of indicator variables for firm i’s topcoded tenure in
market k with product j at time t − 1. Finally, zijk
                                                 t   is as in the entry equation.
       The model suggests that the sensitivity of entry and exit rates to the variables of interest
may depend on the density of firms at the margin. As shown in Tables 3, 4 and 5, entry and
exit rates do differ systematically across firms of different sizes, across different markets, and
across participation histories. By averaging marginal effects across all observations, we may
run the risk of mistakenly inferring insensitivity to shocks. In a set of robustness checks,
we allow for variation in marginal effects, either by splitting the sample, or by allowing for
interactions between zijk
                      t   and an appropriate variable.25


5.2        Export revenue
For export revenue we start with the log-linear specification from the previous section. As
with entry and exit, instead of using product-market-year fixed effects to absorb the effects
of shocks, we include the log of tariffs, real exchange rates and foreign demand, along with
  25
    Whether to split the sample or allow for interactions depends on whether the variable of interest varies
across firm-product-years (split) or within firm-product-years (interact).


                                                    21
product-market fixed effects. This means that the coefficients of interest can be interpreted
as the elasticities of revenue with respect to these variables. Similar to our analysis of entry
and exit, since tariffs vary at the product-market-year level, and real exchange rates and
foreign demand at the market-year level, only time-series variation is used to identify the
coefficients on all three variables.
       A key issue we must address is the possibility of selection bias. As noted in the previous
section, higher initial export revenue forecasts longer survival in a market, which is direct
evidence of selection on unobserved idiosyncratic demand. This type of selection may lead
to biased estimates of tariff and real exchange rate elasticities, because the expectation of
the error term conditional on participation may be correlated with the realizations of these
variables.
       Our environment is not conducive to a Heckman-style selection correction, because we
do not have instruments which affect participation but not revenue conditional on partici-
pation.26 However we do know, based on the observed history of participation, that some
observations are more likely to be marginal than others. In particular, as Table 5 shows, exit
rates decline systematically with market tenure. Observations with tenure of 6 or more years,
or which were ongoing at the start of the sample, have the lowest exit rates, on the order
of 14-16% unconditionally.27 Correlation of unobserved idiosyncratic demand with tariffs
and real exchange rates is less likely to be an issue for observations that are infra-marginal
than for observations that are marginal, and the bias for these observations should be less
severe.28 Based on this, we allow elasticities with respect to tariffs and macro variables differ
across observations according to their market tenure, and we interpret the coefficients on the
low exit probability observations as being less subject to selection bias.
       Our baseline estimating equation for export revenue conditional on participation is then:
                                                                                         
         rtijk = cij
                  t  + γ jk
                            + δ 0
                                    aijk
                                     t   ⊗ sijk
                                            t     + censijk
                                                        t   + β 0 ijk
                                                                 zt   + φ 0
                                                                              zik
                                                                               t  ∗ low ijk
                                                                                        t     + εijk
                                                                                                 t         (12)

Here, rtijk is log export revenue of firm i from selling product j to market k at date t, cij
                                                                                           t is

a firm-product-year fixed effect, and γ jk is a product-market fixed effect. As in the previous
section, aijk
          t   is a vector of indicator variables for firm i’s topcoded tenure in market k with
product j at time t, while sijk
                            t   is a vector of indicator variables for the topcoded length of the
relevant export spell. Redundant interactions between these variables are dropped. censijk
                                                                                       t
  26
    Somewhat less crucially, other dimensions of our identification strategy rely on a rich set of fixed effects
which would be tricky to incorporate in the standard Heckman setup.
 27
    See the Appendix for details.
 28
    Loosely speaking, this idea resembles Chamberlain’s (1986) “identification at infinity.”


                                                       22
                                                                                            ijk
is a vector of indicators for censored entry or exit. zik
                                                       t is as described above. Finally, lowt
(for low exit probability) is an indicator variable, set equal to 1 for observations where market
tenure is at least 6 years as well as observations in export spells whose entry is censored, and
equal to zero otherwise.29
      In robustness analysis, we split export revenue into its quantity and price (unit value)
components, and estimate equation (12) with log quantity and log price in turn as the
dependent variable.


6       Results
We now describe our main results.


6.1       Export entry and exit
The first column of Table 6 reports the results from estimating our baseline entry equation,
equation (10). We find that the probability of entry is higher in periods where tariffs in
the destination market are low, and in periods where the Irish real exchange rate is weak
vis-a-vis the destination market relative to its sample average (i.e. higher pkt ). The signs of
these effects are as predicted by theory, and both coefficients are statistically significant at
the 5% level.
      Remembering that the average in-sample entry rate is 0.8%, the estimated coefficients
can be interpreted as follows: A reduction in tariffs from 10% to 0 would imply an increase in
the entry rate from 0.8%, to 0.86%, while a 10% depreciation of the home real exchange rate
against the destination market would imply an increase the entry rate from 0.8% to 0.81%.
The absolute value of the coefficient on the tariff is 4.7 times that on the real exchange rate,
so entry is more responsive to tariffs than to real exchange rates. But both responses are
economically modest, in a sense we will make precise at the end of this section.
      The second column of Table 6 reports the results from estimating our baseline exit equa-
tion, equation (11). We do not find evidence of statistically significant relationships between
the rate of exit and the level of tariffs or real exchange rates. This contrasts with our findings
on entry.
      Although the point estimates in the exit equation are not statistically significant, it is still
useful to explain how to interpret the coefficient signs and magnitudes. A positive coefficient
on tariffs implies that exit rates are lower when tariffs are lower, consistent with what theory
 29
      The level effect of lowtijk is captured by the inclusion of aijk
                                                                   t   and censijk
                                                                               t   in the regression.


                                                        23
                            Table 6: Export entry and exit responses to shocks
                                                                  (1)                 (2)
                                                                 Entry                Exit
                                                         coeff      s.e.        coeff   s.e.
                             τtjk                       -0.006     (0.002)**    0.176 (0.115)
                             pkt                         0.001     (0.001)**    0.012 (0.023)
                             qtk                         0.005     (0.001)**    0.009 (0.024)
                             Export history controls              yes                   yes
                             Firm-prod-yr f.e.                    yes                   yes
                             Prod-mkt f.e.                        yes                   yes
                             N                               2,380,829                70,198
                             R2                                 0.28                   0.60
                             R2 -adjusted                       0.23                   0.49
                                                        In-sample entry rate    In-sample exit rate
                                                                 0.008                 0.218
Notes: Products are defined based on the concordance of Prodcom and CN product definitions as described in Sections 3.1.2
and 3.1.3. Sample period is 1998-2009. Only potential entrants are included in the entry regression. Only potential exiters
are included in the exit regression. Dependent variable is an indicator for entry or exit at the firm-product-market-year level.
Export history controls in column (1) include evpartijk                                                       ijk          ijk
                                                      t−1 . Export history controls in column (2) include at−1 and censt−1 .
Robust standard errors calculated. ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. Source: CSO and authors’ calculations.


predicts. The point estimate implies that if the exit rate is 21.8% (the average exit rate
in-sample) under a tariff of 10%, it will be 20.04% under a zero tariff. A positive coefficient
on the real exchange rate implies that depreciations of the Irish real exchange rate against
a destination market increase exit from that market, contrary to what theory predicts. The
point estimate implies that a 10% depreciation of the home real exchange rate against a
destination market would imply an increase the exit rate from 21.8% to 21.92%.
    We perform a large number of robustness tests, varying the specification, the estimation
sample, and measurement of the independent variables. Our findings are broadly robust to
these variations. Full results are reported in the Appendix. Here we highlight a few points
of interest.
    First, in order to investigate whether averaging of marginal effects across infra-marginal
and marginal observations leads us to conclude incorrectly that entry and exit responses are
small, or not present, we allow marginal effects to differ across export histories and firm size.
We find that export entry is indeed more sensitive to both tariffs and real exchange rates in
observations with a history of past participation than in observations with no such history.
But the absolute size of the response is in proportion to the higher unconditional entry rate
for these observations, and thus still modest. Entry sensitivities vary with firm size, but
remain modest. Our baseline responses appear to be driven by entry sensitivity to tariffs for
large firms and to real exchange rates for small firms.
    As regards exit, we find weak evidence that pooling across observations may mask exit
sensitivity to tariffs. Lower tariffs do reduce the probability of export exit for observations


                                                              24
with longer market tenure, with the coefficient statistically significant at the 10% level,
and similar in magnitude to the baseline estimate. But conditioning on firm size does not
affect the baseline finding that there are no statistically significant responses of exit to either
variable.
   Second, in our baseline specification, we identify responses to tariffs and real exchange
rates based on deviations from product-market averages. This approach is helpful in estimat-
ing responses to tariffs, where there is relatively little year-on-year variation. But estimation
in first differences has some advantages. It allows us to investigate whether firms respond to
future tariff changes, which could be an indicator of forward-looking behavior, and to look
for asymmetries in response to positive and negative shocks.
   When we estimate in first differences, entry responses to both tariffs and real exchange
rates are magnified, consistent with short-run overshooting of entry relative to the long
run. We find that future tariff reductions reduce entry today, while entry responses to real
exchange rates appear to be driven by adverse movements rather than positive movements.
As regards exit, in first differences, real exchange rate depreciations increase the rate of exit,
rather than decreasing it as theory would suggest. But this finding is not robust to allowing
for asymmetric responses to positive and negative shocks. Moreover, we do not find any
evidence that exit responds to future tariff changes.
   Third, there are various reasons to test whether our results are robust to changing the
sample of countries included in the estimation. Restricting the sample to non-Eurozone
markets does not change our baseline results on entry and exit, though when we restrict
further to non-EU markets, we do not find a statistically significant response of entry to real
exchange rates.
   Finally, it is of interest to know whether responses to the price and nominal exchange rate
components of the real exchange rate are different. We find that entry is more responsive
to the price component than to the nominal exchange rate component, while exit is not
responsive to either.


6.2    Revenue
The first column of Table 7 reports the results from estimating our baseline export revenue
equation, equation (12). We focus on the elasticities for observations with low predicted
exit probability for which selection bias is less likely to be an issue. For these observations,
we estimate that the elasticity of revenue with respect to tariffs is equal to -3.02, and the
elasticity of revenue with respect to the real exchange rate is equal to 0.46. Both elasticities


                                                25
                  Table 7: Export revenue, quantity and price responses to shocks
                                                       (1)                 (2)                   (3)
                                                     Revenue             Quantity               Price
                                                 coeff s.e.          coeff s.e.         coeff     s.e.
                                        τtjk     -3.02 (0.65)**      -2.90 (0.66)**     -0.03     (0.35)
                      Low exit prob     pkt       0.46 (0.08)**       0.24 (0.09)**      0.18     (0.04)**
                                        qtk       0.24 (0.09)**       0.23 (0.09)**      0.08     (0.05)*
                                        τtjk      0.89   (0.58)       0.83   (0.54)      0.18     (0.31)
                      High exit prob    pkt       0.42   (0.08)**     0.21   (0.09)**    0.18     (0.04)**
                                        qtk       0.17   (0.09)*      0.17   (0.09)*     0.08     (0.05)*
                      Export history controls           yes                yes                 yes
                      Firm-prod-yr f.e.                 yes                yes                 yes
                      Prod-mkt f.e.                     yes                yes                 yes
                      N                               191,780            184,890             184,890
                      R2                               0.77               0.83                0.91
                      R2 -adjusted                     0.68               0.77                0.87
Notes: Products are defined based on the concordance of CN product definitions as described in Section 3.1.2. Dependent
variable is log revenue in Euro, log quantity in tonnes, or log unit value at the firm-product-market level. Export history
controls include aijk
                  t   ⊗ sijk
                         t   and censijk
                                     t . Robust standard errors calculated. ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. Source:
CSO and authors’ calculations.


are statistically different from zero. Their signs are as predicted by theory: revenue increases
when tariffs in an export market fall, and when the Irish real exchange rate depreciates
against a destination market. The two elasticities are statistically different from each other
in absolute value. The absolute value of the elasticity of revenue with respect to tariffs is
more than six times greater than the elasticity with respect to real exchange rates.
    In contrast, for observations with high predicted exit probability, the coefficient on tariffs
is not significantly different from zero, though the coefficient on the real exchange rate is
very similar to that for the low exit probability observations. Our interpretation of this is
that sample selection is an issue with respect to tariffs, but not with respect to exchange
rates, consistent with the fact that entry is three times more responsive to tariffs than to
exchange rates, and with the large (though insignificant) point estimate of the response of
exit to tariffs.
    As with entry and exit, we perform a large number of robustness tests, varying the
specification, the sample, and measurement of the independent variables. Our findings are
broadly robust to these variations. Full results are reported in the Appendix. Here we
highlight a few points of interest.
    We try a number of variations on our approach to dealing with potential selection bias.
When we pool across low and high exit probability observations, unsurprisingly, the esti-
mated coefficients are an average of the coefficients for the two subgroups. When we use
spell length rather than market tenure to identify low exit probability observations, the re-
sults are very similar to the baseline. Results are also very similar when we include only


                                                                26
indicators for market tenure as controls, rather than market tenure interacted with spell
length.
       As with entry and exit, estimation in first differences allows us to investigate the nuances
of how revenue responds to shocks. However lack of identifying variation in annual differences
in tariffs seems to be an issue in this specification. We do not find a statistically significant
response to current or future tariff changes. The coefficient on the real exchange is very
similar to the baseline, though less precisely estimated. As with entry, responses to real
exchange rates appear to be driven by appreciations.
       We examine whether revenue elasticities differ systematically by firm size. As with export
entry, export revenue in big firms is sensitive to tariffs, but export revenue in small firms is
not. Elasticities with respect to real exchange rates differ (nonmonotonically) across firms
of different sizes, but the differences are not statistically significant. It is not possible to
separate out whether these differences are due to underlying differences in parameters for
firms of different size, or to differences in the severity of selection bias.
       As with entry and exit, there are various reasons to test whether our results are robust
to changing the sample of countries included in the estimation. When we restrict the sample
to non-Eurozone markets, our findings are consistent with the baseline. The same is true
when we restrict the sample to non-EU markets.
       Finally, we do not find evidence that export revenue responds differently to the nominal
exchange rate and price components of real exchange rates.


6.3        Quantity and price
Can markup adjustment (due to, e.g. sticky prices) explain why the elasticity of export
revenue with respect to tariffs is so different from the elasticity with respect to real exchange
rates? We now show that it cannot.30
       Suppose that demand can be written:
                                                                    
                                             1+   Ttjk       µijk
                                                              t Ct
                                                                  ij
                                                                                   
                              Qijk
                               t   = d                                 = d Ptijk∗                  (13)
                                                    Ptk


where d (·) is some decreasing function, µijk
                                          t   is the endogenous markup over marginal cost for
this firm-product-market triplet, and Ptijk∗ is the price customers in market k must pay for
good j sold by firm i in terms of the numeraire. The key assumption here is that a firm can
  30
       Markup adjustment and sticky prices may be very important in other contexts, just not here.


                                                         27
only affect quantity demanded through changing its (relative) price, not through any other
variable. Let θtijk be the (negative of the) price elasticity of demand. Then the following
relationships must hold:
                                                                   !                        
                        ∂ ln Qijk
                              t                 ∂ ln Qijk
                                                        t                          ln µijk
                                                                                   ∂   t
                                 =          −                        −1 −                             (14)
                                                ∂ ln Ptijk∗
                                                                                    
                    ∂ ln 1 + Ttjk                                              ∂ ln 1 + Ttjk
                                          |            {z          }
                                                      θtijk

                                                                   !                    !
                              ∂ ln Qijk
                                     t                ∂ ln Qijk
                                                            t               ∂ ln µijk
                                                                                  t
                                        =         −                      1−                                (15)
                               ∂ ln Ptk               ∂ ln Ptijk∗           ∂ ln Ptk
                                              |          {z       }
                                                        θtijk

If markup adjustment is to explain why revenue elasticities with respect to tariffs and real
exchange rates are so different, it must be that quantity and markup elasticities with respect
to tariffs and real exchange rates both deliver the same value for the price elasticity of
demand, θtijk .
    To obtain the quantity and markup elasticities from equations (14) and (15), we estimate
equation (12), but with log quantity (i.e. tonnes) and log unit value (i.e. value/tonnes) in
turn as the dependent variable. The results are reported in Columns 2 and 3 of Table
7. Focusing on the estimates for low exit probability observations, we find evidence of
markup adjustment with respect to real exchange rates, but not with respect to tariffs.31
However substituting the estimates from the second two columns of Table 7 into equations
(14) and (15), we see that quantity and markup elasticities with respect to tariffs imply a
price elasticity of demand of -2.99, while quantity and markup elasticities with respect to real
exchange rates imply a price elasticity of demand of -0.29. These two values are inconsistent.
The reason they are inconsistent is because there is an order of magnitude difference in the
responses of quantities to tariffs and real exchange rates conditional on markup adjustment.
This implies that differences in markup responses to tariffs and real exchange rates cannot
explain the differences we document in revenue elasticities.
    This inconsistency points to an additional channel beyond their own price through which
firms can affect their quantity demanded. Customer base is precisely such a channel. If
demand is given by equation (1) from our model rather than (13), and if investment in
  31
     The quantity and price elasticities do not add up to the revenue elasticity because the estimation samples
are slightly different: quantities are not available for all observations. When we estimate the revenue equation
on the sample for which quantities are available, we obtain the sum of the coefficients in the second two
columns of Table 7. These results are reported in the Appendix.



                                                              28
customer base responds differently to tariffs than to real exchange rates, there will be an
extra term in equations (14) and (15) which can explain why export quantity, and hence also
export revenue respond differently to the two variables. We explore this further in Section
7 below.


6.4    Adding up: implications for aggregate exports
We now use our baseline estimates of entry, exit and revenue responses to tariffs and real
exchange rates to calculate the implied elasticities of aggregate exports with respect to these
variables. To do so, we take into account the estimated pattern of exporter dynamics from
Section 4. The exercise we carry out is as follows. We consider two initially identical
hypothetical export markets, and suppose that domestic firms face a reduction in the tariff
from 10% to 0 in one of the markets, but not the other, or a 10% depreciation in the home
currency against one of the markets, but not the other. We calculate what happens to
aggregate exports to the affected market relative to the unaffected market, holding fixed
domestic costs. We do this for each of the first six years after the shock. We also calculate
long run responses. The elasticity of aggregate exports at horizon t with respect to the shock
is then:
                                           ln EXtchange − ln EXtnochange
                         elasticityagg =
                                                 ln (1) − ln (1.1)
where change refers to the market where the variable of interest changes, and nochange
refers to the market where it does not change.
   The full details of the implementation, including how we make use of the estimated
pattern of export dynamics, are reported in the Appendix. Table 8 reports the results. For
each shock, the first column reports the elasticity of aggregate exports setting entry and
revenue responses to their baseline point estimates, but setting exit responses to zero (as a
reminder, the estimated exit responses are not significantly different from zero). The second
column reports the elasticity of aggregate exports, with all responses set equal to their point
estimates. The final two columns in each panel report the aggregate elasticities allowing
only revenue responses, and only entry and exit responses respectively.
   The elasticities reported in Table 8 are broadly in line with those estimated using aggre-
gate data (see Ruhl (2008) for a survey). Whether or not we allow for exit responses, on
impact, aggregate behavior is governed mainly by the response of export revenue conditional
on participation. Over time, the contribution of participation responses grows. Setting exit
responses to zero, the elasticity of aggregate exports with respect to tariffs is six times bigger


                                                29
than than the elasticity with respect to real exchange rates. This is mainly driven by the
difference in revenue responses, as both entry responses and entrants are small.
     Using the point estimates of exit responses rather than setting them equal to zero, the
difference between tariff and real exchange rate elasticities is ten-fold. For tariffs, the point
estimate of the exit response is as predicted by theory, so adding this response magnifies the
elasticity of overall exports with respect to a shock. However for exchange rates, entry and
exit responses go in opposite directions, and the two margins effectively cancel each other
out.
     Overall, whether or not we allow for exit responses, we find that the responses of aggregate
exports to tariffs and real exchange rates owe more to the responses of incumbents on the
intensive margin than to entry and exit responses. It is this which leads us to say that entry
and exit responses are “modest.”

                    Table 8: Elasticities of aggregate exports with respect to shocks
                                            Tariff                                           Real ex. rate
                                                                     Margins
       Horizon       entry, rev   entry, exit, rev    rev    entry, exit   entry, rev   entry, exit, rev     rev    entry, exit
          1            -3.08           -3.33         -3.02      -0.31         0.47           0.45            0.46     -0.01
          2            -3.16           -3.65         -3.02      -0.63         0.48           0.45            0.46     -0.01
          3            -3.24           -3.94         -3.02      -0.92         0.50           0.45            0.46     -0.01
          4            -3.32           -4.19         -3.02      -1.17         0.51           0.45            0.46     -0.01
          5            -3.39           -4.41         -3.02      -1.39         0.52           0.45            0.46     -0.01
          6            -3.46           -4.59         -3.02      -1.57         0.53           0.46            0.46      0.00
     steady state      -3.76           -5.38         -3.02      -2.36          0.59           0.48           0.46      0.02
Notes: First column of each panel reports aggregate elasticities allowing entry and export revenue to respond. Second column
reports aggregate elasticities allowing entry, exit and revenue to respond. Third column reports elasticities allowing only revenue
to respond. Fourth column reports elasticities allowing only entry and exit to respond. For details of construction of aggregate
elasticities, see text.




7       Simulation
As we have just illustrated, the response of export revenue is key to the behavior of aggregate
exports. Moreover, from the behavior of quantities and prices, the differences in export
revenue responses to tariffs and real exchange rates cannot be accounted for by differences
in markup adjustment. So why is export revenue so much more responsive to tariffs than
it is to real exchange rates? We now show that forward-looking behavior due to customer
base, combined with the very different processes followed by tariffs and real exchange rates,
has the potential to explain this behavior. To do so, we make use of the model from Section
2.
     We use an off-the-shelf parameterization of the model, taken from Fitzgerald, Haller and
Yedid-Levi (2016). Briefly, marginal cost is assumed constant, the same for all firms, while

                                                               30
the process for the sunk cost is such that the rate of entry into exporting is exogenous.32 In
addition, the following assumptions are made about customer base and learning: (1) there is
a quadratic cost of adjusting investment in customer base, (2) investment in customer base
is irreversible, and (3), firms learn probabilistically about the nature of their idiosyncratic
demand. Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016) estimate this model to match annual
moments of the post-entry dynamics of export quantities, prices and exit (similar to the
moments we document in Section 4) and we work with their baseline parameter estimates.33
Full details about functional forms and parameter values are reported in the Appendix.
       Most of the identifying variation in tariffs in our data comes from reductions agreed in
the Uruguay Round in 1994, and phased in gradually over the period 1995-2005.34 To mimic
the forecastability of tariff declines, in our simulation we assume that initially exporters face
a tariff rate of 5%, and that they expect this to continue forever. However at some date, it
is announced unexpectedly that in one year, the tariff will fall to 4.5%, the year after it will
fall to 4%, the year after that to 3.5% and so on and so on, until after 10 years, the tariff
reaches 0, where it will remain forever. For the real exchange rate, we use an AR(1) process.
We choose the persistence and innovation variance of this process by estimating an AR(1)
using data on the real exchange rate between Ireland and the United States.35
       We then use the model to solve numerically for the policy functions in response to each
of these two shocks. Based on these policy functions and the assumed processes, we simulate
panels of data to mimic the actual data. The set of firms is assumed exogenous (equal
to 5000) in these simulations. All firms start out as non-exporters, and we first simulate
for 100 years to arrive at the ergodic distribution of export participation and exports. In
year 101 we start the “trade agreement” exercise. We then extract the simulated data for
periods 102 through 115, giving us a panel of 14 years, just as in the actual data. Similarly,
in the exchange rate case, we extract the simulated data for years 102 through 115. We
use the simulated data to construct the same variables and to estimate the same revenue
equations as in the actual data. We implement 100 simulations for the tariff exercise, and
100 simulations for the real exchange rate exercise.
       Table 9 reports the average elasticities across simulations, where the elasticities are the
estimated coefficients for low exit probability observations, defined as in the actual data.
The average elasticity in response to the tariff shock is nearly four times as big in absolute
  32
     Note that we find entry is relatively unresponsive to shocks.
  33
     The price elasticity of demand θ is not identified by the moments they target, but set equal to 2.
  34
     See Figure 1.
  35
     The model operates at a bi-annual frequency, so we estimate the AR(1) using bi-annual data constructed
using quarterly data from IFS. The sample period for this estimation is 1980-2014.


                                                    31
                          Table 9: Revenue elasticities from simulated data
                     Shock                                              Elasticity
                     Pre-announced tariff reduction                     -11.71
                     Real exchange rate: AR(1), ρ = 0.911, σ = 0.063      3.09
Notes: Table reports average across 100 simulated data sets of estimated coefficients on low exit probability observations in
revenue equations similar to equation (12).


value as the elasticity in response to the exchange rate shock. The level of both elasticities
is much greater than in the actual data.36 However it is worth noting that the model ignores
a lot of the richness in the data, and moreover, we tie our hands by taking parameter values
direct from Fitzgerald, Haller and Yedid-Levi (2016), who do not target responses to shocks.
       We conclude from this exercise forward-looking behavior due to customer base has the
potential to rationalize our empirical finding that export revenue is more responsive to tariffs
than to real exchange rates. We think it is worth noting that this is despite the fact that the
“real exchange rate” process we feed into the model has considerable persistence. Relative
to Ruhl (2008), this draws attention not just to the persistence of shocks, but to their
forecastability.


8        Conclusion
The main contribution of this paper is to use firm and customs micro data for Ireland to
pinpoint exactly how firm behavior diverges from the prediction of workhorse models that
exporters should respond similarly to tariffs and real exchange rates. We find that export
revenue is six times more responsive to tariffs than it is to real exchange rates, and it is this,
rather than differences in entry and exit responses, which accounts for most of the difference
in aggregate responses.
       We provide evidence that the difference in export revenue responsiveness to tariffs and
real exchange rates is likely not due to sticky prices and variable markups, which have been
the focus of a very large literature in international macroeconomics. Based on estimating
elasticities of quantities and markups with respect to these two variables, we can see that the
difference in export revenue responses is driven by much greater responsiveness of quantities
to tariffs than real exchange rates, conditional on markups.
       We argue instead that the behavior of export revenue is likely due to a combination of
two factors. First, demand depends on customer base as well as prices, customer base can
  36
    As in the actual data, the tariff coefficient differs substantially between low and high exit probability
observations, but the real exchange rate coefficient does not.


                                                            32
be accumulated through non-price actions, and accumulation of customer base makes firm
decisions about how to respond to tariffs and real exchange rates forward-looking, rather
than static, as assumed in the workhorse models. As a result, the process followed by
shocks matters for how firms adjust their investment in customer base, and hence their
export revenue. Second, tariffs and exchange rates follow very different processes. Tariffs
are predictable, while real exchange rates are not. This implies that forward-looking firms
increase customer base (and hence revenue) much more in response to favorable tariff changes
than in response to favorable real exchange rate changes.
   Returning to the policy questions that motivate our work, our findings suggest that
“currency manipulation” is likely to have only a limited effect on international trade, because
irrespective of current policy, firms see future real exchange rates as uncertain. In contrast,
policy changes such as new trade agreements (or border adjustment of corporate taxes) where
implementation is credible, and the bar for future policy change is very high can have much
larger effects.


References
 [1] Arkolakis, C. (2010), “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in
     International Trade,” Journal of Politicial Economy 118 (6), 1151-1199.

 [2] Arkolakis, C., J. Eaton and S. Kortum (2012), “Staggered Adjustment and Trade Dy-
     namics,” mimeo.

 [3] Berman, N., P. Martin and T. Mayer (2012), “How do Different Exporters React to
     Exchange Rate Changes?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1), 437-492.

 [4] Bustos, P. (2011), “Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence
     on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review 101
     (1), 304-340.

 [5] Campa, J. (2004), “Exchange Rates and Trade: How Important is Hysteresis in Trade?”
     European Economic Review 48, 527-548.

 [6] Chamberlain, G. (1986), “Asymptotic efficiency in semiparametric model with censor-
     ing,” Journal of Econometrics 32, 189-218.

 [7] Das, M., M. Roberts and J. Tybout (2007), “Market Entry Costs, Producer Hetero-
     geneity and Export Dynamics,” Econometrica 75 (3), 837-873.

                                              33
 [8] Drozd, L. and J. Nosal (2012), “Understanding International Prices: Customers as
    Capital,” American Economic Review 102 (1), 364-395.

 [9] Eaton, J., M. Eslava, M. Kugler and J. Tybout (2014), “A Search and Learning Model
    of Export Dynamics,” mimeo.

[10] Eaton, J., S. Kortum and F. Kramarz (2011), “An Anatomy of International Trade:
    Evidence from French Firms,” Econometrica 1453-1498.

[11] Feenstra, R., P. Luck, M. Obstfeld and K. Russ (2014), “In Search of the Armington
    Elasticity,” NBER Working Paper 20063.

[12] Fitzgerald, D., S. Haller and Y. Yedid-Levi (2016), “How Exporters Grow,” NBER
    Working Paper 21935.

[13] Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger and C. Syverson (2008), “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
    Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review 98
    (1), 394-425.

[14] Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger and C. Syverson (2016) “The Slow Growth of New Plants:
    Learning About Demand?” Economica 83, 91-129.

[15] Gagnon, J. (2012), “Combating Widespread Currency Manipulation,” Peterson Insti-
    tute for International Economics Policy Brief 2012-19.

[16] Gourio, F. and L. Rudanko (2014), “Customer Capital,” Review of Economic Studies,
    81(3),1102-1136.

[17] Imbs, J. and I. Mejean (2015), “Elasticity Optimism,” American Economic Journal:
    Macroeconomics 7 (3), 43-83.

[18] International Monetary Fund: International Financial Statistics

[19] ISGEP (International Study Group on Exports and Productivity) (2008), “Understand-
    ing Cross-Country Differences in Exporter Premia - Comparable Evidence for 14 Coun-
    tries,” Review of World Economics 144 (4), 596-635.

[20] Lileeva, A. and D. Trefler (2010), “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-
    level Productivity... For Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3), 1051-
    1099.


                                            34
[21] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development: National Accounts Statistics

[22] Pierce, J. and P. Schott (2012), “A Concordance Between Ten-Digit US Harmonized
    System Codes and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries,” Journal of Economic
    and Social Measurement 37 (1-2), 61-96.

[23] Roberts, M. and J. Tybout (1997), “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical
    Model of Entry With Sunk Costs,” American Economic Review 87 (4), 545-564.

[24] Ruhl, K. (2008), “The International Elasticity Puzzle,” mimeo.

[25] Ruhl, K. and J. Willis (2017), “New Exporter Dynamics,” International Economic
    Review, forthcoming.

[26] Staiger, R. and A. Sykes (2010), “’Currency Manipulation’ and World Trade,” World
    Trade Review 9(4), 583-627.

[27] van Beveren, I., A. Bernard and H. Vandenbussche (2012), “Concording EU Trade and
    Production Data over Time,” NBER Working Paper 18604.

[28] World Bank: World Development Indicators

[29] World Trade Organization: Tariff Download Facility




                                           35
