                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
                         OF TAX REFORMS




                         Mervyn A. King




                     Working Paper No. 1996




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 1986




Paper presented to the Symposium on Empirical Public Finance at the
Fifth World Congress of the Econometric Socity, MIT, 1985. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                Working Paper #1996
                                                August 1986




                    The Empirical Analysis of Tax Reforms




                                  ABSTRACT




Over the last decade increasing use has been made of individual household
data to analyse the gains and losses from tax reform. Much attention has
been paid to the econometric estimation of models of household responses to
taxes. But these models yield valid estimates of the welfare consequences
of tax changes only when the implied preference orderings are well behaved.
This paper discusses the nature of such conditions in detail. Where there
are rionlinearities in the budget constraint then two sets of "primal" and
"dual" conditions must be satisfied.     The analysis of these conditions
yields suggestions for the specification of behavioural models and the use
of individual-specific information in the observed data.




                                               Professor Mervyn A. King
                                               Department of Economics
                                               London School of Economics
                                               Houghtori Street
                                               London, WC2A 2AE
                                               ENGLAND
                   THE EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF TAX REFORMS*

                               Mervyn A. King

1. Introduction


       subject could be more appropriate or topical for the first World
      No

Congress of the Society to be held in the United States than the empirical
analysis of tax reform. In May 1985 the President sent his proposals for
tax   reform to Congress in order "to change our present tax system into a

model of fairness, simplicity, efficiency, and compassion, to remove the

obstacles to growth and unlock the door to a future of unparalleled

innovation and achievement".   (US 1985). If enacted, these proposals would

make a significant difference to the living standards of many families.

The average reduction in taxes as a proportion of income is estimated at

0.6%. But only 58.1% of families would experience a reduction in taxes.

(US 1985, Chart 13),    It is clear that there are substantial numbers of

gainers and losers.

      Who gains, who loses? The answer to this question is of interest not

only in order to assess the distributional impact of the reform, but also

to evaluate why certain proposals are put forward and supported or opposed

by different political interest groups. Conventionally, economists assess

reforms in terms of the implied change in deadweight loss and typically

such estimates are, in terms of order of magnitude, less than one per cent

of national income. Figures of this kind are, however, usually an average

of large positive and negative values. The mean absolute gain is usually



*Financial support was provided by the ESRC Research Programme on Taxation,
 Incentives, and the Distribution of Income. I am particularly indebted to
 my colleagues A,B. Atkinson and N.H. Stern for stimulating discussions and
 comments over many years, and to Ailsa Roell for comments on this paper.
                              -2-

substantially larger and it is the distribution of gains and losses that is

relevant to an assessment of the merits of and motives for a reform.

    Tax reform can have a major impact on the net incomes and welfare of

families, on a par with significant changes in the annual increment to GNP.

It is surprising, therefore, that much less attention has been paid to

modelling the gains and losses that result from tax reform than has been

devoted to macroeconomic modelling.       In part this may reflect the
acceptance of James Tobin's famous maxim that "it takes a whole heap of

Harberger triangles to fill an Okun gap".    While there is by definition

only one Okun gap there are indeed heaps and heaps of Harberger triangles

waiting to be thrown in. Recognition of this has been behind the impetus

for tax reform not only in the US but in Europe and much of the

English-speaking world. Unfortunately, grandiose claims for the benefits

that might be expected to flow from tax reform have been made. How can we

assess the plausibility of such claims?

    It is obvious, though it can never be stressed too often, that the

quality of the model and associated parameter estimates is the critical

factor in assessing the plausibility of the simulated gains and losses. A

satisfactory model must appear convincing in several dimensions,

theoretical consistency, the ability to explain observed empirical

phenomena, and a range of econometric criteria (on which there is by no

means uniform agreement).    This is not simply a question of "flexible

functional forms" but of the nature of the model itself. For example, in
                               -3-


the study of taxation is it more helpful to work with a static or

life-cycle model of labour supply?

    In this paper, however, I want to suppose that for the moment we

suspend our disbelief in the models that we have estimated, and investigate

the consequences of taking them seriously for welfare analysis.    I shall

argue that this generates additional criteria that should be used when

selecting and estimating a model of household behaviour. Two main themes

are pursued below.      The first is the need for a systematic sensitivity

analysis of the consequences of tax changes.     The second is the role of

individual effects in estimating the distribution of gains and losses as a

whole. There is a major difference between time-series analysis on the one

hand and the use of cross-section data for welfare analysis on the other.

In the latter case our interest is not confined to the model itself, but

extends also to the statistical inferences one may draw about the effects

of a change in the tax system on each individual in the sample.
Individual-specific effects are crucial.      It follows that heterogenous

preferences are important not only for estimation but also for simulation

and welfare analysis.     This latter aspect has been neglected relative to

the attention that heterogeneity has received in the literature on

estimation.

    The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 examines the role of

"nonlinearities" and argues that in this context no representative consumer

exists.   Aggregate models are, therefore, unhelpful and welfare analysis

must be carried out using individual household data. Sections 3-5 discuss

the problems of using estimated preference orderings to calculate gains and
                                    -4-


losses, and illustrate these with reference to two empirical examples in

the public finance      literature.       Finally, section 6 discusses the

implications of the issues raised in Section 3 for the estimation of models

that are to be used in welfare analysis, and puts forward some tentative

suggestions for methods that might be used for both estimation and

simulation of tax reforms.



2. Nonlinearities

    I shall argue below that some of the problems that arise in the

empirical analysis    of     tax   reforms   stem from the existence of
"nonlinearities" in budget constraints.      By nonlinearities I do not mean

simply the familiar phenomenon of a nonlinear budget constraint induced by

a progressive tax system, but a wide range of factors that affect the

opportunity sets of households. Taxes invariably lead to heterogeneity in

the prices facing households. In markets in which households can easily

transact with each other, of which the best example is asset markets, no

equilibrium exists unless nonlinearities of ome form are introduced. The

government's attempt to price discriminate must be buttressed by tax

arbitrage constraints that limit transactions.        Examples of this are

studied in Miller (1977) and Auerbach and King (1983). Nonlinearities are,

therefore, likely to be a generic phenomenon in models of taxation.     Tne

main types of nonlinearity are
                                  -5-


(i)       non-negativity constraints - on,       for example, hours worked,

consumption demands, asset demands (if short sales are prohibited or

assets have different characteristics when held in negative

quantities).



(ii)     households may not be free to buy or sell as much as they would

like at the observed market price.          This may be because of explicit

rationing or pre-determined contractual arrangements that limit ex post

flexibility.



(iii) public goods provision -      in   which the virtual budget constraint

is determined by   the   marginal willingness to pay for the fixed quantity

of the public good.



(iv) discrete choice models -     in   which the choice between a number of

mutually exclusive alternatives cannot be described in terms of a

single linear budget constraint.



(v) nonhinearities in the effective budget constraint induced by both

the tax schedule and also those benefits paid to households that are

contingent upon consumption or labour supply behaviour. The resulting

budget    sets   may     be   very complicated (Hausman 198la, l983b,
                                    -6-
      forthcoming) atid Moffitt (1985).   Nonconvexities are induced by the

      interaction between taxes and social security contributions (FICA in

      the US, NIC in the UK), by special allowances such as the earned income

      tax credit in the US (Weisbach, 1985), and by programmes for low income

      families such as AFDC in the US and Family Income Supplement (FIS) and

      Housing Benefit in the UK.

      Nor is the budget constraint necessarily continuous.   In Figure 1 we

show the budget constraint relating consumption to hours worked for a

married man in the UK following the changes to benefits and National

Insurance Contributions (NICs) in 1985. The figure is drawn for a married

man with a non-working wife, two children, and living in rented
accommodation with rent and rates of £15 and £5 a week respectively.

Discontinuities are induced by FIS (at 30 hours a week) and NICs.         In

particular, when the rate of NICs changes at a threshold the new rate is

levied on all earnings not just earnings above the threshold. This is true

for both employer and employee contributions.     Assume that labour market

equilibrium equates the marginal product of labour with the total marginal

employment cost (the wage rate plus marginal employer's NIC). Then it is

natural to assume that the budget constraint should be drawn for a constant

marginal product of labour rather than a constant wage rate. With jumps in

the NICs rates not only is the budget constraint discontinuous but there

are certain ranges of hours worked which are simply infeasible (see Figure

1).    Total employment costs jump discontinuously at a NICs threshold and

for a given marginal product of labour this implies that the number of

hours worked is not a continuous choice variable. Figure 1 is drawn for a
                                  -7-
marginal product of labour of £2 per hour in 1985 prices.

    There are two important consequences of nonlinearities.   The first is

that there is no representative consumer.     Although there are theorems

indicating when it is possible to aggregate over endowments (Corruan 1961,

Muellbauer 1975, 1976) it is not possible to define a representative

consumer for welfare analysis when prices vary across consumers.       For

example, Figure 1 is by no means representative of the budget constraint

facing married men in the UK. The low marginal product of labour was

chosen to highlight the discontinuities.       This means that both for

estimation and welfare analysis we must employ disaggregated household

data.   In turn, the heterogeneity of household demands and preferences

raises a number of issues that are discussed below.

    Secondly, with linear budget constraints welfare analysis can proceed

only if the conditions for a consistent preference ordering are satisfied

by the estimated parameters over the relevant region of the price-income

space. But these conditions are not sufficient for welfare analysis to be

performed when nonlinearities exist. Nonlinearities may occur at points

in the quantity space that are not spanned by the estimated preference

ordering. A complete preference ordering may not be recoverable. This is

discussed further below.
                                    -8-
3. Estimation of Gains and Losses

    The result of a change in the tax system can be described in terms of

the vector g of gains (or losses) of each household in the economy. In

this section we consider some conceptual problems that arise when drawing

inferences about   from econometric estimates of household behaviour.

    Much of the empirical literature on the distribution of the tax burden

has been concerned with the effects of taxes on the net cash incomes of

households (Musgrave et al. 1974, Pecbman and Okner, 1974, Pechman, 1985).

Attention has also been paid, particularly in the analysis of labour

supply, to the value of "full income" the market value of a household's

total endowment including its time endowment. These measures are valuable

for two reasons. First, they focus attention on the diversity of household

experience in contrast to the aggregate measures of deadweight loss.

Secondly, they are robust with respect to assumptions about household

behaviour.   Nevertheless, neither cash nor full income are satisfactory

measures of gains and losses for reasons which are common to both.          A
household's welfare, and hence the gain which it experiences following a

tax reform, depends upon both its endowment and the prices that it faces.

Cash income ignores the latter, and full income incorporates price effects

only to the extent that they affect the value of a household's total

endowment. Consider, for example, two households identical in all respects

except for the wage rate which they can earn. The household with the higher

wage rate has a higher full income.       But this exaggerates the difference

between the two households because, of course, the same household faces a

higher price for leisure.
                                       -9-
    When preferences are defined over a vector of commodities rather than a

scalar such as income (so that relative prices matter) then a measure of

welfare is required.     For empirical purposes it is convenient if welfare

can be measured in units that have some natural interpretation, such as

dollars or the number of baskets of a given consumption bundle.         These

correspond to money metric utility (McKenzie 1956, Samuelson 1974) and

quantity metric utility (Debreu 1951, 1954, Diewert 1981) respectively.

The choice between the two is a matter of taste. In what follows I shall

work principally with the dual version of money metric utility proposed by

r(ing (l983a, equivalent income function) and Varian (1984, indirect income

compensation function).      The differences of terminology are of less

importance than the fact that both measures are defined over the observable

variables that characterise the household's opportunity set. We make the

following assumptions.

Al Households have identical preferences described by the direct and

    indirect utility functions



                          u —   u(x)                            (3.1)

                          v —   v(2,   y)                       (3.2)



   where x denotes the vector of commodity demands (including leisure),

         2 denotes the vector of consumer prices (including the wage rate)

            and y is exogenous full income. Variations in preferences,

           which have played an important role in the econometric

            literature, are discussed below.
                                   - 10   -




A2   There exist observable budget constraints for all households. Where the

     budget constraint is complex it may be difficult in practice to observe

     its shape (Heckman 1983).     For budget constraints that are either

     nonlinear, nonconvex or discontinuous, it is possible to construct the

     equivalent continuous linear budget constraint.     Examples are given
     below.   This virtual budget constraint is defined by the values of

     (strictly positive) virtual prices (Rothbarth 1941) and virtual income

     (Hausman 1981a, 198lb) such that at these virtual prices and income the

     household would choose the same consumption bundle as it selects under

     the nonlinear budget constraint. We shall assume for the moment that

     such a virtual budget constraint exists for all households. But, as we

     show below, this is not necessarily true and the consequences of

     nonexistence for the welfare analysis of tax reforms are nontrivial.

     To compare welfare levels under different consumption possibility sets

we choose a reference price vector, denoted by ER. Although the choice of

a reference price vector is arbitrary, certain choices, such as current

prices, allow a more natural interpretation of gains and losses than

others.

     Indirect money metric utility, or equivalent income, YE as it will be

called here, is defined as that level of income which, at the reference

price vector, affords the same level of utility as can be attained under

the budget constraint (2 y).l Formally,
                                     - 11   -




                        v(R,    YE) =   v(2,    y)               (3.3)



    Inverting the indirect utility function we obtain equivalent income in

terms of the expenditure function



                        YE —   e(,   v)                          (3.4)

    Substituting from the indirect utility function gives equivalent income

as a function of reference prices and actual prices and income



                        YE     f(2R, , y)                        (3.5)

    The principal advantage of working with the equivalent income function

(ElF)   is that it allows a separation of preferences, which are
characterised by the functional form of f, and opportunities, which are

described by the arguments of f. It is also measured in money units. In

the study of income distribution and poverty, attention has traditionally

been focussed on measures of resources rather than welfare. To some extent

this dichotomy is rather artificial. Equivalent income is itself a measure

of resources but computed at a standardised gradient of the budget set

(the reference price vector).     In principle, it allows us to take into

account the various types of "nonhiriearjtjes" identified in section 2, but

this is feasible only when there exists a virtual budget constraint. The

use of the ElF as a measure of resources, however, depends upon the

acceptance of individual preferences as the appropriate basis for analysis.

Where this is not the case a1ernative measures may appear more attractive

(Atkinson 1985).
                                         - 12   -




   The ElF may be used to analyse either the optimal design of the tax

system or the consequences of piecemeal reform.2 From the empirical point

of view the latter is usually of more interest. Consider a tax reform that

maps the original budget set (2° y°) into the post-reform budget set
(2P, yP).3 A measure of the welfare gain resulting from the reform is

given by

                          WG         f(2R, 2P, yP) -    f(2R,   20, y°)    (3.6)




    Consider two possible states of the economy, s1 and 2• The welfare

gain to the household in moving from s1 to 2 is denoted by WG                  There
                                                                          12
is an infinite number of such measures, each one corresponding to a

different reference price vector. Some are more familiar than others. For

example, if we take initial prices 2 as the reference price vector then WG

is similar to a Hicksian equivalent variation measure that incorporates

changes in income.    With post-reform prices 2 as the reference price

vector WG is the Hicksian compensating variation augmented to allow for

income changes. The properties of WO that are important if it is to play a

useful role in the empirical analysis of tax changes are

a) For every possible tax reform s -            s,   if utility is higher in state j

   than in state i then

                          WG
                                 -+s.
                               S .
                                 1J
  This follows directly from the fact that there is, for a given                   a

   one-to-one correspondence between f and utility.

b) The welfare gain in moving from state i to state j is equal in magnitude
                                            - 13      -




     though opposite in sign to that in moving in the reverse direction.


                              WG              - WG

                                     13
                                   S.-*S.
                                                      31
                                                     S.-3S.


c)   Transitivity : if WG

     WG
                            s.-*s.
                             13
                                     and WG
                                               jk
                                              s.-*s
                                                          are both positive then not only is

               positive also but the following linear relationship holds
          ik
                              WG
                                     ik =WG 13 +WGS.4S
                                   s.-+s        S.-*S.


     This   can be seen by direct substitution from (3.6).

      It should be noted that properties (b) and (c) are not satisfied by the

Hicksian equivalent and compensating variations. These measures implicitly

assume a different reference price vector for each pairwise comparison of

states. For example, the equivalent variation employs the prices in state

i to compute the gain in moving from state i to either state j                  or   state k,

but the prices in state j        to compute the gain in moving from state j to
state k.       As a result transitivity will not in general hold.4                     It is

important, therefore, that once a reference price vector has been chosen,

it should remain constant throughout the analysis and also, if possible,

when comparing the results of different empirical studies.                            My own

empirical   experience (King 1983a, l983b) has been that estimates of welfare

gains are rather insensitive to the choice of reference price vector within

the range defined by the pre- and post-reform values, provided that all

allocations (both initial state and all possible reforms) are evaluated at

the same reference price vector.
                                      -14-


       If the reform is revenue-neutral then in an economy of identical

households WG measures the change in deadweight loss. With heterogeneous

households the aggregate change in deadweight loss may be defined as the

sum of welfare gains.       Even if households have identical preferences and

face a common set of prices (including wage rates), this aggregate measure

is independent of the distribution of income only when preferences are of

the Corman (1961) polar form (parallel linear Engel curves).       In general,

therefore ranking reforms in terms of their effect on deadweight loss

implies a set of distributional weights.            Focussing on per capita
deadweight loss (the mean value of WG) ignores most of the information

contained in the vector of welfare gains. This contrasts sharply with the

sophisticated       treatment    of   individual-specific   differences    that

characterises recent econometric study of micro-data (Beckman 1974, Hausnian

and Taylor 1981).

       Since the equivalent income (or indirect compensation) function is

simply an expenditure function evaluated at reference prices and defined

explicitly over the actual budget constraLnt it must satisfy certain

properties if it is to represent a consistent preference ordering.        These

are

(i)      f is homogeneous of degree one in 2R

(ii)     f is homogeneous of degree zero in 2 and y

(iii) f is nondecreasing in the reference prices 2R•

(iv)     f   is nonincreasing in the prices 2•

(v)      f is increasing in y

(vi)     f is concave in reference prices
                                        - 15    -




(vii)   £ is Continuous with first and second derivatives (except
                                                                        possibly
        on a set of measure zero)

(viii) f satisfies the boundary condition

                          f(p, 2 y)         y
(ix)    Demands may be obtained from £ in two ways:

        a) Given that f is an expenditure function defined over          and v,

          then from Shephard's lemma




                                =
                                    R    R                            (3.7)
                                        22

b) Differentiating f with respect to Pj holding v and 2R constant

          yields
                                    -f/p.
                            j       f/y                               38
    If conditions (i) to (viii) are satisfied then the demand functions

(3.7 or 3.8) may be integrated to yield a functional form for the ElF.

(Hurwicz and Uzawa 1971).       It is difficult, however, to find functional

forms that satisfy these conditions either globally or over the feasible

price-income space.     So-called "flexible functional forms" satisfy the

conditions only over certain regions of the price-income space which in

turn depend upon the estimated parameters.            Some of the properties are,

however, easily imposed and arise naturally from the derivation of the ElF

from an estimated demand system.               These are the homogeneity      and
                                     -16-


monotonicity properties (i), (ii), (vii), (viii) and (ix). We shall assume

that in empirical work these properties are imposed.          The remaining

properties ensure that (a) demands are strictly non-negative, and (b) the

matrix of compensated price responses is negative semi-definite (property

(vi)).       We shall call these properties the          "general   concavity

conditions" .5

    Given an estimated preference ordering (or, equivalently, a demand

system) the gains and losses resulting from a tax reform are described by

the vector of WG values.      There are many ways in which information about

the reform can be presented. The distribution of gains and losses can be

illustrated by a quantile analysis of welfare gains; the change in

deadweight loss may be measured by the mean value of welfare gain; and the

gains and losses may be aggregated if a social welfare function is

specified.    For any of these to be meaningful the measure of welfare gain

must correspond to a consistent preference ordering for every household in

the sample.      Outliers   cannot be ignored.   For example, the change in

deadweight loss, which is the mean value of welfare gain, is sensitive to

small numbers of households with large absolute values of welfare gain.

This is often characteristic of reforms in practice in which most

households experience a small gain or loss but in which certain groups,

comprising relatively few households, gain or lose substantial amounts.

Violations of the general concavity conditions invalidate estimates of

deadweight loss. Many empirical studies attempt to overcome this problem

by not reporting the mean value of welfare gain but rather the value of

welfare gain evaluated at the mean values of prices and incomes in the
                                  - 17   -




sample. The general concavity conditions almost always hold at these mean

values. Such a procedure may give a misleading picture of the efficiency

gains of the reform because welfare gain is a highly nonlinear function of

(,y).      Even for calculations of deadweight loss it is necessary to

evaluate WG for the entire distribution of budget constraints observed in

the sample.

    It follows from this that the conditions for a consistent preference

ordering must hold over the relevant domain.      In price-income space the

relevant domain is the set of all budget constraints implied by the pre-

and post-reform vectors of prices and incomes.       In quantity space the

relevant domain is the set of all consumption bundles that would be chosen

by households in the pre- and post-reform allocations.     These conditions

may be expressed in either primal or dual form.

1. Primal (quantity space)

   The direct utility function u(x) must be nondecreasing in its arguments

   (and strictly increasing in at least one) over the relevant domain of x.

2. Dual (price-income space)

   The general concavity conditions must hold over the relevant domain of

   (,y).
    The dual condition was examined above.     The primal condition states

that nonsatiation holds at each commodity bundle that households consume.

This implies that each observed commodity bundle has a positive price

support and hence there exists a continuous linear (virtual) budget

constraint at which the household would choose to consume the bundle.    If

the primal condition is not satisfied then no virtual budget constraint
                                   - 18   -




(with   positive prices) exists.   Why    does this matter?   If welfare is

defined in terms of budget constraints then only the general concavity

conditions need be satisfied provided that the budget constraints are

linear. But if there are any nonlinearities in the budget set, such as a

non-negativity constraint on hours worked, then the primal conditions

become relevant. The reason is that to evaluate the equivalent income

function in the presence of nonlinearities the virtual budget constraint

must be computed. If the primal conditions are not satisfied at the value

of x where the nonlinearity occurs, then with free disposal the assumed

preference ordering is inconsistent with x having been chosen by the

household.    Let the set of x for which the primal conditions are not

satisfied be denoted by X. Then we may say that the preference ordering

does not span the set X. Households that are observed to consume at points

in X thus create problems for welfare analysis. A satisfactory preference

ordering not only satisfies the dual conditions in the relevant
price-income domain but also satisfies the primal conditions in the

relevant quantity domain.

     The primal and dual conditions are not equivalent, and are not implied

by each other. It is possible for the general concavity conditions to hold

for y strictly positive (p,y) and yet for the primal conditions to fail

to hold for some strictly positive x .        To   illustrate this point and

demonstrate its empirical significance we shall consider some examples from

the public finance literature.
                                              - 19     -




4.    Example 1 : Labour Supply

      Consider the following one-period model of labour supply. Preferences

are assumed to be defined over a single composite consumption good and

leisure. Labour supply is assumed to be given by the linear function

                                  L b1 +       b2w     -
                                                            b3y                       (4.1)

      where   L denotes hours worked, w the real wage rate and y full exogenous

income. The price of the consumption good is normalised to unity. Hours

of leisure are (HM-L) where NM is the total number of hours available for

work.     The linear labour supply function is chosen here for two                       reasons.
First, it has been used extensively in the analysis of taxation and labour

supply (Hausman 1981, Bloinquist 1983). Secondly, its simplicity means that

it is easy to derive analytically an explicit expression for the virtual

budget constraint.       The indirect utility function corresponding to (3.9)
is6




                                  -
                                      b3w                 b2 w
                                                   HMbl - —            -
                                                                            b2
                   v(w,y)     e              y +                                      (4.2)
                                                                                  2
                                                       b3         b3       (b3)



      We now consider the primal and dual conditions for this model.                          The

dual conditions are

(i)     f is concave in reference prices. This can be shown to imply that

        b2 - b3 (HML)       0 and hence that


                                                   +
                        (b2b3HM)            b1b3       b2b3w
                                                                                      (4.3)
                                       .
                   y
                                     - 20     -




(ii)   The demand for leisure is non-negative which implies that




                                     b1+b2w-HM
                                                                   (44)
                                         b3



(iii) The demand for the consumption good is non-negative, which implies

       that




                              y(l-b3w)   w(HM-bl-b2w)              (4.5)




              Figure 2 shows the region in price-income space in which the

       dual conditions are satisfied. It is bordered by the constraints

       (4.3)-(4.5). The figure is plotted for US data for 877 male heads of

       household aged between 29 and 55 taken from the 1980 Michigan Panel

       Survey of Income Dynamics. Simple linear regressions of hours worked

       on wages and nonlabour income yield parameter estimates that always

       violate the general concavity conditions.7 There are several reasons

       for this. First, the wage is estimated by the ratio of earnings to

       reported hours. Measurement error in the latter will lead to biassed

       estimates of the wage coefficient. Secondly, with nonlinear budget

       constraints the net wage and income are endogenous. Hence we take

       Hausman's (198la) maximum likelihood parameter estimates of the wage

       and income coefficients (based on a very similar sample of 1085 prime
                                                      - 21   -




      age males in the 1975 PSID) and update them to allow for the increase

      in wage rates and incomes between 1975 and 1980. The intercept is

      chosen such that mean predicted and observed hours are equal. This

      yields the following values, b1                 57.061, b2   13.745, b3 =   0.121.8
      Figure 2 shows also the sample mean wage and full income. They lie in

      the region within which the dual conditions are satisfied. In fact,

      for every observation in the sample the observed budget constraint is

      in the acceptable region.

          The primal condition in this static labour supply model is that

      the virtual budget constraint has a non-negative virtual wage. The

      virtual wage and virtual income, w* and y* respectively, for a

      consumption bundle (C,L) are given by the pair of equations



                                  L b1 + b2w* - b3y*                          (4.6)

                                  C y* - w*(HML)                              (4.7)



      Hence

                                    L+b     C-b
                                        3         1
                                                                              (4.8)
                                   b2 b3(HML)


                                    b2C-4-(L-b1)      (FlNL)
                                                                              (4.9)
                                      b2b3(HML)
The denominator of these expression is positive if the dual

conditions are satisfied. Assuming this to be the case then for the

primal condition to hold
                                    - 22   -




                                L    b1 - b3C                      (4.10)




    Figure 3 shows this constraint in quantity space for the US data used

in figure 2. The region that the linear labour supply function

cannot span is the triangle bordered by the line drawn in the figure

and the two axes. In this region the indifference curves are

upward-sloping, and two such are drawn in Figure 3 corresponding to

the parameter values assumed above. The direct utility function can

be obtained by substituting the expression for w and y given by (4.8)

and (4.9) into the indirect utility function (4.2).

    In terms of the dual conditions welfare analysis using the linear

labour supply function appears straightforward. But this is only

part of the story. The primal conditions are violated over a

non-negligible region of the commodity space and this restricts the

type of problem that can be studied.       For example, the model cannot

explain non-participation in the labour force (defined as the choice

of zero hours of work) for households with small endowments, nor the work

decisions of the retired who may choose to work for a few hours a week.

Consider a married couple with no nonlabour income and in which the

husband's labour supply is fixed at 35 hours per week. The wife's

labour supply is variable and the household's exogenous income is the

value of the wife's time endowment plus the husband's net of tax

earnings.   Suppose that the husband's wage was one-half of the mean wage

observed in the sample. With the parameters assumed above, zero
                                     23 -




hours   of work would never be chosen by a woman married to such a man

if her wage rate was less than 49% of the mean male wage observed in

the sample. For such women the virtual wage at zero hours is

negative. In certain applications this      be of little consequence. But in

general both the primal and dual conditions must be satisfied for the

particular reform under consideration.



5. Example 2    The Demand for Housing Services

    The second example concerns the housing market in the UK. The interest

in this case is that because of institutional restrictions fostered by

government policy observed consumption of housing services is the minimum

of demand for housing and the rationed supply which is determined by the

policies of public housing authorities. The effective budget constraint is

nonlinear and the welfare of a household that is rationed depends upon the

virtual rather than the observed prices.

    In the UK the price of housing services varies across households both

because of differences in tax rates (national and local) and because of the

pricing policies of the local housing authorities             (King,     1980).

Cross-section data can, therefore, be used to estimate both income and

price responses.      The existence of rationing, however, dampens the

effective responses because demands are filtered thorough the rationing

mechanism to yield observed consumption levels. For welfare analysis two

cases must be distinguished.        The first is where the household is

unconstrained and money metrfc utility can be defined over the observed

budget constraint. The second is where the household is rationed and money
                                          -24-


 metric utility is defined over the virtual budget constraint computed at

the observed consumption bundle. Both primal and dual conditions must be

satisfied for welfare analysis to be possible.

    To illustrate this we consider a simple model in which preferences are

defined over the consumption of housing services and a composite

consumption good representing all other commodities.               Preferences are

described by a flexible functional form and for this example I use my

previous estimates of the Deaton-Muellbauer (l980b) almost ideal demand

system (AIDS) in which the share of total income devoted to housing is

given by



                S   =    +   my +    33   mPH + 34(lflPH)2        (5.1)




where y denotes real income (deflated by the price of the composite good)

and H is the real price of housing services. The model was estimated on

data for 4227 households living in England and Wales drawn from the Family

Expenditure Survey. The sample period was the fiscal year 1973/4.



    The indirecty utility function, corresponding to (5.1) is




           v(PH,y) =    pl(mny
                                 -
                                      - o3lnPH   -
                                                     a4(lnPH)2)   (5.2)


where the parameters of (5.1) and (5.2) are related by
                                           - 25   -




                     -(33 +234/32)     -




                     -(/ + 234/(32)2)


                     -




    Consider, first, the dual conditions in the price-income domain.   It

can be shown that these imply



(i) concavity of £ in reference prices:




             -
                     s(l-2)   + 33 ÷   241-H 0            (5.3)




(ii) non-negativity of demands:



     0   s       1                                        (5.4)
                                  - 26   -




    Substitution   of (5.1) into the above equations yields the implied

relationships between H and y.      On any realistic scaling these curves,

which define the region within which the dual conditions are satisfied, are

indistinguishable from the axes. Hence we do not plot the equivalent of

Figure 2 for the housing example.     The conditions are satisfied for all

4,227 households in the sample. With two commodities the extra flexibility

offered by the AIDS functional form has almost no cost in terms of

restricting the domain over which the general concavity conditions are

satisfied. This illustrates a more general point, namely that the trade-off

between flexibility of functional form and consistency of the implied

preference ordering is more severe the large the number of commodities.

    To investigate the primal conditions we plot the indifference map

corresponding to (5.1). There is no explicit form for the direct utility

function and its values are computed numerically by solving for the virtual

price of housing services and virtual income as functions of quantities and

substituting them into the indirect utility function. Although the general

concavity conditions are satisfied almost everywhere in the positive

ortharit of the price-income space, in the quantity space there exists an

infeasible region that cannot be spanned by the estimated preference

ordering. This is shown in Figure 4. As can be seen from the figure, the

indifference curves are spiked-shaped as they approach the line that

defines the border of the infeasible region. No point to the northwest of

the line in Figure 4 can be supported by the estimated preference ordering.

Not only would no household choose to be in this region but there exists no

measure of welfare for a household rationed to consume in this region. The
                                  - 27    -




indifference   map is not defined in the infeasible region. The practical

significance of this varies from case to case. Roughly speaking, the

infeasible region is where expenditure on housing exceeds one-third of

total consumption spending.    Of the 4,227 households in the sample only

nine were observed to be in the infeasible region. But for the purposes of

welfare analysis these households had to be eliminated from the sample, a

rather unsatisfactory procedure because of the resulting sample selection

bias.    In principle, the number of observations that give rise to such

problems could be large, and would not be detected by checks on the general

concavity conditions alone.   Examining the implied indifference map is a

useful way of assessing the economic plausibility of the functional form

and parameter estimates. This is particularly important when measuring

changes in welfare at prices and incomes which are not close to the sample

means.



6. Consistent Estimation of Welfare Effects



    The main conclusion from the above examples is that to carry out a

welfare analysis of a given tax reform we must ensure that the primal and

dual conditions are satisfied for all households in the sample. There are

two ways in which this might be done. The first is to impose the relevant

conditions at the estimation stage. The second is to impose the conditions

when carrying out the welfare analysis.
                                  - 28   -




    Consider the first method.   The difficulty of imposing the relevant

conditions depends upon whether the starting point is the specification of

a direct or an indirect utility function. Most recent studies have adopted

the duality approach in order to simplify the derivation of an observable

demand system. One may specify the expenditure function directly or derive

it from a demand system chosen such that it may be integrated analytically

to yield the indirect utility function using Roy's identity.      The great

advantage of this approach is that it yields an explicit functional form

for the welfare gain.      The drawback is that even for quite simple

functional forms such as those used in the two examples above, the

conditions that must be imposed are complicated functions of both the

parameters and the data. This can be seen from equations (4.3)-(4.5) and

(5.3) and (5.4). The difficulties of imposing the general concavity

conditions globally have been discussed by Christensen and Caves (1980) and

Wales (1977) in the context of flexible functional forms. Some advances in

methods to impose global concavity have been made by Diewert and Wales

(1985) and by McFadden (1985).           There remain serious computational

difficulties in estimating functional forms that impose the general

concavity conditions and yet retain flexibility.        Nevertheless as the

discussion in McFadden (1985) shows, this is a promising area for research.

    Imposition of the primal and dual conditions may be easier if we use

the direct utility function. Again this may either be specified directly

or obtained by specifying a functional form for the marginal rates of

substitution that may be integrated analytically to yield the direct

utility function. The latter method was developed by Heckman (1974) for a
                                       - 29    -




two-commodity model of labour supply, and was used to assess the impact of
child care programmes.     To illustrate Heckman's method I shall use a

general two-commodity model in which preferences are defined over the

consumption levels of two goods, x1 and x2. Preferences are described by

an underlying direct utility function.



                             u =   u(x1,       x2)                  (6.1)




    From the implicit function theorem the marginal rate of substitution

between the two commodities, denoted by m, is given by




                         _____     -                     m(x1,x2)   (6.2)
                                       dx2/U
    For a suitable specification of the function in the differential

equation defined by (6.2) may be solved to give the direct utility function

with the constant of integration taken to be the level of utility.

    The particular twist that Heckman employs is to label the indifference

curves using what is essentially a quantity-metric approach. Choose a

fixed value of x1, 4 say, and ask the question, how much of good 2 would

a household need in order to be as well off as with the bundle (x1,x2)?

Denote the answer to this question by 4:


                                                     R    *
                                           =
                            u(x1,x2)           u(x1,     x2)         (6.3)
                                        - 30   -




    Indifference    curves are now labelled by the value of           which is a

quantity-metric measure of welfare at the reference quantity 4.               In
Heckinan's empirical application x1 is hours of leisure, and                          is a

composite commodity of consumption goods. We may now write the

marginal rate of substitution as a function of               and the label x

                               in                                     (6.4)
                                    in(x1, x)


This is a method of parameterising the indifference map.

    Corresponding to any bundle (x1, x2) the value of x* is given by




                                         xl
                                    ÷                                (6.5)
                                               m(x1, x)dx1
                                          R
                                         xl




    The functional form proposed by Heckman is




                           in m —       + c1x1 +   o2x   +           (6.6)


where cr may contain observable characteristics that influence preferences

and c represents unobservable differences.




                           m(x1, x)dx1
                                               e22   tell -                   (6.7)
                                                                 e14}

where   =   exp(0   + c)
                                     - 31   -




    Hence x is given implicitly by the equation




                         x x2 + 13e22                        (6.8)
                                            fe1X1 -
                                                      e1}
    In the absence of an explicit solution for x we cannot integrate

'6.6) analytically to obtain an explicit direct utility function.        The

attraction of the approach, however, is that it is straightforward to see

what conditions must be imposed for consistency. These are



    (i)            0; for convex preferences


    (ii) Equation (6.8) has a unique solution for x; so that the implied

             indifference curves do not cross.

    (iii) m must be positive for the primal conditions to hold.



    An interesting area for further research would be to find ways to

generalise Beckman's functional form while satisfying conditions (i)   (ii)

and (iii).

    The demand system is defined implicitly by the equations

                              c x c x*(x1 ,x 2)
                                                  —         (6.9)
                                                  p1


                                 y - p1x1                   (6.10)
                                       - 32   -




       Welfare   analysis can be carried out using the quantity-metric measure

        but the lack of an explicit functional form for either the direct or

indirect utility function means that a money metric measure can only be

computed by nunierica1 integration.

       The sheer computational complexity of imposing the relevant conditions

at the estimation stage, especially with heterogeneous preferences,

suggests that it may be worthwhile to explore an alternative method. This

is to impose the conditions at the stage when welfare analysis is carried

out.      Where the heterogeneity of preferences is unobservable (a random

coefficients model) allowing for such heterogeneity allows us to use extra

information in order to impose the conditions implied by theory.             In

essence the idea is that the primal and dual conditions fail to hold

because preferences vary and that the conditions may be imposed by

estimating an individual-specific preference parameter vector using the

information contained in the estimated residual for the observation.

Welfare analysis may then be carried out using the individual-specific

measures of welfare gain.

       In order to impute an individual-specific effect a loss function must

be specified.        To illustrate the general principle we shall consider a

quadratic loss function in which the objective is to minimise the variance

of the prediction of tax revenues. There is no particular reason for this,

other than to exploit linear models. A more general approach might be to

define the loss function in terms of differences between equivalent income

and the expenditure required to purchase the observed consumption bundle at
                                     - 33   -




the reference price vector. Moreover, this approach could be extended to

the estimation not only of the individual-specific effect but of the mean

preference parameter vector as well.        -




    Consider     a simple example in which household preferences over

commodities may be represented by an expenditure system that is linear in

parameters, and in which only linear taxes are considered.       Suppose that

expenditure on a typical commodity by household h is determined by the

model




                                Xh + Eh                 (6.11)




    This system of expenditure equations may be estimated and the estimates

of the parameter vector used to calculate a predicted expenditure after the

reform.


                                                           (6.12)




    This is the usual procedure when using the parameter estimates to

predict the effect of changing the values of the exogenous variables. But

although this procedure gives an unbiased estimate of tax revenues it does

not give an efficient estimate because it ignores the information contained

in the residuals from the fitted regression.      To the extent that the

residual measures an unobservable household-specific effect it contains

information which can be used to reduce the variance of the predictor. A

better    predictor might therefore be
                            - 34   -




                                                            (6.13)
where




    This estimator (suggested by Feldstein and Taylor (1976) and Feenberg

and Rosen (1981)   is, however, also inefficient in that it implicitly

attributes all of the residual to unobservable household-specific effects.

In general, the optimal predictor depends upon the specification of the

error term.

    The optimal predictor will be taken as that which minimises the

variance of the prediction of tax revenues.   Total revenues are a linear

function of expenditures. If we assume that the error terms in (6.11) are

distributed independently across households and across equations (with the

exception of that for the nt11 commodity which is dropped for estimation

purposes), then minimizing the variance of the predictor for tax revenues

is equivalent to minimizing the variance of the predictor for each

expenditure in (6.11). We therefore choose h to minimise the variance of

the predictor for e which we write as


                                                          (6.14)


    Note that all three predictors (6.12), (6.13), (6.14) are unbiased, and

the differences lie in their relative efficiencies.

    We assume that household expenditure may be represented by a mixed

error and variance components model. The error term in (6.11) is given by
                                    - 35   -




                           hXhfh+1h                          (6.15)


    The first component of the error reflects the fact that preferences

vary among the population. The vector i3 is assumed to be distributed with

zero mean and covariance matrix fl.            The second component is a
household-specific effect which is fixed for each household (hence

f =   f   )   and we assume that these effects are drawn from a distribution

with zero mean and variance a.9 The final component measures transitory

effects or measurement errors. It is assumed to be identically and

independently distributed with zero mean and variance c. The three

components are assumed to be uncorrelated with each other. With

cross-section data it is not possible to estimate       although if

we assume that the errors are normally distributed it is possible to

obtain maximum likelihood estimates of 2 and the sum of a2 and a2. The
                                                        u     f

use of panel data allows the estimation of


    From (6.11), (6.14) and (6.15) the prediction error is




                eh hh          + h +       -
                                               - a,f)           (6.16)

The variance of this predictor is

                                -
    V XCX± (X- %x)c2(x.                                         (6.17)
                                     - 36    -




where C is the covariance matrix of the estimator of the parameter vector



    The value of c which minimizes this variance is given by




                                0°'          2       2                (6.18)
                                                 +
                             XhflXh +       0f


    In   other words the optimal predictor of expenditure by household h

after the reform is equal to the prediction given by the structural model

plus a fraction of the residual for household h from the original

regression equal to the proportion of the total variance of the equation

attributable to unobservable household-specific effects adjusted for the

change in the exogenous variables.

    With only cross-section data the value of            cannot be estimated.

This leaves two alternatives.    Either a value can be imposed using prior

information based, perhaps, on other studies which employed panel data

(this approach was used by King and Dicks-Mireaux (1980) to estimate

permanent income), or the fixed effect can be ignored on the grounds that

the most significant household-specific effects are those correlated with

the regressors and captured by the specification of random preferences.

    From (6.14) the predicted deviation of mean expenditure conditional

upon observable characteristics and the value of c, may be attributed to

individual-specific preferences. This deviation may be spread among the
                                   - 37   -




preference parameters according to their relative variances. In practice
most estimates of random preference models take 1 to be diagonal. In this

way a household-specific preference parameter vector may be obtained, and

these parameter estimates used to compute a vector of welfare gains.

    Equally, the conditions that are relevant, both primal and dual, are

now defined in terms of the household specific preference parameters.    To

the extent that much of the residual variance in the model with uniform

preferences can be accounted for by heterogeneous preferences (including

fixed effects) then it is much more likely that the conditions will be

satisfied.    Indeed, in the example of Section 5, once individual-specific

preferences were imputed all of the households in the sample satisfied both

primal and dual conditions.    But a suggestion for formally imposing the

conditions is the following. Once o has been determined then spread the

predicted residual among the preference parameters subject to the
restriction that the necessary conditions hold.      Although the implied

distribution of the preference parameters will then strictly not be that

assunied in estimation, the difference is likely to be small.   The exaniple

of Section 5 suggests that simply incorporating heterogenous preferences

into the welfare measures is likely to be sufficient for all but a very

small number of households.

    This approach of using the additional information in the observed

residual has a good deal in common with the use of shrinkage estimators in

statistics,    (see Morris    (1983)   and the   accompanying discussion),

statistical decision theory, nd empirical Bayesian analysis. Because the

R2 in cross-section models is usually low, it is clear that such
                                     - 38   -




information is potentially valuable. A full Bayesian treatment poses
serious problems becaue it is different to impose the primal and dual

conditions on a tractable joint distribution of the parameters of the

preference ordering.      The prior information contained in the requirement

that the consistency conditions be satisfied, is much easier to impose at

the stage where we are making inferences about individual-specific

parameters. Further use of parametric empirical Bayesian inference appears

a promising direction for research.

     To illustrate the quantitative importance of individual-specific

effects, consider some empirical results for the housing model described in

the second example of Section 5.      I compared estimation of the welfare gain

from abolishing tax relief to home owners both with and without imputed

household-specific effects. Allowing for heterogenous preferences reduced

the estimated deadweight loss of the tax concessions by between 20 and 25

per cent, but it increased the coefficient of variation of welfare gain by

over 40%. Heterogeneity is, therefore, quantitatively important.



7. Conclusions



     The stimulus for empirical analysis of tax reforms has come in recent

years from proponents of a "supply-side" thesis that there are significant

welfare costs to our existing tax system.            The issues involved are

quantitatively important and the arguments directly impinge on the
theoretical and econometric models employed by public finance economists.

It   is not   unreasonable, therefore, to subject the claims made by would-be
                                   - 39   -




reformers   to serious scrutiny.   I interpret this to mean that we need a

systematic sensitivity analysis to discover which propositions are robust

with respect to changes in the parameterisation (or specification) of the

model among which the available data make it difficult to choose.           In

estimation we do not wish to impose on the data too restrictive a set of

assumptions on either the functional form or stochastic distribution. Even

if the data are relatively uninformative about certain differences in the

parameterisation of the model, it is important to examine the sensitivity

of the estimated welfare gains to these differences. The implications of a

research programme along these lines are:



   (i)   To incorporate supply-side behavioural responses the impact of

         the reform should be measured by the welfare gain, and care be

         taken to hold constant the reference price vector that used

         as the basis for comparisons. Much confusion in the literature

         has been caused by a rather casual approach to the calculation

         of money measures of gains and losses.



 (ii)    There is no reason to suppose that there exists a representative

         consumer, and every reason to suppose that there does not. Hence

         welfare analysis must be conducted using the full sample of

         observations.
                                    -40-


  (iii) Modelling the behaviour of "outliers" is the essence of capturing

           the effects of tax reform, whereas in conventional econometric

           estimation outliers are often seen as a potential hindrance to

           obtaining robust parameter estimates. The top ten percent of

           the income distribution are often critical to an assessment of

           the revenue effects of a reform, and the bottom ten percent to

           the distributional consequences. These households have wage

           rates, incomes and other characteristics that may be a long way

           from the mean of the sample.



(iv)       Combining (i)-(iii) I have argued that conditional upon the

           functional form of the model, the implied preference ordering

           used for welfare analysis must be consistent with the axioms

           of consumer choice for each observation in the sample. Methods

           of ensuring this were discussed above. Sensitivity analysis then

            takes the form of examining the robustness of conclusions about

            the effects of a reform to alternatve functional forms among

           which it is difficult to discriminate using the available data)-°



       Are violations of either the primal or dual conditions quantitatively

significant? In the above examples only simple functional forms were used

in order to illustrate the argument and the numbers of violations were

small.     But with more sophisticated models the number of violations can

increase alarmingly.     For example, Blundell et al. (1985) in a study of

family labour supply in the UK that investigated the role of demographic
                                   - 41   -




characteristics    in great detail found large numbers of violations of the

general concavity conditions for even the most flexible functional form

estimated.   These occurred for between 16% and 26% of the sample.      As

Blundell and Meghir (1985) themselves comment "there is clear evidence of

an underlying trade-off between flexibility and theory consistency."

Similarly, in studies of consumer demand using large cross-section data

sets Baccouche and Laisney (1985) and Hughes (1985) both found large

numbers of violations. Hughes (1985) discovered that different flexible

functional forms could be ranked in terms of the number of violations.

Performance in this dimension might be used as an informal criterion of

model selection.

    Does it really matter if the primal or dual conditions are violated by

some households in the sample? Surely, the models that we estimate are no

more than approximations (or to use Learner's (1985) phrase "economic

metaphors") to the underlying model of economic behaviour, and it should

come as no surprise when some observations appear to be inconsistent with

the theory. This misses the point. The fact that our models capture only

some of the many influences of policy variables on behaviour is certainly

important and implies the need for sensitivity analysis. ut for any given

parameterisation of the model the analysis must be consistent with the

concept that is being measured.     Violations of either the primal or dual

conditions mean that the estimated welfare gains for those households are

meaningless and can lead to severe bias in the estimate of statistics such

as the mean welfare gain (that is, the change in deadweight loss).1-1- The

conventional approach to this problem is simply to drop these households
                                    -42-


from the sample when doing welfare analysis. It is clear that this is not

an attractive procedure.    There is no obvious way to correct for the

resulting sample selection bias because the model provides no means of

relating the welfare gain of the excluded households to the estimated gain

of the included households. The selection criterion is the result of the

failure of the model. Moreover, the number of households dropped because of

violations will vary with the choice of functional form thus making it more

difficult to carry out sensitivity analysis on a uniform sample.

    Perhaps the following practical argument will convince those readers

who are as yet unpersuaded.     Household expenditure surveys are used by

governments to predict who will gain and who will lose from tax changes.

It is unlikely that the Chancellor of the Exchequer could stand up in the

House of Commons and announce that according to Treasury calculations

almost every family would benefit from his proposals, except that is for

the 20 per cent of families who unfortunately were deleted from the

analysis because their behaviour appeared to be inconsistent with the

axioms of consumer choice. A promising direction for future research is the

imposition of the primal and dual conditions by allowing for variations in

preferences among the population.

    In the last resort of course many will argue that it is fruitless to

analyse policy changes, that economists are either ignored or used by

policy-makers. But the fact that empirical analysis may have some impact

on decisions means that, even if our present knowledge is very limited, we

should strive to report that knowledge in a manner that is credible,

stressing those results that seem to be most robust.
                                     -43-


                                    FOOTNOTES

1. Similarly, in an interternporal setting equivalent wealth may be
     defined as that value of initial full wealth which, at the reference
     price vector (including interest rates), affords the same level of
     expected utility as can be attained given the actual budget constraint
     and distribution of future wages and prices.

2.    In an economy of identical households, the optimum tax rates are
     obtained by maximising (3.5) subject to the government's revenue
     constraint.     It can be shown (King, 1983a) that this is equivalent to
     mininlising a measure of deadweight loss.       When households are
     heterogeneous     the   optimum depends upon explicit interpersonal
     comparisons.

3. The term "reform" is sometimes used in the literature to denote only a
    local change from some given initial position.    The analysis of such
    marginal reforms requires much less information than in the case of
    discrete changes, as /thmad and Stern (1983) have shown.  Knowledge of
    aggregate responses alone provides sufficient information to evaluate
    the reform.   In this paper we focus on the analysis of non-marginal
     reforms.

4.    The problem is even more severe in the case of the compensating
     variation which would, for example, incorrectly compare a set of
     mutually exclusive reforms at reference prices corresponding to each of
     the alternatives.   (Kay 1980, King 1983a).   For this application the
     equivalent variation would be appropriate because it would employ a
     common reference price vector given by the pre-reform prices.

5.    These are called "regularity conditions" by Christensen and Caves
     (1980).

6.    See Hausmari (1981a). We define y to be full exogenous income in the
     static model of labour supply, whereas Hausman takes it to be nonlabour
     income.    This is of no consequence for our analysis.           In an
     intertemporal model y represents full expenditure in the period, and
     with preferences that exhibited interteniporal separability (4.2) would
     be the conditional indirect utility function.

7. In my experience this is true also for similar samples drawn from
    the UK Family Expenditure Survey.

8.    Hausman's (198la) wage coefficient was 0.0113, and for the income
     coefficient we take the mean value of the estimated truncated normal
     distribution assumed for this coefficient of -0.153.       These were
     converted to 1980 weekly 'ialues and adjusted for the fact that we use
     full income rather than virtual nonlabour income.
                                    -44-
9 .   e take a random effects
                        of
                               rather than a fixed effects model because the
                              the   error term              allows   for a
      first   component                            already
      household-specific effect that is correlated with the regressors.

10. The computational burden of a sensitivity analysis of this kind may be
    greatly lessened by the use of a package such as TRAP (King l983a).

11.   If the primal conditions are violated then no welfare measure for the
      household may exist (as in the infeasible region in Figure 4). When
      the dual conditions are violated then the compensated own-price
      responses may be positive, and the introduction of a distortionary tax
      may raise predicted welfare and lower estimated deadweight loss.
                                   - 45   -


                                 REFERENCES

Ahmad, E. and Stern, N.H. (1984), "The Theory of Reform and Indian Indirect
    Taxes", Journal of Public Economics 25, 259-298.

Ashenfelter, 0. and Hecknian, J.J. (1974>, "The Estimation of Income and
    Substitution Effects in a Model of Family Labor Supply", Econornetrica
    42, 73-85.

Ashworth, J.S. and Ulph, D.T. (1981), "Estimating Labour Supply with
    Piecewise Linear Budgets, in (eds.) Brown, C.V. Taxation and Labour
    Supply Allen and Unwin, London.

Atkinson, A.B. (1985), "How Should We Measure Poverty? : Some Conceptual
    Issues,", mimeo, LSE.

Auerbach, A.J. and King, M.A. (1983), "Taxation, Portfolio Choice and
    Debt-Equity Ratios: A General Equilibrium Model", Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 98, 587-609.

Baccouche, R. and F. Laisney (1985), "Analyse Microeconomique de la
    Reforme de la TVA de juillet 1982 en France : Premiers Resultats".
    mimeo, Toulouse.

Blomquist, N.S. (1983), "The Effect of Income Taxation on the Labour Supply
    of Married Men in Sweden", Journal of Public Economics 22, 169-197

Blundell, R. and Meghir, C, (1985), "Selection Criteria for a
    Microeconometric Model of Labour Supply", Centre for Economic Policy
    Research Discussion Paper No. 57, mimeo, London.

Blundell, R. Meghir, C., Symons, E. and Walker I. (1985), "Alternative
    Specifications of Labour Supply and the Simulation of Tax Reforms",
    mimeo, University College London.

Burtless, G. and Hausman, J.A. (1978), "The Effect of Taxes on Labour
    Supply: Evaluating the Gary Negative Income Tax Experiment", Journal
    of Political Economy 86, 1103-1130.

Christensen, L. R. and D. W. Caves (1980), "Global Properties of Flexible
    Functional Forms", American Economic Review 70, 422-432.

Deaton, A.S. (1981), "Optimal Taxes and the Structure of Preferences",
    Econometrica 49, 1245-1260

Deaton, A.S. (1981), "Econometric Issues for Tax Design in Developing
    Countries", in (eds.) Newbery, D. and Stern, N.H.

Deaton, A.S. and J. Muellbauer, l98Oa, Economics and Consumer Behaviour
    (Cambridge University Press)
                                     -46-
Deaton, A.S. and J.Muellbauer, 1980b, An Almost Ideal Demand System,
    American Economic Review 70, 312-326.

Debreu, C. 1951, The coefficient of Resource Utilization, Econometrica 19,
    273-292.

Debreu, G. 1954 A Classical Tax-Subsidy Problem, Econometrica 22, 14-22.

Diewert, W. E. (1981), "The Measurement of Deadweight Loss Revisited",
    Econometrica 49, 1225-1244.

Diewert, W. E. and T. J. Wales (1985), "Flexible Functional Forms and
    Global Curvature Conditions", University of British Columbia
    Discussion Paper No. 85-19, mimeo.

Feenberg, D. R. and H. S. Rosen (1983), "Alternative Tax Treatments of
    the Family : Simulation Methodology and Results", in (ed.)
    Feldstein, M.S. Behavioural Simulation Methods in Tax Policy
    Analysis, Chicago University Press.

Feldstein, M. S. and A. K. Taylor (1976), "The Income Tax and Charitable
    Contributions", Econornetrica 44, 1201-1222

Gorman, W.M. ,   1961, On a Class of Preference Fields, Metroeconomica 13,
    53-56.

Hausman, J.A. (1981a) "Labor Supply" in (eds.) Aaron, H.J. and Pechman,
    J.A. How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, Brookings Institution.

Hausman, J.A. (1981b), "Exact Consumers' Surplus and Deadweight Loss",
    American Economic Review 71,662-676.

Hausinan, J.A. (1983a), "Stochastic Problems in the Simulation of Labor
    Supply", in (ed.) Feldstein, M.S. Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax
    Policy Analysis, Chicago University Press.

Hausman, J.A. (1983b), "Taxes and Labor Supply", National Bureau of
    Economic Research Working Paper No. 1102.

Hausman, J.A. (1985), "The Econometrics of Nonlinear Budget Sets",
    Econoinetrica, 53, 1255-1282.

Hausman, J.A. and W. E. Taylor (1981), "Panel Data and Unobservable
    Individual Effects", Econometrica 49, 1377-1398.

Heckinan, J.J. (1974), "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply",
    Econometrica 42, 679-694.

Hecknian, J.J. (1983), "Comment on Hausman", in (ed.) Feldstein, M.S.
    Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, Chicago
    University Press.
                                  -47-
Heckinan, J.J. (1974), "Effects of Child Care Programs on Womens' Work
    Effort", Journal of Political Economy. 82, S136-163.

Hughes, C. A. (1985), "Concavity and the Estimation of Consumer Demand
    Equations", mimeo, Edinburgh University.

Hurwicz, L. and Uzawa, H. (1971), On the Integrability of Demand Functions,
    in: J. Chipman, L. Hurwicz, M. Richter and H. Sonnenschein, eds.,
    Preferences, Utility and Demand, (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York).

Kay, J.A., 1980, The Deadweight Loss from a Tax System, Journal of Public
    Economics 13, 111-119.

King, M.A., 1980, An Econometric Model of Tenure Choice and Demand for
    Housing as a Joint Decision, Journal of Public Economics 14, 137-159.

King, M.A. (1983a), "Welfare Analysis of Tax Reforms Using Household
    Data", Journal of Public Economics 21, 183-214.

King, M.A. (l983b), The Distribution of Gains and Losses from Changes in
    the Tax Treatment of Housing, in: M.S. Feldstein, ed., Behavioural
    Simulation in Tax Policy Analysis (Chicago University Press).

King, M.A. (1983c), "Tax Policy and Family Welfare", Second Departmental
    Lecture on Economic Policy, University of Southampton, mimeo.

King, M. A. and L-D.L. Dicks-Mireaux (1982), "Asset Holdings and the
    Life-Cycle", Economic Journal 92, 247-267.

Learner, E.E. (1985), "Sensitivity Analyses Would Help", American Economic
    Review 75, 308-313.

McFadden, D. (1985), "Specification of Econometric Models", Presidential
    Address to the Fifth World Congress of the Econometric Society.

McKenzie, L., (1956), Demand Without a Utility Index, Review of Economic
    Studies 24, 185-189.

Miller, M.H. (1977), "Debt and Taxes", Journal of Finance 32, 261-275

Moffitt,  R.   (1985),  "The Econometrics of Piecewise-Linear Budget
    Constraints : A Survey and Exposition of the Maximum Likelihood
    Method", Brown University Working Paper No. 85-10, mimeo.

Morris, C. N. (1983), "Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference : Theory and
    Applications", Journal of the American Statistical Association, 78
    47-55.

Muellbauer, J. (1975), Aggregation, Income Distribution and Consumer
    Demand, Review of Economic Studies 42, 525-543.
                                  -4$-
Muellbauer, J. (1976), Community Preferences and the Representative
    Consumer, Econometrica 44, 972-999.

Musgrave, R.A., Case, K.E. and Leonard, H. (1974), "The Distribution of
    Fiscal Burdens and Benefits", Public Finance Quarterly 2, 259-311.

Pechman, J.A. (1985), Who Paid the Taxes, 1966-85? Brookings Institution,
    Washington, DC.

Pechman, J.A. and Okner, B.A. (1974), Who   Bears   the Tax Burden?, Brookings
    Institution, Washington DC.

Rothbarth, E. 1941, The Measurement of Changes in Real Income Under
    Conditions of Rationing, Review of Economic Studies 8, 100-107.

Samuelson, P.A. 1974, Complementarity - An Essay on the 40th Anniversary of
    the Hicks-Allen Revolution in Demand Theory, Journal of Economic
    Literature 12, 1255-1289.

Stern, N.H. (1984), "On The Specification of Labour Supply Functions", ESRC
    Programme on Taxation, Incentives and the Distribution of Income
    Discussion Paper No. 50, mimeo LSE.

U.S. (1985), The President's Tax Proposals to the Congress for Fairness,
    Growth and Simplicity, US Government Printing Office, Washington DC.

Varian, H. (1984), Microecononiic Analysis (2nd edition), W.W. Norton and
    Co., New York.

Wales, T.J. (1977), "on the Flexibility of Flexible Functional Forms : An
    Empirical Approach", Journal of Econometrics 5, 183-193.

Wales, T.J. and Woodland, A.D. (1980), "Sample Selectivity and the
    Estimation of Labour Supply Functions", International Economic Review
    21, 437-468.

Weisbach, M.S. (1985), "The Economic Effects of the Earned Income Tax
    Credit", mimeo, MIT.

Zabalza, A. (1983), "Optimization Errors and Measures of Welfare Change",
    Centre for Labour Economics Discussion Paper No. 176, mimeo LSE.

Zabaiza, A. and Arrufat, J.L. (1983), "Efficiency and Equity Effects of
    Reforming the Britsh System of Direct Taxation: A Utility Based
    Simulation Methodology", Centre for Labour Economics Discussion Paper
    No. 175, mimeo LSE.
               Pigure        1                            985
                                 :Budget
                                   Married
                                           Constraint,UK1
                                                MPL
                                        man;cons-tan-t
        150
        140
        130
        120
  a)
  a)
        110
  a)    100
  a
  (I)   90
-o
 C
        80
 0
 a      70
 C
 0      60
-4-—,

 a      50
 E
 :3
 (1)    40
 C
 0
0       30
        20
         10
         0
              80   75   70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20   15   10   5   0
                                     Hours (per week)
                                               Duo Conditions
                              FigureLinear2:Labour  Function
                                                Supply
                  2
            1.9
            1.8
            1.7
            1.6
            1.5
            1.4
Q)
'.1)        1.3
       U)   1.2
       C    1 .
       a
(1) Ct)           1
Ci:)
L
0-          0.9
o
C           0.8
            0.7
U-          0.6
            0.5
            0.4
            0.3
            0.2
            0.1
                  0
                      0   2     4   6     8    10        12    14   16   18   20
                                        Wage Rate   ($/Iour)
                      Pig u re 3: P r i nn a       Co n d I t 10 n s
                              Linear Labour Supply Function
      600


      500

a)
a)
      400
a)
0

C
      300
40a
E
13
(I)   200
CT
0
0
      100


        0
            80   72      64   56    48    40     32     24    16   8   0
                                   Hours (per week)
                 FigureAIDS4: Primo     Conditions
                                 Demand Function
                                Housing
        30
        28
-Th
        26
 0)
        24
 0)
 ci     22
 U)
D       20
 C
 0      18
 a
        16
 0
-1-'    14
 a
 E      12
 iii)
 U)
 C      10
0
U        8
 C.
 (I)
         6
 0       4
IL
         2
         0
             0     20             40          60              80   100•
                        Other Consumption (pounds per week)
