NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICIES IN A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE
Olivier Jeanne
Working Paper 19967
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19967
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2014

Paper presented at the 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve bank of San Francisco,
November 3-5 2013. A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the BOJ-IMES Conference,
"Financial Crises and the Global Financial System" at the Bank of Japan, May 29-30, 2013. I thank
the participants at these conferences for their comments, especially my discussants Guillermo Calvo,
Jonathan Ostry and Eric Santor. I also thank Anton Korinek for his comments on a previous draft.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Olivier Jeanne. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Macroprudential Policies in a Global Perspective
Olivier Jeanne
NBER Working Paper No. 19967
March 2014
JEL No. F36,F41,F42
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the case for the international coordination of macroprudential policies in the context
of a simple theoretical framework. Both domestic macroprudential policies and prudential capital
controls have international spillovers through their impact on capital flows. The uncoordinated use
of macroprudential policies may lead to a "capital war" that depresses global interest rates. International
coordination of macroprudential policies is not warranted, however, unless there is unemployment
in some countries. There is scope for Pareto-improving international policy coordination when one
part of the world is in a liquidity trap while the rest of the world accumulates reserves for prudential
reasons.
Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
454 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
ojeanne@jhu.edu

1

Introduction

One legacy of the global financial crisis is the emergence of macroprudential policy as a
new policy tool towards financial stability. The policymakers in charge of financial stability
missed the mark before the crisis because they failed to perceive and contain the financial
vulnerabilities that were building up during the boom. Macroprudential policy fills this
gap—retrospectively and hopefully looking forward—by restraining the factors of systemic
risk in the balance sheets of the banking and real sectors before the crisis. To the extent
that it succeeds, macroprudential policy will allow monetary policy to continue to focus on
its traditional objectives.
This paper is about the nexus between macroprudential policies and international capital flows. This nexus is important because international capital flows play a key role in
generating the financial vulnerabilities that macroprudential policy tries to remedy. There
is evidence that inflows of private capital to emerging market economies help generate domestic credit booms that often lead to financial crashes (Obstfeld, 2012). Emerging market
economies have responded to surges in capital inflows by accumulating large stocks of foreign
reserves and with prudential capital controls.1 International capital flows pose macroprudential challenges for advanced economies too. For example, it has been argued that the rest
of the world’s appetite for US “safe assets” was an important factor behind the US credit
and asset price boom and the subsequent crisis (Bernanke et al., 2011).
The relationship between macroprudential policies and international capital flows goes
both ways. Not only do macroprudential policies respond to capital flows, they also affect
capital flows, and they do so in a way that may generate undesirable international spillovers.
For example, the accumulation of large stocks of reserves may have prudential motives from
the perspective of emerging market economies, but it may have had a destabilizing effect
on the US financial system. At a conceptual level the existence of such spillovers is not
surprising. In a globally integrated financial market, a macroprudential restriction in one
part of the world deflects financial flows toward the rest of the world, which must then deal
with the consequences for its own financial stability.2
While there is a long line of literature on the international spillovers generated by monetary policy (and to a lesser extent fiscal policy), we would like to know more about how
macroprudential policies interact in the global economy and whether there is a case for
international rules or mechanisms of coordination in this area. This issue is discussed in
Jeanne, Subramanian and Williamson (2012), Ostry, Ghosh and Korinek (2012) and Korinek (2012) but there remains scope for more theory to inform the policy discussions. This
paper contributes to fill this gap.
1

For example, Brazil introduced a tax on all capital inflows except direct investment in October 2009. Prudential capital controls have been viewed with more sympathy than in the past by the official sector (IMF, 2011;
Ostry et al., 2011). In its Seoul Action Plan (following the 2010 G20 summit in Seoul), the G20 endorsed
the use of “carefully designed macro-prudential measures” to deal with excessive volatility in capital flows
to emerging market economies. See Williamson (2005) for a pre-crisis exposition of the merits of prudential
capital flow management for emerging market economies.
2
There is evidence that capital controls deflect capital flows between emerging market economies. For example,
Forbes et al. (2011) find that capital controls in Brazil caused investors to increase the share of their portfolios
allocated to other Latin American countries, possibly shifting vulnerabilities from one country to another.

2

For this purpose, I present a simple framework to analyze the international consequences
of macroprudential policies. The model is in line with the recent theoretical literature that
motivates the role of macroprudential policies by the need to address certain financial externalities (this literature is reviewed in section 2). The model assumes that certain financial
contracts generate negative externalities because they increase the risk of a systemic debt
crisis. The role of macroprudential policy is to correct the distortions induced by these externalities. I adopt here a broad view of macroprudential policy, that includes but is not
limited to banking regulation and also covers measures such as prudential capital controls
on inflows or the accumulation of international reserves.
I then proceed to look at the international spillovers generated by macroprudential policies. The key result is that macroprudential policies are strategic complements (to use the
terminology of game theory). A macroprudential restriction in one country deflects capital
flows toward the other countries, leading them to restrict their own macroprudential policies.
In the uncooperative equilibrium, all countries implement macroprudential policies that are
more intense because of the macroprudential policies of the other countries, a situation that
might be reminiscent of an inefficient arms race.
In spite of these spillovers I find that there is little scope for international coordination
of macroprudential policies to improve global welfare. The reason is the same as in Korinek
(2012), who derived this result earlier. The spillovers induced by macroprudential policies
are not true externalities because they are mediated through a competitive price, the global
interest rate. There is no more reason to coordinate macroprudential policies than, say, to
coordinate competitive producers and consumers in a general equilibrium model because
their supplies and demands affect goods prices.
The fact that macroprudential policies tend to lower the global interest rate can become
problematic when there are nominal frictions, however. Macroprudential policies tend to
depress demand, an effect that monetary policy may unable to offset because of the zerobound constraint on the nominal interest rate. I present a Keynesian extension of the model
in which the uncoordinated use of macroprudential policies can push some or all countries
into a liquidity trap with a positive level of unemployment. In such a situation, there is
scope for Pareto-improving coordination of macroprudential policies. The countries with
unemployment benefit from a coordinated relaxation of their macroprudential policies that
raises global demand.
Finally, I study the scope for the international coordination of monetary policy and
macroprudential policy. I present a specification of the model in which one country (the US)
is in a liquidity trap with unemployment while the rest of the world (China) attempts to
mitigate the effects of the US monetary stimulus by a prudential accumulation of reserves.
I find that there is again a case for international coordination leading both countries to be
less aggressive in the pursuit of their objectives.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a selective review of the literature.
Section 3 presents the model and compares domestic macroprudential policies and prudential
capital controls. Sections 4 and 5 look at the case for the international coordination of
prudential capital account policies, respectively assuming full employment and less than full
employment. Section 6 concludes with a brief discussion of the policy implication of my
analysis for the international community.
3

2

Literature

This paper belongs to a rapidly growing literature on financial externalities and regulation.
One important part of this literature focuses on the banking sector, where there was a
shift in emphasis from the microprudential regulation to the macroprudential regulation
of banks (Hanson, Kashyap and Stein, 2011; Galati and Moessner, 2013).3 In a nutshell,
macroprudential regulation focuses on how the behavior of banks taken collectively makes
the financial system riskier, whereas microprudential regulation was focusing on individual
banks’ risk of insolvency taking their financial environment as given.4
From a theoretical perspective, the shift toward macroprudential regulation has been
justified by the need to address certain externalities that lead to financial amplification
in a crisis. Two externalities have received most of the attention in the literature.5 The
first one is related to the interconnectedness between financial institutions that stems from
the network of cross-institutions claims and liabilities. A shock to a given institution may
propagate itself to a large number of other institutions through a domino effect, including
to institutions that are not directly linked to the bank at the origin of the shock. Banks do
not internalize their contribution to the propagation of the systemic risk when they contract
with other banks, leading to a network that may be excessively fragile in aggregate.
The second externality is related to the fire sales that occur when all banks try to deleverage by selling the same assets at the same time. Ex post (in the crisis), banks do not internalize that selling the asset drives other banks into insolvency by depressing its price. Ex
ante, they do not take into account the contribution of their own leverage to the risk of a
systemic crisis induced by fire sales.
In theory, the most direct and natural policy instrument to address an externality is a
Pigouvian tax. Some analyses of macroprudential banking regulation indeed take Pigouvian
taxation as a theoretical benchmark, and some measures that were recently implemented or
proposed take the form of taxes on certain banking activities. For example, Shin (2010) and
Perotti and Suarez (2011) proposed to use a tax on banks’ non-core liabilities as a tool for
prudential regulation and such a tax was introduced in Korea in August 2011. But overall,
the macroprudential regulation of banks relies on the traditional instruments of banking
regulation, which are quantity-based.6
Macroprudential policy is often taken to mean the macroprudential regulation of banks,
especially in central banking circles, but it is important to realize that the externalities that
justify the use of macroprudential policies are not at work only in the banking sector. These
externalities are also relevant in the real sector. For example, the evidence in Mian and Sufi
(2009) suggests that one important reason behind the large and persistent fall in US demand
3

See Borio (2003) for a pre-crisis discussion of macroprudential policy.
Hanson, Kashyap and Stein (2011) differentiate microprudential and macroprudential regulation as follows:
“A microprudential approach is one in which regulation is partial-equilibrium in its conception and is aimed
at preventing the costly failure of individual financial institutions. By contrast, a macroprudential approach
recognizes the importance of general-equilibrium effects, and seeks to safeguard the financial system as a
whole.” (p.3)
5
See De Nicolo, Favara and Ratnovski (2012) for a discussion of the externalities that underpin the macroprudential regulation of banks. See Stein (2012) and Acemoglu, Malekian and Ozdaglar (2013) for models
of systemic risk in the banking sector based on these externalities.
6
Of the ten macroprudential instruments reviewed by Lim et al. (2011), none takes the form of a tax.
4

4

after the banking crisis was excessive leverage in the household sector rather the banking
sector.
The recent theoretical literature on Fisherian “debt deflation” has studied how the type
of externalities that have been invoked to justify macroprudential regulation of banks can
also lead to excessive leverage in the real sector. For example, in a residential real estate bust
the fact that households are credit-constrained puts further pressure on house prices. The
feedback loop that this generates is very similar to the “fire sale” mechanism in the banking
literature. This mechanism is analyzed in the three-period model of Lorenzoni (2008) and
more dynamic quantitative contributions can be found in Jeanne and Korinek (2010b) and
Mendoza and Bianchi (2010).
Another transmission mechanism involves aggregate demand. For example, the model in
Jeanne (2013b) features an economy in which firms produce inputs that are complementary
in the production of the consumption good. As a result default may be contagious. Sectoral
shocks that make the producers of certain production inputs insolvent lower the price of
complementary inputs and may draw the producers of those other inputs into default. There
is excessive borrowing under laissez-faire because each firm does not internalize the impact
of its debt on the default risk of other firms.
Similar arguments can be developed in the open economy. A boom in capital inflows
is associated with a real appreciation of the domestic currency, which increases the “internationally acceptable collateral” on the basis of which domestic agents can borrow abroad.
The problem is that booms in capital inflows are often followed by “sudden stops” a la
Calvo (1998), in which exactly the same amplification mechanisms work in reverse. The
sudden capital outflow is associated with a depreciation of the currency and a decline in the
foreign-currency price of domestic assets.
One strand of recent theoretical literature examines whether prudential capital controls
are desirable from the perspective of improving the overall domestic welfare of an emerging
market economy when there are booms and busts in capital flows (Korinek, 2010, 2011;
Jeanne and Korinek, 2010a; Bianchi, 2011). The optimal policy is a Pigouvian tax on capital
inflows that makes private market participants internalize their contributions to systemic risk
in order to restore the efficiency of the decentralized market equilibrium.7
Consistent with the recent theoretical literature, I adopt in this paper a broad view of
macroprudential policy which is not limited to banking regulation. Macroprudential policy
will be defined as a system of Pigouvian taxes (or equivalent quantity-based measures) that
aim at reducing excessive leverage in a boom, whether it takes place in the banking sector
or the real sector. In the open economy, as we will see, macroprudential policy can be
implemented through the management of international reserves.
Unlike for trade or monetary policies, where the welfare benefits of international cooperation have been studied in a large literature, there has been relatively little research on the
international coordination of macroprudential policies. Recent contributions include Korinek
(2012) and Bengui (2012). Korinek (2012) shows that in a model similar to the one presented here, international cooperation is not justified if small countries use prudential capital
controls to redress domestic externalities. Bengui (2012) studies the scope for international
7

Benigno et al. (2013) compare the use of ex ante prudential capital controls and ex post interventions in a
small open economy with collateral frictions.

5

coordination in an open-economy version of Holmström and Tirole’s (1998) model of public
liquidity provision. He finds that the uncooperative equilibrium between national regulators
leads to an inefficiently low level of regulation as national regulators do not internalize the
benefits of their country’s provision of liquidity to the rest of the world.8
Let me conclude the discussion of the literature by emphasizing two things that this
paper is not about.
First, this paper is not about the effectiveness of macroprudential policies when the
private sector attempts to circumvent them. There is evidence that the private sector makes
such efforts but the empirical literature suggests that they are not entirely successful—
although they may constrain the set of effective policies. Existing empirical research finds
that the macroprudential regulation of banks has been effective at least in some ways. Based
on aggregate data, Lim et al. (2011) and Dell’Ariccia et al. (2012) find evidence of some
macro-prudential policies being effective in reducing the procyclicality of credit and leverage.9
Similar results have been obtained in the empirical literature on capital controls.10 I will
ignore in the following problems related to the avoidance of macroprudential measures.
Second, this paper is not about the international coordination that is required to close
the gaps that come from international arbitrage between regulators. Traditional arguments
for international coordination of banking regulation are the need to maintain a level-playing
field for banking competition and to avoid regulatory races to the bottom. These arguments
also apply to the macroprudential part of banking regulation. But the fact that booms and
busts are often country-specific generates a new tension because macroprudential regulation
may have to be restricted in some countries and not others. A problem arises when the
macroprudential regulation of banks is used to contain excessive leverage in the real sector.
In a financially integrated world, the borrowers that see the cost of borrowing from the
domestic banking sector increase because of a macroprudential restriction can borrow from
foreign banks, either directly (for the largest corporate borrowers), or through their domestic
branches (which are not subject to domestic macroprudential regulation).11 This problem
is especially salient in the euro area, where country-specific macroprudential regulation is
more important than elsewhere to fulfill the stabilizing role that monetary policy can no
longer play at the national level, and at the same time banking integration is an explicit
objective. However, I will consider this problem solved in this paper, by assuming that the
domestic policymaker can tax domestic agents’s borrowing irrespective of the residency of

8

The international coordination of capital control policies has also been studied in models where these controls
are not implemented for prudential reasons. Farhi and Werning (2012) look at the macrostabilization benefits
of capital controls for economies with a fixed exchange rate or a common currency in the context of a New
Keynesian framework with nominal stickiness, and find a very limited need for coordination. Costinot,
Lorenzoni and Werning (2011) find that international cooperation may be warranted if countries are large
enough to influence their intertemporal terms of trade (the world real interest rate).
9
Claessens, Ghosh and Mihet (2013) find similar results based on disaggregated data on more than 2,000
banks in 48 emerging market and advanced economies.
10
See IMF (2011) for a review of this literature, and Ostry et al. (2012) for a recent study. Klein and Shambaugh
(2013) find that capital controls must be broad-based in order to be effective.
11
For example, in the UK Aiyar, Calomiris and Wieladek (2012) find that UK-owned banks and resident
foreign subsidiaries reduce lending in response to tighter capital requirements but that this effect is partially
offset by an increase in lending from resident foreign branches.

6

the lender.12

3

Macroprudential policies in a small open economy:
A simple model

The key concept in the literature reviewed in the previous section is that of externality. There
is excessive borrowing in a boom because debt has social costs that are not internalized by
the borrowers. The uninternalized social costs of borrowing can be modeled in several ways,
but they all boil down, in reduced form, to the existence of a wedge between the private
return and the social return on borrowing. I present in this section a model, based on Jeanne
(2013b), that captures this idea in a simple reduced-form way. Note that the model is not
specifically about banking, although one could view it as a model of banking by interpreting
the borrowers as bankers who make loans to the real sector. Thus the macroprudential
policies discussed in this section are not limited to the macroprudential regulation of banks.

3.1

Assumptions

The model has two periods. Lending and investment take place in the first period and
repayment takes place (or not) in the second period. The model is completely real (there is
no money) and it features one single good which is used for both investment and consumption.
The assumptions about the lenders are simple and standard. The country has a mass
of identical lenders who are endowed with the country’s GDP, denoted by Y , in the first
period. The lenders maximize their utility, which is the sum of a concave function of their
first-period consumption plus the expected value of their second-period consumption,
Ul = u(C) + E(C 0 ).
The lenders lend their saving, S = Y −C, at the riskless interest rate, r. If capital is perfectly
mobile this interest rate is equal to the world riskless interest rate, r∗ (taken as exogenous for
now). In general, r could be higher or lower than r∗ because of restrictions to international
capital mobility.
The lenders save until the marginal benefit of saving is equal to the marginal cost, u0 (Y −
S) = 1 + r, which implies that saving is an increasing function of the real interest rate,
S = S(r), S 0 (·) > 0.
The mass of lenders is normalized to 1, so that S represents both the saving of an individual
lender and the country’s aggregate saving.
The borrowers are identical atomistic entrepreneurs (or firms) who need funds to finance
investment projects. A given entrepreneur invests a quantity I of good in the first period
in the hope of receiving a quantity f (I) of good in the second period. There are decreasing
marginal returns to investment, i.e., function f (·) is concave. The investment is risky because
12

Basel III allows domestic regulators to require foreign regulators to impose higher capital standards on
domestic lending by foreign banks, which may reduce leakage in the future.

7

the payoff f (I) is obtained with a probability p that is in general lower than one. With
probability 1 − p the investment yields nothing. Although this is not crucial for the results, I
will assume that this risk is perfectly correlated across firms, i.e., there is a “good” aggregate
state in which all firms have a high payoff and a “bad” aggregate state in which they all
have a zero payoff. The bad state will lead to a systemic debt crisis.
The borrowers have no funds in the first period, implying that the investment is entirely
financed with debt, D = I. If the borrowers are unable to repay their debts in the second
period because of a zero payoff, they default and the lenders receive nothing. Because of this
risk the borrowers must pay a default risk premium: they promise a repayment of (1 + r)D/p
to the lenders.
The borrowers consume in the second period only (for example because the agency cost
of debt deters them from borrowing to finance first-period consumption). The borrowers,
thus, simply maximize the expected level of their second-period consumption,
Ub = E(C 0 ).
Like for lenders, the mass of borrowers is normalized to 1. Domestic welfare is the sum of
the welfare of lenders and borrowers, U = Ul + Ub .
The following assumption is key in generating systemic risk. I assume that the expected
payoff of an investment is a decreasing function of the aggregate level of debt,
p = p(D), p0 (·) < 0.

(1)

Note that in this expression D is the aggregate level of debt rather than the debt of an
individual entrepreneur. This assumption generates the externality leading to systemic risk:
individual borrowers do not take into account the impact of their borrowing on the risk of
default for the other borrowers. It can be viewed as a reduced form for the micro-founded
model of contagion in systemic debt crises presented in Jeanne (2013b). In that model, as
mentioned in the previous section, entrepreneurs produce inputs that are complementary in
the production of the consumption good. As a result default may be contagious because of
a demand externality. Sectoral shocks that make the producers of certain production inputs
insolvent lower the price of complementary inputs and may draw the producers of those
other inputs into default. Assuming that the probability of default of a given entrepreneur
is a function of the aggregate level of debt, as we do in equation (1), is a simple reduced
form for this mechanism.13
Essentially, the model captures the idea that some expenditures generate negative externalities because they are financed by debt. There is nothing essential to the assumption
that productive investment is debt-creating whereas consumption is not. In the following
one can think of I and C as notations for expenditures that are financed relatively more by
debt and by cash respectively.

13

In the microfounded model the probability of a systemic debt crisis depends on the level of debt repayment
in period 2, (1 + r)D/p, rather than on the level of debt issued in period 1, D. This complicates the model
in ways that are interesting in some respects (for example by generating multiple equilibria a la Calvo, 1988)
but that are not essential for the analysis in this paper.

8

Ub

p(I)f(I)-(1+r)I
p(Ilf)f(I)-(1+r)I

Isp

Ilf

Investment, I

Figure 1: Borrowers’ welfare under laissez-faire and a social planner

3.2

Domestic macroprudential regulation

It is easy to see how laissez-faire may lead to over-borrowing. Since the representative
borrower repays (1 + r)I/p with probability p, his expected repayment is (1 + r)I and his
ex-ante utility is given by,
Ub = pf (I) − (1 + r)I.
The entrepreneur borrows until the marginal benefit is equal to the marginal cost of borrowing, pf 0 (I) = 1 + r, which implicitly defines the demand for loans as a decreasing
function of the real interest rate. The equilibrium level of debt under laissez-faire satisfies p(I lf )f 0 (I lf ) = 1 + r.
The level of borrowing is excessive under laissez-faire because individual borrowers do
not internalize that the probability of a systemic debt crisis depends on the aggregate level
of debt. A benevolent social planner, by contrast, would take this effect into account and
maximize p(I)f (I) − (1 + r)I. The difference between laissez-faire and the social planner
solution is shown in figure 1. At the laissez-faire equilibrium level of debt and investment,
I = I lf , the ex ante welfare of borrowers is increased by marginally reducing the investment
level in order to reduce the probability of the state in which all the borrowers default (a
systemic debt crisis). The social planner, thus, would pick a level of investment, I sp , that is
lower than under laissez-faire. This is also the level of investment that maximizes ex ante
domestic welfare, U = Ul +Ub , since in this simple model the welfare of lenders is not affected
(ex ante) by the risk of a systemic debt crisis.14
Figure 2 shows the Metzler diagram for this simple economy. The figure shows, on
14

This is because the lenders are risk-neutral and appropriately compensated for the risk of default in equilibrium. This ignores the fact that the lenders could suffer from a debt crisis through other channels, for
example is if they receive a wage income from the productive sector. In this case the social planner has to
take into account the impact of prudential policies on agents other than the borrowers but the essence of
our results carries through.

9

the horizontal axis, the level of investment and saving, and on the vertical axis, the gross
marginal gain from investing and the gross marginal cost of saving. Under perfect capital
mobility and laissez-faire both the marginal gain from investing and the marginal cost of
saving must be equal to the gross cost of external borrowing, 1 + r∗ . The difference between
domestic saving and domestic investment, S − I, is the country’s current account balance.
The main difference with the textbook Metzler diagram is that in the presence of systemic
debt externalities, the social marginal gain from borrowing is lower than the private marginal
gain. The difference, p0 (I)f (I), reflects the impact of aggregate debt on systemic risk. As
a result the social planner would like to reduce domestic investment below the laissez-faire
level, which means—domestic saving being unchanged—that the country’s current account
balance must increase. The figure illustrates the case where the social planner reduces a
current account deficit that remains positive. But in general, the intervention of the social
planner could also reverse the sign of the current account balance, and transform a capitalimporting country into a capital exporter.
What policy instrument can the social planner use to achieve the optimal level of borrowing and investment? The most direct policy instrument is a Pigouvian tax on domestic
borrowing equal to the wedge between the private return and the social return (labeled τ in
figure 2).15 The proceed of the tax can be rebated in such a way that both the borrowers and
the lenders benefit. To the extent that the tax is imposed on domestic borrowing irrespective
of the residency of the lender, this policy should be interpreted as domestic macroprudential
policy rather than a capital control.
More formally, let us assume that the tax increases the riskless cost of borrowing from r∗
to r∗ + τ .16 The level of debt and investment in the decentralized equilibrium is now given
by
p(I)f 0 (I) = 1 + r∗ + τ.
This coincides with the level of debt and investment chosen by the social planner,17 which
satisfies p0 (I sp )f (I sp ) + p(I sp )f 0 (I sp ) = 1 + r∗ , if the tax is set at
τ = −p0 (I sp )f (I sp ).
That is, the optimal Pigouvian tax on domestic borrowing is equal to the marginal loss in
expected output from the systemic risk caused by a marginal increase in aggregate debt.
How does the optimal domestic macroprudential tax vary in the cycle? For simplicity I
will consider the case where the cycle is induced by variations in the cost of foreign borrowing,
r∗ .18 As can be seen from figure 2, a lower cost of external borrowing is associated with
more investment both under laissez-faire and under the social planner. It also leads to
an increase in the optimal Pigouvian tax on domestic borrowing if the difference between
the private marginal gain and the social marginal gain from investing increases with the
15

A tax on domestic borrowing is a tax paid by all domestic borrowers irrespective of the residency of the
lenders or the jurisdiction of issuance.
16
The promised debt repayment must be (1 + r∗ + τ )/p if the tax is not paid when the borrower defaults. Like
the interest rate, the ex ante tax rate is increased by a default premium.
17
For simplicity I assume that p(I)f (I) is a concave function of I so that the first-order condition is sufficient
for optimality.
18
Similar results hold if the cycle is induced by a change in domestic productivity that changes the private
and social marginal gains from investing by the same factor.

10

Gross interest rate
marginal gain from investing
marginal cost of saving, u’(Y-S)

τ

1+r*

private, p(I)f’(I)
social, p’(I)f(I)+p(I)f’(I)

S

Isp

Ilf

Investment I , Saving S

Figure 2: Metzler diagram with systemic debt externalities
level of investment, that is if −p0 (I)f (I) is increasing with I. In this case the domestic
macroprudential policy is countercyclical, in the sense that it is used to smooth investment,
domestic borrowing and capital inflows against variations in domestic productivity.
Domestic macroprudential regulation leans against the ebbs and flows of international
capital movements, whether they are caused by variations in global interest rates or in risk
premia. Hereafter we will assume that this is true by making the following assumption:
Assumption 1. The marginal cost of the systemic risk increases with the level of debt,
i.e., −p0 (D)f (D) is increasing with D.

3.3

Prudential capital account policies

If the economy is receiving capital inflows, another way that the social planner can reduce
lending to the socially optimal level is by imposing a tax on external borrowing, i.e., on
lending from nonresidents to residents. Because the tax is differentiated by the residency of
the lender, it is a capital control of the type, for example, that Brazil has been using since
2009. The tax on external borrowing raises the (riskless) interest rate at which domestic
borrowers can borrow from r∗ to r∗ + τ and so has exactly the same impact on domestic
borrowing and investment as the domestic macroprudential tax considered in the previous
section. However, the capital control tax also increases the interest rate for domestic savers.
At the margin, domestic borrowers can borrow from domestic lenders and they will do so
until the same interest rate is paid to domestic and foreign lenders.
More formally, let us consider a capital-importing country, i.e., a country for which the
autarkic interest rate ra (defined as the level of interest rate that equalizes domestic saving
and domestic investment) is higher than the external cost of borrowing r∗ . As long as the
tax on capital inflows τ is lower than the difference between the autarkic interest rate and
the external cost of borrowing, the country imports capital and increasing the tax on capital
inflows raises the domestic interest rate one for one. When the tax rate reaches ra − r∗ ,
11

however, the country is in financial autarky and raising the tax further has no impact on
the domestic interest rate, which remains equal to the autarkic level ra . If the social planner
wants to increase the domestic cost of borrowing to a level r that is above ra , he must
subsidize capital outflows at rate τ = r − r∗ . In the following, τ is a wedge that will be
interpreted either as a tax on capital inflows or a subsidy on capital outflows depending on
the sign of the current account balance.
The use of subsidies on capital outflows does not seem to be widespread in the real world
but the capital account policies of countries such as China illustrates how the same outcome
can be achieved with policies that affect quantities rather than prices (see Jeanne, 2013a).19
To simplify, China’s capital account is closed to most capital inflows except foreign direct
investment (FDI) whereas most of the accumulation of foreign assets takes the form of foreign
exchange reserves at the central bank. As a counterpart to the purchase of foreign reserves the
domestic banking sector, which is largely controlled by the government, produces domestic
assets that must be purchased by residents since nonresident investors do not have access to
these assets. The domestic interest rate, thus, must adjust to the level that makes resident
investors willing to hold the domestic assets backing up the reserves. Essentially, the Chinese
authorities divert a fraction of domestic saving—which would otherwise be lent domestically
through the banking system—into the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves (Jeanne,
2013a).
In the context of my simple model, the impact of Chinese-style reserve accumulation
can be captured in a simple way by assuming that the capital account is closed, so that
the current account balance B = S − I is equal to the accumulation of reserves by the
authorities. Then in equilibrium the domestic interest rate r has to adjust to a level such
that the domestic lenders are willing to save B in excess of the domestic demand for loans,
B = S(r) − I(r).
If the level of reserve accumulation B is higher than the level of net foreign assets that would
be observed in the absence of capital account restrictions, this policy raises the domestic
interest rate above the world level, r > r∗ . The equilibrium is effectively the same as if the
authorities had imposed a subsidy r − r∗ on capital outflows.
How do prudential capital account policies compare with domestic macroprudential regulation in terms of welfare? Since the underlying externality affects domestic investment,
not domestic consumption, it is inefficient to change the levels of both consumption and investment. Capital account policies affect all expenditures alike, including those that do not
generate externalities. The impact of a tax on external borrowing on domestic borrowing is
welfare-enhancing but its impact on domestic saving is distortive. In this model, thus, prudential capital controls are a second-best instrument—the first-best instrument is domestic
macroprudential regulation.
As a result, the optimal tax on capital inflows is lower than the optimal domestic macroprudential tax. To distinguish between the two types of tax, let us denote by τ c the tax
on capital inflow, as opposed to τ d the d omestic macroprudential regulation tax. Figure 3
shows the impact of the capital control tax on the equilibrium. Unlike the domestic macroprudential tax, the capital control tax raises the level of saving. This implies that a given
19

This is not to suggest that the motive for reserve accumulation in China is primarily prudential—as opposed
to, say, maintaining a competitive exchange rate.

12

Gross interest rate
Investment
Saving

1+r*

τd τc
Private return

Social return

Isp Ssp

Slf

Ilf

I,S

Figure 3: Lending and saving in the open economy: the case of capital controls
level of tax has a larger impact on the current account balance if it applies to external borrowing rather than domestic borrowing. Figure 3 illustrates a case where the optimal capital
flow tax transforms a capital-importing country into a capital-exporting country whereas the
optimal tax on domestic borrowing would not.
In addition, the figure shows the welfare loss from excessive borrowing (the lower triangle)
as well as the welfare loss due to the distortion of saving (the upper triangle). The tax on
external borrowing τ c is at the optimal level when it minimizes the total welfare loss (the
sum of the areas of the two triangles). It is easy to see that the optimal tax on external
borrowing is lower than the optimal tax on domestic borrowing. If τ c were set at the same
level as τ d , the lower triangle would disappear but the upper triangle would be much larger.
Then there would be a first-order gain (in terms of higher consumption) but a second-order
cost (in terms of higher crisis risk) from marginally reducing τ c below τ d . Intuitively, capital
controls should be used less aggressively than domestic macroprudential regulation because
they come with a collateral cost: they distort non-debt-creating expenditures at the same
time as they correct debt-creating expenditures.
The cyclical properties of the optimal tax on external borrowing are not necessarily the
same as for the tax on domestic borrowing, but one can ensure that the optimal capital
controls are countercyclical at the cost of an additional assumption. To understand this it
is useful to introduce the country’s total expenditures,
E = C + I.

(2)

Using a tax on foreign borrowing implies that the marginal utility of consumption must be
equal to the gross private marginal return on investment,
u0 (C) = p(I)f 0 (I).

13

(3)

This constraint implies that investment and consumption are positively related in equilibrium: with capital controls is is impossible to reduce investment without also repressing
consumption. Together equations (2) and (3) make it possible to write consumption and
investment in function of total expenditure, C(E) and I(E). Then it is possible to show
that the optimal tax on external borrowing is countercyclical (i.e., smoothes the domestic
cost of borrowing against variations in the cost of external borrowing) if and only if the
following assumption is satisfied.
Assumption 2. The marginal cost of systemic risk increases with the level of domestic
expenditures, i.e., −p0 (I(E))f (I(E))I 0 (E) is increasing with E.
This assumption is the analog of Assumption 1 for the case of capital controls. The
social planner targets the total level of expenditures because he can no longer target the
level of debt-creating expenditures (investment) separately. Assumption 2 ensures that the
optimal tax on external borrowing varies inversely with the external cost of borrowing.
Assumptions 1 and 2 are independent (neither one implies the other), but it is not difficult
to find specifications of the model in which they are both satisfied. The appendix presents a
quadratic specification of the model in which both assumptions are satisfied and closed-form
expressions for all the main variables can be derived.
Our main results are summarized below.
Result 1 Consider a small open economy in which domestic borrowing may be excessive
because of a systemic risk externality. The first-best policy instrument is a macroprudential
tax on domestic borrowing. A second-best instrument is a macroprudential tax on external
borrowing. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, both taxes should be used in a countercyclical way
so as to smooth the domestic cost of borrowing against variations in the external cost of
borrowing.
Proof. See appendix.
This analysis raises the question of why governments should ever use prudential capital
controls since the first-best instrument is domestic prudential regulation. There are several
possible answers to this question.20
First, discriminating between the transactions involving residents and nonresidents may
be justified if nonresident investors contribute more to systemic risk than resident investors
in a crisis. For example, short-term debt could be more systemically more dangerous in
the hands of nonresident investors than in those of residents if the former have a stronger
tendency to rush of the exits in a crisis. There is evidence that this was the case in the
2008 crisis, when investors tended to retrench on their own countries’ assets (Forbes and
Warnock, 2012). These factors are not explicitly captured by my simple model but they
may be important in the real world. In the model, systemic risk is determined by the level
of D irrespective of the residency of the debt holders. But one could decompose total debt

20

See Ostry, Ghosh and Korinek (2012) for a related discussion of this issue.

14

into the component held by residents (Dh ) and the component held by foreigners (Df ) and
assume that p is more sensitive to Df than to Dh .21
Second, the appropriate domestic macroprudential taxes may not be available as policy
instruments. As discussed in the introduction, the externalities leading to systemic risk do
not necessarily all take place inside the banking sector. Thus the scope of macroprudential
regulation may be too narrow if it is limited to banks. Although broader macroprudential
taxes can in principle be used, they are determined in the context of a political process that
makes it unlikely that they will be used according to Pigouvian principles.22 Capital controls
may be the only broad tax-like instruments that are somewhat sheltered from the political
process.
Finally, policymakers might have to rely on a wide range of instruments (including secondbest ones) because exclusive reliance on a narrow set of instruments may encourage avoidance
and circumvention efforts by the private sector. In this case, there could be a maximum level
for τ d , above which there will be excessive avoidance, and at the margin τ c must be used.
For these reasons, there might be a case for using prudential capital controls as a secondbest instrument. In the rest of the analysis, thus, I will assume that countries use capital
controls and domestic macroprudential policies.

4

International spillovers and “capital wars”

I now consider a world composed of a large number of small open economies like the one
described in the previous section. The countries are indexed by j ∈ J. The global capital
market finds its equilibrium for an interest rate r∗ such that
X
X
Sj (r∗ + τjc ) =
Ij (r∗ + τjd + τjc ),
j∈J

i∈J

where τjd and τjc are country j’s taxes on domestic borrowing and external borrowing respectively. This equation endogenizes the equilibrium global interest rate, r∗ , as the level for
which global investment is equal to global saving.
It is easy to see that prudential taxes on domestic or external borrowing have international
spillovers. Other things equal, raising the domestic macroprudential tax in country j lowers
the global demand for investment and so the global interest rate. Raising the capital control
tax by the same amount lowers the global interest rate even more since it raises the global
supply of saving at the same time as it lowers the global demand for investment. In both
cases, the other countries respond to the lower global interest rate by increasing their tax
rates on domestic or external borrowing. Intuitively, raising the macroprudential taxes in a
given country deflects capital flows to the other countries, inducing them to raise their own
macroprudential taxes. Macroprudential policies are strategic complements.
21

Another consideration is that in models where the pecuniary externality involves the real exchange rate, such
as Korinek (2010), the repayment of foreign currency debt has a larger systemic impact on the domestic
economy if it involves a transfer to foreign creditors.
22
The evidence suggests that even taxes that are explicitly designed to address externalities are heavily influenced by other considerations—see for example Barthold (1994) for the case of environmental taxation in
the US.

15

This raises the question of the efficiency of the equilibrium that is reached when all
countries set their prudential taxes in an uncoordinated way. To answer this question in the
context of the model I assume that countries belong to two groups that use different policy
instruments: the countries in the first group use the tax on domestic borrowing (j ∈ J d )
whereas the countries in the second group use the tax on external borrowing (j ∈ J c ). The
equilibrium global interest rate, then, satisfies
X
X
X
X
Sj (r∗ ) +
Sj (r∗ + τjc (r∗ )) =
Ij (r∗ + τjd (r∗ )) +
Ij (r∗ + τjc (r∗ )),
(4)
j∈J d

j∈J c

j∈J d

j∈J c

where τjd (r∗ ) and τjc (r∗ ) are the optimal tax responses discussed in the previous section.
The equilibrium level of the global interest rate is lower, and could be much lower than
in the absence of macroprudential policies.23 The Nash equilibrium in tax policies may thus
give the impression of a “capital war”, in which countries are engaged in a self-defeating
effort to export capital to the rest of the world. As first shown by Korinek (2012) in a
similar context, however, the impression that the uncoordinated equilibrium is inefficient is
misleading. The Nash equilibrium in macroprudential policies is efficient, as stated in the
following result.
Result 2 Consider a world composed of many small open economies such as the one analyzed in the previous section. Countries mitigate their systemic debt externalities using a
macroprudential tax on either domestic borrowing or external borrowing. Then the Nash
equilibrium in which each country independently sets its macroprudential tax yields the same
allocation as the equilibrium in which all the taxes are set by a global social planner who
maximizes global welfare.
Proof. See appendix.
There is no need for the international coordination of macroprudential policies (whether
purely domestic or involving the capital account) since the Nash equilibrium between domestic policymakers is Pareto-optimal. The “capital war”, in other words, is efficient.24
The reason for this result is that the international spillovers associated with the use
of capital controls (or domestic prudential policies) do not constitute a true international
externality. The spillovers that countries impose to each other are mediated through a price
(the real interest rate) in a perfectly competitive market so that the first welfare theorem
applies to the decentralized equilibrium between countries in the same way as it applies
between consumers in a general equilibrium model. Each domestic social planner is like a
small agent in a competitive market.
23

The strategic complementarity between macroprudential policies does not lead to equilibrium multiplicity.
As r∗ + τ c (r∗ ) and r∗ + τ d (r∗ ) are both increasing in r∗ global saving and global investment are respectively
increasing and decreasing with the interest rate so that the global loanable funds market has one unique
equilibrium.
24
The fact that the uncoordinated use of macroprudential policies raises global welfare does not mean that it
raises the welfare of all countries. The welfare of capital-exporting countries may be reduced by the lower
return on their foreign assets.

16

An important caveat to this result will be presented in the next section when we look at
the case with less than full employment. But before we proceed with a Keynesian version of
the model, other caveats are in order.
First, the results would be different in the presence of cross-country systemic debt externalities. Going back to the microfoundations of the model, one could assume that the
consumption good is produced with production inputs from different countries, making default contagious across countries and not only across firms in a given country. This would
make it optimal to coordinate national social planners to internalize the cross-country externalities. The point made by Result 2, from this perspective, is that it is not enough to
point to cross-country spillovers to justify international policy coordination: one must show
that the spillovers involve a true externality.
Second, the uncoordinated use of capital controls increases global welfare less than the
uncoordinated use of domestic prudential policies. In fact, it is easy to construct an example
where the uncoordinated use of capital controls does not change global welfare at all. Assume
that all countries set their taxes on external borrowing in the same way, i.e., they have the
same tax response function τ c (r∗ ). Then the global interest rate must satisfy,
X
X
Sj (r∗ + τ c (r∗ )) =
Ij (r∗ + τ c (r∗ )).
j

j

It follows that the equilibrium cost of borrowing, r∗ + τ c (r∗ ), must be the same as the
level of the interest rate that would be observed in the equilibrium without macroprudential
taxes. The uncoordinated use of capital controls, thus, is self-defeating in the sense that it
leads to exactly the same allocation (and the same level of welfare) as if no capital control
were used. If the use of capital controls entailed some administrative cost on the side of
governments, or costly circumvention effort on the side of the private sector, there would be
a case for international coordination to reduce or save these costs, as noted by Ostry, Ghosh
and Korinek (2012).
Third, we have assumed so far a large number of countries. With strategic interactions
between a small number of countries, the results are different. In the two-country model of
Costinot, Lorenzoni and Werning (2011), the borrowing country can raise its welfare relative
to the laissez-faire level by restricting its borrowing and lower in this way the interest rate
that it must pay to the lending country. Conversely, the lending country will want to restrict
its lending in order to raise the world interest rate. The Nash equilibrium of this game leads
to a Pareto inefficient “capital war” in which both countries see their welfare decreased.
This is essentially the transposition to intertemporal trade of the classical “optimal tariff”
argument for free trade.

5

Capital war in a global liquidity trap

We have seen in the previous section that a capital war was efficient in spite of the fact that
it depressed the level of the global interest rate. The model, however, was perhaps missing
an important reason that depressing the real interest rate is problematic in the real world:
the existence of a zero bound on the nominal interest rate that prevents the real interest

17

rate from reaching the full-employment level. Could a capital war be costly and inefficient
because it leads to unemployment in a global liquidity trap?
One cannot study this question without making significant changes in the model. Instead
of looking at a real endowment economy, we now need to introduce money, nominal rigidities
and to make output endogenous. This is done in section 5.1. With the new model in hand, I
re-examine the case for international coordination of macroprudential policies in section 5.2.
Finally, I look at the scope for international policy coordination in an asymmetric world with
one country (interpreted as the US) that attempts to implement a monetary stimulus in a
liquidity trap whereas countries in the rest of the world sets their macroprudential policies
so as to limit the spillovers from the monetary stimulus.

5.1

A Keynesian model

The model is made Keynesian in the most simple possible way. In particular, I consider a
world with only one currency to focus the attention on the interactions between national
macroprudential policies rather than between monetary policies. This could also be interpreted as a world with fixed exchange rates (not necessarily a bad approximation if one
thinks of the policy interactions between, say, the US and China.) The nominal price of the
good in terms of the global currency is denominated by P .
One key difference with the model used so far is that first-period output is now endogenous
and can be demand-determined. Each country produces output with labor according to the
production function Yj = gj (Lj ) where gj (·) is increasing and concave. The demand for labor
from the first-order condition,
Wj
,
gj0 (Lj ) =
P
where Wj is the nominal wage in country j and P is the nominal price of the good (the same
in all countries by the law of one price).
I assume that the nominal wage is rigid downward in the same way as in Schmitt-Grohé
and Uribe (2012). The total quantity of labor used in the economy cannot increase above a
level corresponding to full employment whereas the nominal wage cannot fall below a level
that is predetermined for each country,
Lj ≤ Lj ,
Wj ≥ W j .
A given economy can then be in two regimes. Either there is full employment and Wj =
gj0 (Lj )P , or there is less than full employment and Wj = W j . Which regime the economy
lands in depends on how the global price of the good compares with the country’s nominal
wage. Country j has full employment if P ≥ W j /gj0 (Lj ). Once full employment is achieved
increases in the world price level are reflected one for one in domestic wages because wages
are flexible upward.
P
Figure 4 shows how global supply Y W = j gj (Lj ) varies with the nominal price level.
An increase in the nominal price level raises supply by lowering the real wage, like in the
textbook model of aggregate supply and aggregate demand. When the nominal price level
falls below a certain threshold, there is unemployment in some countries. In general, the
18

unemployment could be spread across all countries (this would be true in the symmetric case
where all countries are identical) or it would be concentrated in a few countries that have
high nominal wages relative to their productivity.
The figure also shows the level of aggregate demand,
X

 X
Cj (r∗ + τjc ) + Ij (r∗ + τjc ) ,
EW =
Cj (r∗ ) + Ij (r∗ + τjd +
j∈J c

j∈J d

where Cj (·) gives consumption in country j as a function of the interest rate. Global demand
is represented by an horizontal line in figure 4 because it does not depend on the nominal
price level. It is determined instead by the real interest rate as well as the macroprudential
taxes, and it is decreasing in these variables. Global demand is equal to the full-employment
level of global supply when the real interest rate is at the ”Wicksellian” level.25 Importantly,
the macroprudential taxes depress global demand and thus lower the Wicksellian interest
rate.
Finally, we need to specify how the real interest rate is determined. I assume that a global
monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate i∗ . The expected rate of inflation rate,
denoted by π ∗ , is taken as exogenous, for example because it results from a credible inflation
targeting mandate. Variations in the nominal interest rate, thus, are reflected one-for-one in
the real interest rate, r∗ = i∗ − π ∗ . In addition monetary policy is constrained by the usual
zero bound on the nominal interest rate. Thus, one can think of the monetary authority as
setting the real interest rate subject to the constraint,
r∗ ≥ −π ∗ .

5.2

The benefits from international coordination

We now return to the Nash equilibrium between the domestic social planners in charge of
macroprudential policy. Like before I assume that each domestic social planner uses one
macroprudential tax, which is either on domestic borrowing or on foreign borrowing. There
is now one more player in the game between policymakers: the global monetary authority.
For simplicity I will assume that the global monetary authority maximizes global employment
conditional on the inflation target π ∗ . We will look in the next section at a case where the
monetary authority maximizes the welfare of a particular country.
An equilibrium, then, is characterized by a set of macroprudential taxes on domestic
borrowing, τjd (j ∈ J d ), and on foreign borrowing, τjc (j ∈ J c ), as well a real interest rate r∗
such that:
(i) the domestic social planner of each country j sets his macroprudential tax (τjd or τjc )
so as to maximize domestic welfare, taking the macroprudential taxes of the other countries
and the global real interest rate as given;
25

It is impossible, in this simple model, to lower the real interest rate below the Wicksellian level because labor
cannot be increased above the full employment level. Any attempt to do so will result in an unbounded
increase in P .

19

Global demand and supply

𝑌

𝑊

𝐸𝑊

Nominal price level, P

Figure 4: Global supply and global demand
(ii) the global monetary authority sets the real interest rate r∗ so as to maximize global
employment subject to the constraint r∗ ≥ −π ∗ , taking the countries’ macroprudential taxes
as given.
It is easy to see that now, a capital war can decrease the welfare of all countries. This is
clear in the special case where all countries are identical and use capital controls. Then as we
saw in section 4 in the case of an endowment economy without nominal stickiness, the capital
war decreases the real interest rate without changing the allocation. If it decreases the real
interest rate from a level that is above −π ∗ to a level that is below −π ∗ , the capital war will
lead, in the presence of nominal stickiness, to a global liquidity trap with unemployment in
all countries. All the countries would then benefit from an international agreement not to
use capital controls, which would restore full employment.
The case for the international coordination of macroprudential policies is more general
than that. It arises as soon as there is unemployment in some countries, as stated in the
following result.
Result 3 Assume that there is unemployment in some countries in the Nash equilibrium
between macroprudential policymakers. Then a coordinated reduction in the macroprudential taxes of the countries with unemployment raises the welfare of those countries without
affecting the welfare of the countries with full employment.
Proof. See appendix.
There is scope for Pareto-improving international coordination of macroprudential taxes
in a world with unemployment. The intuition is that the countries with unemployment do
not internalize the impact of their macroprudential taxes on global demand. Global demand
creates a true international externality because each country, by imposing taxes on domestic
20

or external borrowing, reduces the demand for the output of other countries in a way that is
not mediated by a competitive price. At the margin, countries with unemployment suffer a
second-order loss from lowering their prudential taxes but a first-order gain from an increase
in global demand that raises their employment level. As for the welfare of countries with full
employment, it does not change since the global real interest rate stays at the same level (it
is equal to minus the inflation target because the zero-bound constraint is binding).
Importantly, the scope for policy coordination does not include the countries with full
employment. This is the case because (realistically) we have not allowed the countries that
lose from a change in macroprudential policies to be compensated by international transfers.
Otherwise the countries with unemployment would find it optimal to pay the countries with
full employment to reduce their macroprudential taxes. The countries with full employment
would suffer a second-order loss from slightly reducing their taxes whereas the countries with
unemployment would have a first-order gain from increasing their employment. But in the
absence of transfer (or any other type of reward), there is no way that the countries with full
employment can be induced to reduce their macroprudential taxes below the uncooperative
level.

5.3

US monetary stimulus vs. Chinese reserve accumulation

I now consider an application of the model to the equilibrium between monetary policy in
one part of the world and prudential reserve accumulation in the rest of the world. In the
wake of the Great Recession the monetary authorities in most advanced economies, after
lowering their policy rates to levels close to zero, have resorted to unconventional forms of
monetary stimulus such as quantitative easing or forward guidance. This induced global
capital to move towards emerging market economies, which in response accumulated foreign
exchange reserves and in some cases imposed restrictions on capital inflows. Does the model
support the view that there is scope for efficient policy coordination in such a situation?26
The question can be addressed by specializing the model as follows. There are two
countries that will be labeled “the US” and “China”. The global real interest rate is set by
the US so as to maximize US welfare. The capital account of China is closed except for the
accumulation of foreign assets (reserves).27 The accumulation of foreign reserves by China
is denoted by BC . We consider a Nash equilibrium between the US setting the interest rate
r∗ and China accumulating reserves BC .
For simplicity I focus on equilibria in which there is full employment in China but not
in the US. There is less than full employment in the US because of the lower bound on the
real interest rate,
r∗ ≥ −π ∗ .
26

Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti (2012) argue that when the global economy is in a liquidity trap, the negative impact of certain policies such as reserve accumulation on global demand could justify international
coordination.
27
This is not suggest that the Chinese accumulation of reserves is made primarily for prudential reasons
as opposed to resisting the appreciation of the currency. The results in this section would remain valid,
however, if China accumulated reserves because of a positive externality related to currency undervaluation,
as in Aizenman and Lee (2010). The analysis in Korinek (2012) also encompasses this case.

21

China accumulates reserves so as to contain the growth in domestic credit caused by US
monetary stimulus. For simplicity I assume that there is no debt externality in the US.28
Given that there is full employment in China, its output is equal to YC = gC (LC ). Setting
foreign reserves BC is equivalent to setting the level of domestic expenditures EC = YC −BC .
Increasing Chinese reserves by one dollar reduces Chinese domestic expenditures by the same
amount. Thus Chinese consumption and investment can be written as functions of reserves in
the same way as in section 3.3, CC (BC ) and IC (EC ). Both consumption and investment are
decreasing with BC since reserve accumulation reduces domestic expenditures. The problem
of the Chinese social planner can be written,
UC = max uC (CC (BC )) + pC (IC (BC ))IC (BC ) + (1 + r∗ )BC .
BC

It then follows from the envelope theorem that the partial derivative of Chinese welfare with
respect to the real interest rate is equal to the level of Chinese reserves,
∂UC
= BC .
∂r∗
An increase in the interest rate raises Chinese welfare by increasing the return that it receives
on its reserves.
As for US welfare, it is given by,
UU S = uU S (CU S ) + pU S IU S − (1 + r∗ )BC ,

(5)

where we have used the fact that Chinese foreign assets are US foreign liabilities. The
probability of a high payoff on the investment does not depend on the level of debt because
we have assumed away the debt externality in the US.
The US social planner’s problem, thus, is rather simple. If China accumulates a positive
level of reserves (BC > 0), the three terms on the right-hand side of (5) are maximized when
the real interest rate is minimized. It is thus optimal for the US social planner to set the
real interest rate at the lowest possible level subject to the zero-bound constraint, r∗ = −π ∗ .
At the margin, any increase in US consumption or investment is “free” since it is produced
by unemployed US labor.
Given that the first two terms on the right-hand side of (5) do not depend on BC , US
welfare is decreasing with Chinese reserves,
∂UU S
= −(1 + r∗ ).
∂BC
An increase in Chinese reserves lowers global demand and US production by the same amount
(since Chinese production does not increase at the margin). The gross interest rate appears
on the right-hand side of the expression above because the US borrows from China to cover
the fall in its first-period income.
We are now ready to look at the case for international coordination. Figure 5 shows
the policy instruments of the US and China on the horizontal and vertical axis respectively.
28

This assumption is not restrictive as it is in general optimal for the US to set the domestic macroprudential
tax to zero if there is unemployment in the US.

22

BC

iso-UC
BC(r*)
NE
A

iso-UUS

-π*

r*

Figure 5: Monetary stimulus and reserve accumulation
The curve labeled BC (r∗ ) shows how China’s level of reserves increases with the real interest
rate. The vertical line corresponds to the US optimal policy, which is to set the real interest
rate at the minimum level irrespective of what China does. The Nash equilibrium is at
the intersection of the two countries’ best response curves (the point labeled NE on the
figure). As a condition for optimality the iso-welfare curve of China must be tangent to the
vertical line. Finally, the figure shows the US iso-welfare curve that passes through the Nash
equilibrium. This curve is downward-sloping since an increase in the real interest rate that
reduces US welfare must be offset by a decrease in Chinese reserves that raises the demand
for US output.
The figure shows that the Nash equilibrium is not Pareto-optimal. Both US and Chinese
welfares are increased by moving from the Nash equilibrium to a point such as A, where the
US sets a higher interest rate and Chinese accumulates less reserves than in the uncooperative
equilibrium. Then China benefits from receiving a higher return on its reserves whereas the
US benefits from a higher level of Chinese demand. The US suffers from raising its own
interest rate but it is always possible to make this cost smaller than the benefit that it
receives from larger Chinese demand. This is because the cost incurred by China for raising
its own demand is second-order since Chinese welfare was at its maximum in the Nash
equilibrium. Thus China can be compensated for increasing global demand by a very small
(second-order) increase in the US interest rate.
Result 4 Assume that the model has two countries. One country (the US) sets the global
interest rate and has some unemployment because of the zero-bound constraint. The other
23

country (China) has full employment and accumulates foreign reserves for prudential reasons.
Then in the Nash equilibrium there is scope for Pareto-improving policy coordination in which
the US raises its interest rate and China lowers its reserve accumulation at the margin.
Proof. See discussion above.

6

Conclusion

I have presented a simple framework that allows us to (i) compare the welfare effects of
domestic prudential policies and prudential capital account policies in a small open economy;
(ii) analyze the general equilibrium effects of the uncoordinated use of these policies, and (iii)
explore the case for the coordination of macroprudential and monetary policies at the global
level. The main conclusions are that (i) domestic prudential policies are generally preferable
to capital controls but that realistic constraints on the use of the former may justify using
the latter; (ii) the fact that these policies have international spillovers does not per se imply
that they should be subject to international rules or coordination; but (iii) international
coordination may be justified if there is a global demand shortage.
The bottomline, thus, is that a case for the international coordination of macroprudential
policies can be made, but that it is not as robust or generic as one might expect. The case for
coordination cannot be based merely on the existence of international spillovers and depends
on the circumstances of global demand.29 The case for coordination is stronger in a bust—
when global resources are underutilized—than in a boom. Furthermore it will be difficult
to involve the countries that have full employment in the coordination effort in the absence
of international transfer. Basic theory does not suggest that the international oversight of
prudential capital control policies should be supported by the kind of permanent institutions
that exist for international trade, such as the world trade organization (WTO).

29

There may be other reasons for having international rules of good conduct for capital account policies, e.g.,
reducing stigma for appropriate policies—see Jeanne, Subramanian and Williamson (2012). I have focused
here on the rationale for coordination based on international spillovers and externalities.

24

APPENDIX
Appendix A. Proofs.
Proof of Result 1. The claims in Result 1 have been proven in the text except for the
statement that the optimal tax on external borrowing is countercyclical under Assumption
2. Domestic welfare is equal to the utility that lenders derive from their first-period consumption, u(C), plus the expected second-period income of lenders and borrowers, which is
equal to the payoffs from the domestic investment and from the foreign assets,
U = u(C) + p(I)f (I) + (1 + r∗ )(Y − C − I).
If the domestic social planner uses capital controls, consumption and investment can
be written as functions of the level of domestic expenditure, E, with C(E) + I(E) = E.
Differentiating domestic welfare with respect to the level of expenditure gives,
dU
= p(I(E))f 0 (I(E)) + p0 (I(E))f (I(E))I 0 (E) − (1 + r∗ ).
dE
To derive this expression we have used the first-order condition u0 (C) = p(I)f 0 (I) as well
as C 0 (E) + I 0 (E) = 1. The first term on the right-hand side is the private marginal utility
gain from increasing total expenditure, which by the envelope theorem is the same as if the
marginal expenditure were spent on investment. The second term on the right-hand side
is the social cost from increasing total expenditure, equal to the marginal increase in the
probability of a systemic crisis due to higher debt.
Figure 6 is similar to figure 2 but with total expenditures instead of investment on
the horizontal axis. The marginal gain from increasing total expenditures is lower from a
social perspective than from a private perspective. A social planner would choose a level of
expenditures E sp such that the social marginal gain is equal to the gross external cost 1 + r∗ .
This can be achieved by a Pigouvian tax on external borrowing equal to
τ c = −p0 (I(E sp ))f (I(E sp ))I 0 (E sp ).
As shown by figure 6, a lower cost of external borrowing r∗ increases total expenditures and,
if Assumption 2 is true, also increases the optimal tax on external borrowing.
Proof of Result 2. The global social planner’s problem is

P


j [uj (Cj ) + pj (Ij )fj (Ij )] s.t.
 max
P
P
(C
+
I
)
≤
j
j
j
j Yj ,


 u0 (C ) ≥ p (I )f 0 (I ) for j ∈ J c .
j
j j j j
j
The global social planner maximizes global welfare, which is equal to the sum of the utilities
that lenders derive from first-period consumption plus the expected levels of second-period
output. The first constraint is the global resource constraint. The second constraint is that
the marginal utility of consumption cannot be smaller than the private marginal return on
investment for the countries that use capital controls.
25

Gross interest rate
marginal gain from spending

1+r*

τc

private, p(I)f’(I)
social, p’(I)f(I)I’(E)+p(I)f’(I)

Esp

Elf

Expenditure, E=C+I

Figure 6: The optimal level of tax on capital inflows
For the countries that use domestic macroprudential policies (j ∈ J d ), the first-order
conditions are:
u0j (Cj ) = λ,
p0j (Ij )fj (Ij ) + pj (Ij )fj0 (Ij ) = λ,
where λ is the shadow cost of the global resource constraint.
For the countries that use prudential capital controls (j ∈ J c ), the first-order conditions
are:
u0j (Cj ) = λ − µj u00j (Cj ),


p0j (Ij )fj (Ij ) + pj (Ij )fj0 (Ij ) = λ + µj p0j (Ij )fj0 (Ij ) + pj (Ij )fj00 (Ij ) ,
where µj is the shadow cost of the constraint on the marginal utility of consumption.
The first-order conditions and the constraints are the same as in the Nash equilibrium
with independent national planners, with λ = 1+r∗ . Hence a global social planner who maximizes global welfare chooses the same allocation as the one obtained in the Nash equilibrium
between national social planners.
Proof of Result 3.
We consider a Nash equilibrium with unemployment in some
countries. In such an equilibrium the zero-bound constraint is binding, r∗ = −π ∗ . Let us
assume that all the countries with unemployment (j ∈ U ) reduce their macroprudential tax
by a small (first-order) amount dτ . This increases global demand by,
X
X 

−
I 0 (r∗ + τjd (r∗ ))dτ −
C 0 (r∗ + τjc (r∗ )) + I 0 (r∗ + τjc (r∗ )) dτ = dE W > 0.
j∈U ∩J d

j∈U ∩J c

The increase in global demand is matched by an increase in supply from the countries with
unemployment. In equilibrium, there is a small increase in the nominal price of the good
26

(dP > 0),P
which raises supply in all the countries with unemployment by dYj > 0 in such a
way that j∈U dYj = dE W . Since there is still some unemployment left after this first-order
change, the global monetary authority keeps the nominal interest rate at the zero bound and
there is no change in the real interest rate r∗ .
The welfare of a country that uses domestic macroprudential regulation is given by,
Uj = max uj (Cj ) + pj (Ij )fj (Ij ) + (1 + r∗ ) (Yj − Cj − Ij ) .
Cj ,Ij

The welfare of a country that uses prudential capital controls can be written in the same way,
with the additional constraint pj (Ij )fj0 (Ij ) = u0j (Cj ). By the envelope theorem the change in
country j’s welfare is,
dUj = (1 + r∗ )dYj > 0.
Thus all the countries with unemployment have a positive welfare gain, whereas the countries
at full employment see their welfare unchanged.
Appendix B. Linear-quadratic specification of the model.
Let us assume that output and systemic risk vary linearly with investment and debt
respectively,
f (I) = (1 + ρ)I,
p(D) = 1 − D/D,
where ρ and D are exogenous parameters. We assume ρ > r∗ to ensure that investment is
profitable when there is no systemic risk. Under these assumptions the laissez-faire level of
debt and investment satisfies p(I lf )(1 + ρ) = 1 + r∗ , implying
I lf =

ρ − r∗
D.
1+ρ

The first-best level of investment maximizes (1 − I/D)(1 + ρ)I − (1 + r∗ )I. It is equal to
one-half of the laissez-faire level of investment,
Ifb =

ρ − r∗ D
.
1+ρ 2

This level of investment can be achieved using a macroprudential tax on domestic borrowing
τ d = −p0 (I f b )f (I f b ) = (1 + ρ)I f b /D or
ρ − r∗
τ =
.
2
d

As a result the net domestic cost of borrowing is (r∗ + ρ)/2. The optimal tax smoothes out
one half of the variations in the external cost of borrowing.
The utility for consumption is quadratic,
u(C) = αC(C − C/2),
27

where C is the satiation level in consumption. It follows that saving is a linear function of
the real interest rate,
1+r
.
S(r) = Y − C +
α
When the social planner uses a tax on external borrowing, he optimizes under the constraint
u0 (C) = p(I)f 0 (I), or


α C − C = (1 + ρ) 1 − I/D .
This constraint, together with the definition of total expenditures, E = I + C, can be used
to derive how consumption and investment increase with total expenditures,
C − βD + βE
,
1+β
βD − C + E
I =
,
1+β

C =

where β ≡ (1 + ρ)/(αD). The optimal tax on external borrowing is
τc =

ρ − r∗
.
2+β

It is smaller than τ d , the optimal tax on domestic borrowing. One can show, finally, that
the current account balance is larger with the optimal tax on external borrowing than with
the optimal tax on domestic borrowing.

28

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Azarakhsh Malekian, and Asuman Ozdaglar. 2013. “Network
security and contagion.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19174.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Charles W Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek. 2012. “Does macropru leak? Evidence from a UK policy experiment.” NBER Working Paper 17822.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee. 2010. “The Real Exchange Rate, Mercantilism
and the Learning By Doing Externality.” Pacific Economic Review, 15(3): 324–335.
Barthold, Thomas A. 1994. “Issues in the design of environmental excise taxes.” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(1): 133–151.
Bengui, Julien. 2012. “Macro-prudential policy coordination and global regulatory
spillovers.” University of Montreal, manuscript.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and
Eric R Young. 2013. “Financial crises and macro-prudential policies.” Journal of International Economics, 89(2): 453–470.
Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin.
2011. “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States,
2003-2007.” International Finance Discussion Paper 1014, , (Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System).
Bianchi, Javier. 2011. “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle.”
American Economic Review, 101(7): 3400–3426.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2012. “(Why) Should Current
Account Balances Be Reduced&quest.” IMF Economic Review, 60(1): 139–150.
Borio, Claudio. 2003. “Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and
regulation?” BIS Working Paper No.128.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1988. “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations.” The
American Economic Review, 647–661.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1): 35–54.
Claessens, Stijn, Swati R. Ghosh, and Roxana Mihet. 2013. “Macro-Prudential Policies to Mitigate Financial System Vulnerabilities.” Manuscript, IMF.
Costinot, Arnaud, Guido Lorenzoni, and Ivan Werning. 2011. “A Theory of Optimal
Capital Controls.” Manuscript, MIT.
29

Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven, Deniz Igan, and Hui Tong. 2012. “Policies for
Macrofinancial Stability: How to Deal with Credit Booms.” IMF Staff Discussion Note
12/06.
De Nicolo, Gianni, Giovanni Favara, and Lev Ratnovski. 2012. “Externalities and
Macro-Prudential Policy.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 12/05.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2012. “Dealing with the trilemma: Optimal capital controls with fixed exchange rates.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 18199.
Forbes, Kristin J, and Francis E Warnock. 2012. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops,
Flight, and Retrenchment.” Journal of International Economics, 88(2): 235–251.
Forbes, Kristin, Marcel Fratzscher, Thomas Kostka, and Roland Straub. 2011.
“Bubble Thy Neighbor: Direct and Spillover Effects of Capital Controls.” Working Paper
MIT.
Galati, Gabriele, and Richild Moessner. 2013. “Macroprudential Policy—A Literature
Review.” The Journal of Economic Surveys, 27(5): 846–878.
Hanson, Samuel, Anil Kashyap, and Jeremy Stein. 2011. “A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 3–28.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1998. “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity.”
Journal of Political Economy, 106(1): 1–40.
IMF. 2011. “Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows-Cross-Cutting Themes and
Possible Policy Framework.” http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/021411a.pdf.
Jeanne, O., A. Subramanian, and J. Williamson. 2012. Who Needs to Open the Capital
Account? Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2013a. “Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate.” NBER
International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2012 (ISOM), , ed. Francesco Giavazzi and
Kenneth D. West, 7–42. University of Chicago Press.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2013b. “Systemic Debt Crises and Demand Externalities.” Manuscript in
progress, Johns Hopkins University.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. 2010a. “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows:
A Pigouvian Taxation Approach.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
100(2): 403–7.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. 2010b. “Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A
Pigouvian Taxation Approach.” NBER Working Paper 16899.
30

Klein, Michael W, and Jay C Shambaugh. 2013. “Rounding the Corners of the Policy
Trilemma: Sources of Monetary Policy Autonomy.”
Korinek, A. 2012. “Capital Controls and Currency Wars.” Manuscript, University of Maryland.
Korinek, Anton. 2010. “Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality
View.” Manuscript, University of Maryland.
Korinek, Anton. 2011. “The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls: A Research
Agenda.” IMF Economic Review, 59: 523–561.
Lim, C, F Columba, A Costa, P Kongsamut, A Otani, M Saiyid, T Wezel, and X
Wu. 2011. “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? Lessons
from Country Experiences.” IMF Working Paper 11/238.
Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008. “Inefficient Credit Booms.” The Review of Economic Studies,
75(3): 809–833.
Mendoza, Enrique G, and Javier Bianchi. 2010. “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and
Macro-prudentialPolicy?” NBER Working Paper 16091.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
U.S. Household Leverage Crisis.” NBER Working Paper No. 13936.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2012. “Does the Current Account Still Matter?” American Economic
Review, 102(3): 1–23.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Luc Laeven, Marcos
Chamonand Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Annamaria Kokenyne. 2011. “Managing
Capital Inflows: What Tools to Use?” IMF Staff Discussion Note, 11/06.
Ostry, Jonathan D, Atish R Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mahvash S Qureshi.
2012. “Managing Capital Inflows: The Role of Capital Controls and Prudential Policies.”
Journal of International Economics, 88: 407–421.
Ostry, Jonathan David, Atish R Ghosh, and Anton Korinek. 2012. Multilateral
Aspects of Managing the Capital Account. IMF Staff Discussion Note 12/10, International
Monetary Fund.
Perotti, Enrico, and Javier Suarez. 2011. “A Pigovian Approach to Liquidity Regulation.” International Journal of Central Banking, 7(4): 3–41.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe. 2012. “Prudential Policy For Peggers.”
NBER Working Paper 18031.

31

Shin, Hyun Song. 2010. “Non-core liabilities tax as a tool for prudential regulation.”
Manuscript, Princeton University.
Stein, Jeremy C. 2012. “Monetary policy as financial stability regulation.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 127(1): 57–95.
Williamson, John. 2005. Curbing the boom-bust cycle: stabilizing capital flows to emerging
markets. Institute for International Economics.

32

