                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       UNCOVERED EQUITY PARITY AND REBALANCING IN INTERNATIONAL
                              PORTFOLIOS

                                           Stephanie E. Curcuru
                                            Charles P. Thomas
                                            Francis E. Warnock
                                              Jon Wongswan

                                          Working Paper 19963
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19963


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       March 2014




The authors are thankful for comments from Galina Hale, Richard Levich, Assaf Razin, Giorgio Valente,
and participants in seminars or conferences at BIS, Clemson University, De Nederlandsche Bank,
ECB, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Federal Reserve Board, Georgetown University, Hong Kong
Monetary Authority, Trinity College Dublin, Universiteit van Amsterdam, University of Oregon, and
University of Virginia. We thank James Albertus for excellent research assistance. Warnock thanks
the Darden School Foundation for generous support and the Asian Institute of Management for its
hospitality. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Stephanie E. Curcuru, Charles P. Thomas, Francis E. Warnock, and Jon Wongswan. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uncovered Equity Parity and Rebalancing in International Portfolios
Stephanie E. Curcuru, Charles P. Thomas, Francis E. Warnock, and Jon Wongswan
NBER Working Paper No. 19963
March 2014
JEL No. F21,F31,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

Portfolio rebalancing is a key driver of the Uncovered Equity Parity (UEP) condition. According to
UEP, when foreign equity holdings outperform domestic holdings, domestic investors are exposed
to higher exchange rate exposure and hence repatriate some of the foreign equity to decrease their
exchange rate risk. By doing so, foreign currency is sold, leading to foreign currency depreciation.
We examine the relationship between U.S. investors’ portfolio reallocations and returns and find some
evidence consistent with UEP: Portfolio shifts are related to past returns in the underlying equity markets.
But we argue that a motive other than reducing currency risk exposure is likely behind this rebalancing.
In particular, U.S. investors may be exploiting mean reversion in underlying equity markets, rebalancing
away from equity markets that recently performed well and moving into equity markets market just
prior to relatively strong performance. Such behavior suggests tactical reallocations to increase returns
rather than reduce risk.


Stephanie E. Curcuru                                 Francis E. Warnock
Board of Governors                                   Darden Business School
of the Federal Reserve System                        University of Virginia
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW              Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
Washington DC 20551                                  and NBER
stephanie.e.curcuru@frb.gov                          warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

Charles P. Thomas                                    Jon Wongswan
Board of Governors                                   Phatra Securities Public Company Limited
of the Federal Reserve System                        11F Muang Thai-Phatra Office Tower 1
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW              252/6 Ratchadapisek Road
Washington DC 20551                                  Bangkok, 10310
charles.thomas@frb.gov                               Thailand
                                                     jon@phatrasecurities.com
1. Introduction

        A new parity condition has emerged in the international finance literature, the uncovered

equity parity condition (UEP) of Cappiello, Lorenzo, and Roberto De Santis (2005, 2007), Hau

and Rey (2006), and Kim (2011). UEP is exciting in part because it provides another way of

thinking about exchange rate movements, which have been notoriously difficult to predict

(Meese and Rogoff 1983; Cheung, Chinn, and Pascual 2005).

        The main intuition behind the UEP condition is one of portfolio rebalancing. There are

two distinct steps. First, when foreign equity holdings outperform domestic holdings, domestic

investors are exposed to higher relative exchange rate exposure and decide to repatriate some of

the foreign equity to decrease exchange rate risk. Second, the associated selling of foreign

currency leads to foreign currency depreciation.

        Evidence supporting the second step of UEP is abundant, as order flow has been shown

to impact exchange rates (Evans and Lyons 2002; Dunne, Hau, and Moore 2010; Filipe 2012).

However, evidence supporting the first step does not exist; we attempt to fill this void by

examining the evidence on the mechanisms behind UEP. One part of the mechanism has

investors rebalancing international equity portfolios away from (toward) countries whose

markets have recently done well (poorly). Do they? Or do they continue to purchase the equities

of countries whose markets have recently performed well? UEP presumes the former, but this

behavior would seem to be counter to the presumed behavior driving carry trades in which a high

yielding currency is expected to appreciate and continue to appreciate, or returns chasing in

general.1



1
 By carry trade, we mean simultaneously shorting one or more low-interest rate currencies and buying one or more
high interest rate currencies. See, among many others, Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan (2011).This strategy will
be profitable as long as the low interest rate currencies do not appreciate too much against the high interest rate

                                                         2
        We examine this issue from an empirical perspective, using the most recent update of the

Bertaut and Tryon (2007) data on U.S. investors’ monthly equity positions across 42 markets

from 1990 to 2010. We find strong evidence supporting the second leg of UEP: equity flows are

contemporaneously positively correlated with currency movements, a relationship consistent

with price pressure. This finding is neither controversial nor surprising, as many others have

found such evidence.

        More elusive has been evidence supporting the first leg of UEP, which itself has two

parts. One part is that when foreign equity holdings outperform domestic holdings, domestic

investors decide to repatriate some of the foreign equity. The second part is why investors do

this. In particular, UEP presumes that the selling of foreign equity holdings that recently

outperformed owes to a desire to reduce the now higher exchange rate exposure.

        We tackle these two subcomponents in turn. First, we find strong evidence—once

appropriate techniques and data are used—that investors do indeed sell foreign equity markets

that recently performed well. This behavior is asymmetric, as we do not find increased flows into

markets that recently performed very poorly, and so only constitutes partial evidence supporting

a condition behind UEP, but it is nonetheless robust evidence.

        The second subcomponent, why investors engage in this behavior, is somewhat more

difficult to ascertain. UEP suggests investors reallocate to lessen the increased risk of currency

exposure. An indirect test of this is to see if investors reallocate because of past currency

movements. They do not. U.S. investors react to changes in underlying equity market returns in a

manner consistent with partial equity rebalancing, trading away from equity markets that recently




currencies. On returns chasing in international equity markets, see Bohn and Tesar (1996), Brennan and Cao (1997),
and Curcuru et al. (2011), among others.

                                                        3
performed well and into ones that subsequently perform well. But we find that past currency

movements have no influence on these portfolio shifts.

       That investors do not react to currency movements is not damning evidence against UEP,

as UEP is about returns translated back into a common currency and hence concerns what we

will call total returns, the combination of the underlying equity returns and the currency returns.

And, indeed, as found in Curcuru et al. (2011), an examination of total returns provides evidence

of selling past winners. We find that this behavior is due to movements in the underlying equity

returns, not currency movements.

       We then explore another way to assess the motive behind the reallocations. We find that

equity returns, much more than currency returns, exhibit some mean reversion, so investors

might be opportunistically exploiting dynamics in the underlying equity returns, consistent with

De Bondt and Thaler 1985 and many others. We find this in country-by-country returns—the

underlying equity returns of ten countries have negative and significant autocorrelation

coefficients at the six-month horizon—but also when dividing countries in quartiles based on

past returns, as the top quartile markets never dominate the middle quartiles in horizons up to six

months. The worst quartile (based on past returns) continues to perform poorly up to three

months out, perhaps why our rebalancing results are asymmetric (top performers come back to

earth, but the worst performers do not quickly turn around) and only begin to perform well at

longer horizons.

       We then examine how well the reallocations performed. Here we find pretty strong

evidence against the notion that investors reallocate to reduce risk. In fact, we find evidence that

U.S. investors switched into the right equity markets: for horizons of one, two and three months

those markets outperformed. This switching to markets that subsequently outperformed owes to



                                                 4
exploiting movements in the underlying equity returns and seems to have nothing to do with

currency movements. Thus, the evidence based on country-by-country returns autocorrelations,

portfolios constructed based on past returns, and how well the reallocations predict future returns

all suggest that the reallocations were tactical decisions to increase expected returns, not

measures to reduce currency exposure.

           Overall, our assessment of the evidence is that two mechanisms behind UEP—price

pressure and reallocating away from past winners—are strongly supported in the data, but the

evidence does not support the behavior proposed in the UEP literature. Rather than finding

evidence consistent with a desire to reduce currency exposure driving reallocations, the evidence

we find is consistent with tactical reallocations toward equity markets that will subsequently

outperform. In that sense the returns-seeking behavior we find is more consistent with the carry

trade—moving into high yielding currencies that have performed well and, absent a sharp

increase in risk aversion, will continue to perform well—that puts the uncovered interest parity

directly at odds with reality.2 Our conclusion is that while evidence of the mechanics behind

UEP is strong enough, it seems this is due to positioning to earn higher returns, not to mitigate

risk.

           Our results are important for the growing area of international macroeconomic research

on gross financial flows and international portfolio allocation. Theoretical models of

international portfolio choice are being constructed with ever-increasing frequency; see, among

many others, Kraay and Ventura (2000, 2003), Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2009),

Coeurdacier, Kollmann, and Martin (2007), Tille and van Wincoop (2008, 2010), Hnatkovska

(2010), Pavlova and Rigobon (2010), Devereaux and Sutherland (2010, 2011), and Dumas,

Lewis, and Osambela (2010). One could very well imagine such models to begin incorporating
2
    For evidence on the failure of UIP, see the surveys of Hodrick (1987) and Engel (1996, 2014).

                                                           5
UEP. Our results would suggest that some mechanisms behind UEP are supported by data, but

the assumed behavior of risk mitigation is not. In addition, any study of the returns on

international positions is worthwhile, as valuation effects have become ever more important

determinants of changes in the external wealth of nations as gross international positions have

become ever larger. But even though empirical research on this topic has skyrocketed with the

improved availability of data on international positions, made possible in large part by the

datasets created in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001, 2007), Obstfeld (2010) paints a bleak picture

of the extent of our knowledge. This limited knowledge is due at least in part to the fact that most

datasets have a disconcertingly limited ability to provide accurate information on valuation gains

and losses in international portfolios. In this paper we strive to add to our understanding of

valuation gains and losses by delving deeply into one aspect: the relationship between portfolio

reallocations and past and prospective equity and currency returns within U.S. investors’ foreign

equity portfolios.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss theory on how equity

portfolios should react to currency movements, as well as evidence from practitioners. In Section

3 we present data, methodologies, and main results, focusing on the relationship between

reallocations and past, contemporaneous, and future returns. In Section 4 we present similar

evidence for a sample that excludes countries with the Kim (2011) notion of market risk. We

conclude in Section 5.




                                                 6
2. Uncovered Equity Parity and the Existing Evidence

       There are a number of theories on how international equity investors should react to

currency movements. Adler and Dumas (1983) suggests that investors will hedge the currency

exposure inherent in international equity positions by altering their nominal bond portfolios or

through forward contracts. International equity positions should not adjust based on past

currency movements, because the currency exposure is hedged elsewhere. In contrast, the

existence of a carry trade in currencies (Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo 2010; Brunnermeier

Nagel and Pederson 2010; Lustig and Verdelhan 2007; Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan 2011)

might suggest that investors should increase their allocations to the equities of countries whose

currency recently appreciated. In this framework currency movements are largely a function of

slow-moving interest rate differentials, so investors should add to their exposure of currencies

that recently appreciated, a form of returns chasing, and those currencies should continue to

appreciate.

       A third alternative is uncovered equity parity (UEP), suggested by the work of Hau and

Rey (2004, 2006, 2008), Cappiello and De Santis (2005, 2007), and Kim (2011). In those

models, investors have an optimal currency exposure in mind and cannot perfectly hedge against

currency movements. To minimize currency risk, investors rebalance away from equity markets

that recently performed well. This rebalancing is a reaction to movements in the currency, the

underlying equity market, or some combination of the two. Moreover, rebalancing away from a

foreign market will appreciate the home currency. The argument is laid out informally in Hau

and Rey (2004), with the theoretical underpinnings developed more fully in Hau and Rey (2006).

At the heart of the UEP condition is portfolio rebalancing due to increased currency exposure:

Whenever foreign equity holdings outperform domestic holdings, domestic investors have



                                               7
increased foreign exchange rate exposure. In reaction, they repatriate some of the foreign equity

wealth to decrease their exchange rate risk and, by doing so, they sell the foreign currency which

then depreciates.

        Thus, the UEP of Hau and Rey (2006) and Kim (2011) provides a set of mechanisms that

we can explore in the data.3 But other theories are consistent with international equity investors

not reacting to currency movements (because they are already hedged) or adding to the equity

positions of countries whose currency recently appreciated (for carry trade reasons). In the

absence of a theoretical consensus, the obvious question is: What do investors actually do?

        The first thing to note about how investors actually react to currency exposure is that in

practice it is impossible to tell with publicly available data, for the simple reason that there is no

dataset that allows us to discern the true exposure faced by investors. Consider amounts for one

snapshot as of end-2010 (Table 1). U.S. investors’ international equity holdings totaled $4,647

billion. Added to that is a small amount ($500 billion) of U.S. holdings of foreign-currency

denominated bonds issued by foreign entities.4 U.S. investors also hold foreign currency debt

issued by U.S. entities, but the vast majority of such debt ($817 billion of the $1,019 billion) is

held by foreigners. U.S. investors also hold the equities of U.S. multinationals that have

operations in many foreign countries; one can back out those holdings and attempt to estimate

the inherent currency exposure (see Cai and Warnock 2012). In addition to all those are

derivatives positions—forward, options, and others—for which the data problems are even more

daunting; only summary data on the fair-market value of U.S. cross-border derivatives is

available, with no data on exposures to specific equities or currencies (Curcuru 2007). So though

we know the value of U.S. investors’ equity and bond positions in many countries and can back

3
  Cappiello and De Santis (2005, 2007) present another mechanism for UEP: expected returns on risky assets, when
expressed in a common currency, should be equal.
4
  See Burger, Warnock and Warnock (2012) for analysis of these bond holdings.

                                                       8
out their holdings of U.S.-issued foreign currency bonds and of U.S. multinationals’ equities,

these data offer an incomplete picture of currency exposure.

         Surveys of investors suggest that while international bond positions might be hedged,

international equity positions are typically unhedged (Levich et. al 1999). One reason might be

that the currency exposure of an international bond is easily quantified because the currency of

the bond’s periodic coupon payments and final payment is well defined. In contrast, it is difficult

to ascertain ex ante the currency exposure associated with a foreign equity. The actual currency

exposure of a firm’s assets and liabilities is unknown, as is the exposure of its off-balance sheet

products such as derivatives that could be in place specifically to alter the firm’s currency

exposure.5 Even for well-measured equity positions it is impossible to ascertain the true currency

exposure.

         So available data cannot ascertain the extent of currency exposure, and theory allows for

all possibilities of investors reactions to currency movements—they might ignore currency

movements, chase them, or in the case of UEP rebalance away from them—and evidence from

practitioners suggests little reaction of international equity investors to currency movements. We

turn next to empirical evidence from U.S. investors’ international equity portfolios.



3. Empirical Assessment of UEP

         We will assess the various legs in the UEP condition in three steps by examining the

relationships between flows or portfolio reallocations and current, past, and future returns.

5
  This is true in national statistics but also at the level of individual equities. Consider, for example, that for an
international investor the simple categorization of the Swiss firm Roche as a Swiss equity might suggest its currency
exposure is based solely on movements in the Swiss franc. But in practice Roche’s exposure is spread throughout
the world. Even if it is known exactly how Roche’s assets and liabilities (and income and cost streams) are
distributed throughout the world, corporate hedging programs are typically flexible enough that it is not possible to
determine ex ante how Roche will choose to hedge its currency risk over the short- to medium-term. If the currency
exposure of international equity investors is difficult to discern and what exposure they have might or might not be
hedged by the firm, it is impossible for national statistics on international portfolio positions to speak to exposure.

                                                          9
3.1 Flows and Contemporaneous Returns: An Assessment of Price Pressure on Exchange Rates

       There is a substantial literature that shows using high frequency data that flows impact

exchange rates (Evans and Lyons 2002; Dunne, Hau, and Moore 2010; Filipe 2012). In the UEP

literature, some work has utilized the TIC (Treasury International Capital) flow data, the official

capital flows data for the United States. For example, Hau and Rey (2004) use bilateral net TIC

flows scaled by gross trading (that is, the sum of purchases and sales), while Hau and Rey (2006)

use normalized “net-net” TIC flows: net U.S. purchases of foreign equities minus net foreign

purchases of U.S. equities, normalized by the average absolute level of the net increase in foreign

stock ownership by U.S. residents over the previous 12 months. In Table 2 we recreate such

analysis and find some evidence of a positive contemporaneous correlation between flows and

currency movements. In eleven countries the correlation is positive and significant; for no

country is it negative and significant. While we do not know the timing of purchases within a

month and so cannot perfectly disentangle return-chasing from price pressure, the positive

contemporaneous correlations are consistent with the third leg of UEP: equity flows cause

exchange rate movements.



3.2 Analysis of Past Returns: Do Investors Rebalance?

       Analysis of flows can assess price pressure (subject to not knowing the timing of within-

period flows), but any attempt to discern trading behavior from flow data is subject to the

Curcuru et al (2011) critique: Flow data are influenced by changes in financial wealth. Thus,

while we can observe flows and past returns, a negative relationship between the two is not

necessarily evidence of rebalancing, neither is a positive relationship necessarily evidence of

returns chasing.



                                                10
        Portfolio data are, however, well suited to assess the existence of such trading behavior.6

We use the Bertaut and Tryon (2007), henceforth BT, estimates of the monthly bilateral positions

of U.S. investors in the equities of a large set of foreign countries. The country-level dataset

includes, for example, a monthly time series of U.S. holdings of German equities (as well as of

the U.S. holdings of equities in many other foreign countries). The BT data are formed by

combining high-quality but infrequent readings on positions (from security-level benchmark

surveys) with more frequent flow data. In the process of combining positions and flows data, the

reported-flow data are adjusted to alleviate well-known country attribution problems (the

financial center bias of Warnock and Cleaver 2003, among others). Specifically, the BT monthly

bilateral positions are formed by starting with an initial position as given by a benchmark survey,

creating naïve monthly positions until the next benchmark survey by using flow data and

valuation adjustments (from, for foreign equity markets, MSCI indexes), and then adjusting the

estimates to eliminate the financial center bias and other wedges between flows-based estimates

and survey-based readings. The resulting dataset is entirely consistent with reported data on U.S.

holdings of foreign equities. In fact, an earlier version of the dataset formed the basis for the

official U.S. entries in the IMF’s Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey in 2002, a year in

which the United States did not conduct a benchmark asset survey.7



6
  Hau and Rey (2008) use mutual fund data for four source countries and find evidence of currency risk rebalancing
behavior.
7
  The BT dataset is currently the best available for monthly U.S. investment in foreign equities. That said, data
quality could improve even more in the near future. For example, positions estimates could be further improved by
incorporating more direct measures of the returns U.S. investors earn in each foreign market; such direct returns
measures do not currently exist but could be constructed for the portion of holdings that is in individual equities.
Moreover, since June 2011, some monthly securities positions data have been collected by the U.S. Department of
the Treasury through its Treasury International Capital (TIC) system. To date, post-WWII benchmark asset surveys
occurred as of March 1994, year-ends of 1997 and 2001, and annually at year-end starting 2003. During World War
II the Treasury Department conducted a survey of all foreign assets owned by U.S. citizens and residents as of May
1943, but the primary purpose was to identify U.S. assets abroad in preparation for the war settlements phase of
peace negotiations; the 1943 survey is sufficiently removed in time and different in scope, methods, and purpose that
the 1994 benchmark survey is considered to be the first of its kind.

                                                        11
        The bilateral holdings data provide the country weights in U.S. investors’ portfolios.8

Another important piece of our dataset is the returns earned by U.S. investors within each foreign

market. This is currently unknowable; returns series based on U.S. investors’ foreign holdings do

not exist. While directly measured country-level returns series do not exist, the literature is pretty

clear on the type of firms that should be in such an index. A long line of research has shown that

investors—be they Americans, Swedes, Finns, or others—tend to hold the largest and most

liquid foreign stocks (Kang and Stulz (1997), Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001), Grinblatt and

Keloharju (2001), Edison and Warnock (2004), and Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2009)). This

suggests the use of the publicly available country-level MSCI returns indices, which are

comprised of the largest and most liquid firms in each country. Moreover, a one-time comparison

of MSCI firms and actual U.S. investment at a point in time (December 1997) showed that MSCI

firms represent almost 80 percent of U.S. investors’ foreign equity investment and that in the

12,000-firm universe of foreign stocks in Ammer et al. (2012), the correlation between weights

in the MSCI World Ex US and U.S. investors’ foreign equity portfolios is quite high at 0.77.

MSCI returns indices, while not direct measurements, should be reasonable representations of

the returns U.S. investors earn within each foreign market.

        Armed with the time series of country weights from the BT dataset, and assuming that

within each country the market (as represented by MSCI firms) is held, we are able to compute

the (unhedged) dollar returns earned by U.S. investors on their foreign equity portfolios. We note

that the dollar returns U.S.-based investors face in foreign equity markets are comprised of two



8
 The bilateral data we use in this paper are the basis for Curcuru et al. (2011). Aggregate BT data—specifically,
aggregate foreign positions in U.S. securities and aggregate U.S. positions in foreign securities—have been used in
Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2008, 2010) and Curcuru, Thomas, and Warnock (2009) to show that (i) previous
estimates of the differential between returns on U.S. investors’ foreign portfolios and returns on foreigners’ U.S.
positions were biased upward and (ii) foreigners’ U.S. portfolio returns were reduced by ill-timed switching between
U.S. bonds and U.S. equities.

                                                        12
components: returns on the currency and returns on the underlying local-currency equity market.

Our final working dataset is monthly 1990 – 2010 for 42 foreign markets for which we have both

U.S. portfolio weights and monthly equity returns. These markets, listed in Table 2, comprise

$4,161 billion of the $4,647 billion in U.S. foreign equity holdings as of December 2010.9

         Armed with data on bilateral portfolio reallocations and currency and equity returns, we

can use of the Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995) techniques to assess whether reallocations

and past returns are related negatively (as in UEP) or positively (as in returns-chasing behavior).

         We use three measures (LM, BM, and SM) to assess the degree to which U.S. investors

actively change their portfolio holdings in the direction of previous currency or underlying stock

returns. The key, as demonstrated in Curcuru et al. (2011), is to use not flow data but the active

change in the weight of country i in U.S. investors’ foreign portfolio at time t, Xi,t:



                                                          1         ,   ,
                                ,          ,      ,                                    1
                                                          1         ,   ,



where ri,total,t is the total dollar return on country i equities from period t-1 to t; rp,total,t is the total

dollar return on U.S. investors’ foreign portfolio, defined as                    ,    ,      ∑         ,     ,   ,   ;

and wi,t is the weight of country i at time t in U.S. investors’ portfolio. If investors followed a

buy-and-hold strategy, Xi,t would equal zero. The momentum statistic LMk is:

                                       1
                                                      ,       , ,           , ,        2


where Nt is the number of countries held in the portfolio at time t , m denotes whether returns are

total dollar returns, underlying equity returns, or currency returns, and k is the number of months

9
  Of the $486 billion in end-2010 U.S. holdings of foreign equities not included in our study, 94 percent is in
financial centers of the Caribbean, Jersey, Guernsey, and Luxembourg.

                                                          13
(k=1, 2, 3, or 6) the returns are lagged. If Xi,t is positively related to past returns the LM statistic

will be positive and significant, indicating momentum trading: U.S. investors on average

increased the weights on countries whose equities or currencies performed well (relative to the

other countries) k periods ago. A significantly negative value of LM would be evidence of

contrarian trading or portfolio rebalancing, consistent with UEP. Two additional momentum

statistics isolate trading when investors increase country weights (the BM measure) from when

they decrease country weights (the SM measure).

         Table 3 shows results.10 Focusing on all portfolio reallocations (i.e., the LM measure),

only two LM statistics are significant at the 5% level. In the Equity Returns block, LM3 and LM6

are both negative and significant. The SM and BM lines in the Equity Returns block indicate that

this rebalancing is due to selling past winners (SM statistic for all lags is negative and

significant), not to buying past losers.

         Turning to the relationship between reallocations and currency returns (the middle panel),

we find no evidence that U.S. investors consider past currency movements when adjusting their

international equity portfolios. At no lag are portfolio reallocations related to currency

movements at the 5% level of significance, and the one coefficient that is significant at the 10%

level is positive. This could be because the currency risk is already hedged, unknowable ex ante,

or that investors are reallocating solely in response to the underlying equity moves.11 But at some

level this behavior does not appear to be consistent with the uncovered equity parity theory in

which investors actively reallocate away from currencies that have appreciated.



10
   In Tables 3-7, countries enter the dataset in January 1990 or at the time of the first data point on equity returns.
For all Advanced Economies (except Hong Kong and Israel), equity returns are available by January 1990. EME
equity returns tend to start in the mid-1990s.
11
   We note that the Adler and Dumas (1983) notion that nominal bond positions are altered to hedge currency risk
would mean that U.S. investors are shorting foreign bonds. We have no way to tell if this is occurring.

                                                           14
       Overall, the evidence in Table 3 indicates that U.S. investors reallocate out of equity

markets that recently performed well—in line with UEP—and that this behavior owes to

reactions to underlying equity returns, not to currency movements.



3.3 Portfolio Reallocations and Future Returns: Are Investors Positioning to Reduce Exposure

or to Increase Future Returns?

       The above analysis is supportive of UEP in that rebalancing away from past winners

seems to be a feature of U.S. international equity portfolios. UEP might struggle to reconcile the

facts that none of the reallocations seem to owe to currency movements and that the reallocations

are asymmetric (i.e., no evidence of buying of past losers), but the results are robust and largely

in support of mechanisms proposed to underlie UEP.

       We next tackle what is arguably more difficult to ascertain empirically: What exactly is

the motivation behind investor behavior observed in Table 3? By UEP, it should be that the

reallocations are done to reduce mounting currency risk. An alternative hypothesis is that the

reallocations are tactical decisions to increase future returns. We assess these competing

behaviors in a number of ways.

       First, we ascertain whether there is mean reversion in currency or equity returns that

could prompt relatively mechanical reallocations out of past winners (Table 4). We find

substantial mean reversion in equities at the six-month horizon, with equity market returns in

eleven countries having significantly negative autocorrelation coefficients at that horizon. In

contrast, at short horizons (one-month) both currency and equity returns have some persistence.

Beyond the 1-month horizon currency returns show no real tendency for persistence or reversion.




                                                15
We take the results in Table 4 to suggest that at the 6-month horizon there may well be some

predictability in equity returns, but not in currency returns.12

         Table 4 is country-by-country. We turn next to portfolio analysis similar to Richards

(1997) that segments the sample into portfolios based on past returns (Table 5). Portfolios are

formed based on the returns over ranking periods of the past k months, where k=1, 2, 3, 6, or 12.

The worst performing countries during the ranking period form Portfolio 1; the best performing

countries form Portfolio 4. “Test period returns” then shows the performance of those ranking

period portfolio in the subsequent k months. For total USD equity returns (top panel), during the

test period the best ranking period performers (Portfolio 4) underperforms the next best

(Portfolio 3) for horizons of one, two, and six months (and is roughly equal over the 3-month

horizon). The worst ranking period performers (Portfolio 1) continue to perform poorly for three

more months, improving at the 6- and 12-month horizons. One interpretation of the top block of

Table 5 is that the strategy uncovered in the LM, BM, SM analysis of Table 3—that of selling

equity markets that performed well in the past—seems supported in the returns data. A similar

analysis of local equity returns (middle block) is less supportive. The bottom panel of Table 5

shows similar results for currency returns. For currencies, the poor performers continue to do

poorly (at all horizons), and for short horizons the best performers continue to perform strongly.

For currency returns, there is little evidence to suggest it would be profitable to rebalance away

from the best performers.

         We next move to two more direct ways to assess the behavior that might be behind the

reallocations out of past winners that we have documented. In both we assess the relationship

between portfolio reallocation and future returns. If the behavior posited in the UEP condition is


12
  The lact of predictability of currency returns is a feature of a long literature spanning Meese and Rogoff (1983)
and Cheung, Chinn, and Pascual (2005).

                                                         16
actually occurring, we should not see a positive relationship between today’s reallocations and

future returns, as the reallocations would occur to reduce exposure, not to position portfolios for

stronger returns.

        The first way we assess this is with the conditional weight-based measure (CWM), a

portfolio-based measure developed by Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993), Eckbo and Smith

(1998), and Ferson and Khang (2002). The CWM is based on an estimate of the sum of the

covariances between active changes in portfolio weights and future abnormal returns (that is, the

component of the return that is not forecastable using public information). The CWM is often

used in the literature as a gauge of private information or an informational advantage; under

time-varying expected returns, a risk-averse investor with non-increasing absolute risk aversion

would move into (out of) the market when private information indicates a positive (negative)

abnormal return relative to that predicted using public information. When the private information

signals are on average correct, the estimate of the sum of the conditional covariances between

changes in portfolio weight and future abnormal returns will be positive.

        We set up the CWM as follows. Define the estimate of the sum of the conditional

covariances as




                 ,   ,   , ,   |Ω            ,        ,   , ,          , ,    Ω    |Ω       3




where    ,   is the benchmark weight of country i at time t and m denotes whether returns are total

dollar returns, underlying equity returns, or currency returns. Let the benchmark be a buy-and-

hold weight of lag k defined as


                                                 17
                                                         1           ,   ,
                              ,           ,   Π                                       4
                                                         1           ,   ,




Estimate the conditional portfolio weight-based measure via GMM:



                                                                 /
                                      ,           , ,                           5




                                  ,                 ,        ,       ,        φ        6


With the one distinction of allowing for different types of returns (total, underlying equity, and

currency) the implementation follows Curcuru et al. (2011). Equation (5) is an N vector of errors

from estimating a linear function of future excess returns on information variables when N is the

maximum value of Nt for the full sample. Zt, a subset of                     , are public information variables.13

Each error in equation (5) has an interpretation of an abnormal return. Equation (6) is the error

from estimating an average of the conditional covariances between changes in portfolio weights

and future abnormal returns. φp is the average of conditional weight measure across the full

sample. See Curcuru et al. (2011) for estimation details.

        Table 6 shows the results of the CWM analysis; the top panel includes our full sample of

42 countries, whereas the bottom panel is for the “floating” sample. The Equity Returns lines

show positive and significant CWM coefficients for horizons of one, two, and three months. U.S.

investors switched into equity markets that subsequently performed abnormally well (compared

13
  As in Curcuru et al. (2011), we use three variables to proxy for public information: (1) lagged changes in the
short-term interest rate (U.S. Treasury three-month yield), (2) lagged changes in term structure spread (U.S.
Treasury 10-year yield minus U.S. Treasury 3-month yield), and (3) lagged world excess returns. These information
variables have been found to have robust predictive power for aggregate country-level expected returns (Harvey,
1991; Ferson and Harvey, 1993; and Bekaert and Harvey, 1997).

                                                        18
to their predicted returns), which is consistent with tactical reallocations to increase future

returns rather than attempts to reduce exposure to certain currencies. Moreover, the Currency

Returns lines in Table 6 show that U.S. investors’ reallocations are not associated with future

currency appreciations or depreciations.

         The CWM statistic is widely used to ascertain the extent to which investors successfully

use private information when reallocating their portfolios, but the statistic is not directly related

to performance. A portfolio could evolve in a way that produces a positive and significant CWM

statistic but does not actually produce higher returns. In other words, the CWM is positive if the

investor switched into country x just before country x had higher than expected returns

(specifically, positive abnormal returns), but if the switch meant foregone returns in country y

just before it had even higher returns, the switch into x need not have improved portfolio

performance. Curcuru et al. (2011) showed that U.S. investors switched into markets that

subsequently had high abnormal returns, and we have shown that this owes to timing the

underlying equity markets, but did these reallocations lead to exceptional portfolio

performance?14

         We construct a new measure to ascertain whether reallocations actually led to higher total

portfolio returns. Consider a measure, which we refer to as timing or TM, that captures the

degree to which U.S. investors correctly anticipate future returns within the context of their

entire foreign equity portfolio, rather than just at the country-level. The construction of TM is

similar to the LM measure, but is forward looking:




14
  Because the information variables have a low predictive power (that is, it is difficult to predict one-month ahead
equity returns, whether local variables are included or not), the Curcuru et al. (2011) results would have been nearly
identical had information variables been excluded. In that case, those results would be interpreted as “switching into
markets just prior to higher than their time-series average returns”.

                                                         19
                  1                                                1
                               , ,           , ,                               ,   , ,        7




where Xi,t is the active portfolio shift defined in (1); m denotes whether returns are total dollar

returns, underlying equity returns, or currency returns; ri,m,t, is the k-month return on country i

equities at time t; and rbhp,m,t+k is the return that would have been realized at time t on the buy-

and-hold portfolio (specifically, U.S. investors’ foreign portfolio had there not been an active

shift at time t). A significantly positive value of TM would indicate that U.S. investors on

average increased the weights on countries whose equities were set to outperform the buy-and-

hold benchmark.

       As was the case with the momentum measure, the main TM measure combines investors’

actions when they buy with their actions when they sell. We also jointly compute separate timing

measures for buys (BTM) and sells (STM). Specifically, the BTM statistic will indicate whether

returns are correctly anticipated when investors increase country weights; STM applies when

investors decrease country weights.




                                     1
                                                               ,           ,       8
                                                       ,



                                     1
                                                           ,           ,           9
                                                   ,




where BTM (STM) is a measure of correct anticipation when investors buy (sell) securities. The

timing measures (TM, BTM, and STM) capture the degree to which U.S. investors correctly


                                                   20
anticipate future returns within the context of their entire foreign equity portfolio, rather than just

at the country-level; a significantly positive value of TM would indicate that U.S. investors on

average increased the weights on countries whose equities were set to outperform the buy-and-

hold benchmark.

         The TM line in Table 7 shows results for the main timing measure for dollar returns,

underlying equity returns, and currency returns. The TM measure is positive and significant for

one-month total returns and one- and two-month equity returns. TM for currency returns is never

significant. Overall, the evidence suggests that when U.S. investors reallocate within their

foreign equity portfolios, their reallocations improved short-term portfolio performance.15 The

results that focus on instances in which U.S. investors increased the portfolio weight on country i

(BTM Buy Only) are even stronger. U.S. investors reallocate into equities that are set to

outperform a buy-and-hold portfolio at return horizons of one, two, three and six months. In

contrast, when they decreased the weight on country i (STM Sell Only), the results are

insignificant.

         Taken together, the evidence in Tables 6 and 7 indicates that U.S. investors

systematically switch into markets that are about to experience high abnormal returns (or higher

than their average returns), and that these portfolio reallocations improved near-term portfolio

performance. By UEP, reallocations should be done to reduce mounting currency risk. But the

alternative hypothesis that the reallocations are tactical decisions to increase future returns seems

to be more supported by the data.




15
   While Table 7 suggests that U.S. investors’ reallocations within their foreign equity portfolios improved short-
term portfolio performance, Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2010) found no evidence of timing ability when U.S.
investors reallocate between foreign debt and foreign equity.

                                                         21
4. Limiting the Sample to Advanced Economies

           Market risks might help explain failure of UEP (Kim 2011), so in this section we limit

the sample to countries unlikely to have substantial market risks. Market risks in Kim (2011) are

associated with emerging markets, as they “can be justified by incomplete institutional reforms,

weaker macroeconomic fundamentals, more volatile economic conditions, shallow financial

markets, and imperfect market integration” and include, specifically, “the degree of market

integration, transaction costs, the distance between capital markets, and the size of the market”.

Moreover, “market risk after the liberalization of financial markets is expected to decrease

gradually along the path of market integration.”16 Thus, market risk in Kim (2011) is an

emerging market phenomenon that helps explain failure of UEP in such economies.

           To assess whether our conclusions are subject to the market-risk phenomenon of Kim

(2011), we re-estimate our main evidence limiting the sample to a set of countries not subject to

the Kim (2011) notion of market risk: advanced economies. Tables 8-10 show that the full

sample results also hold for AEs: Trading patterns in U.S. investors’ advanced economies’

foreign equity portfolios are due to a relationship between reallocations and returns of the

underlying equity markets, not currency returns. Specifically, the rebalancing we find in the AE

portfolio is not due to past currency movements, but to movements in underlying equity markets

(Table 8), and seems to be more about positioning for future returns rather than rebalancing to

reduce risk exposure (Tables 9 and 10). Even in the sample of countries not subject to Kim

(2011) market risk, the behavior proposed in the UEP literature—rebalancing in order to reduce

currency exposure—does not seem supported by the evidence.




16
     Quotes are from Kim (2011, pg. 1492).

                                                 22
5. Conclusion

       Using portfolio data on international equity holdings and portfolio-based techniques, we

find evidence that trading patterns in U.S. investors’ foreign equity portfolios arise from a

relationship between reallocations and returns of the underlying equity markets. We find no such

evidence of a particular trading strategy with respect to currency movements.

       We cannot rule out the uncovered equity parity theory, nor is it our intent to, because at

its heart is a statement about overall currency exposure and subsequent portfolio reallocations.

Overall currency exposure comes from some combination of currency movements and changes

in the underlying equity prices, as well as changes in the value of other assets and positions in

derivatives. While our analysis shows that within their international equity portfolio U.S.

investors do not react to currency movements, it does not necessarily mean that they do not react

to currency exposure. As we note, data limitations preclude an analysis of currency exposure.

       We provide an assessment of the uncovered equity parity condition (UEP) by examining

the mechanisms that have been posited to lead to UEP. For some of the mechanisms behind

UEP, we find strong support. We found a positive contemporaneous relationship between equity

returns and portfolio adjustments, which could be due to price pressure, consistent with one leg

of UEP. We find substantial evidence that investors reallocate away from equity markets that

recently performed well, consistent with the rebalancing leg of UEP. But for other aspects of

UEP, our evidence is not supportive. The rebalancing we find is not due to past currency

movements, but to movements in underlying equity markets. This is not damning, but does raise

questions about UEP. More troubling is that the rebalancing we find seems to be more about

positioning for future equity returns rather than rebalancing to reduce risk exposure, the behavior

proposed in the UEP literature. Overall, our assessment is that while data are consistent with



                                                23
some legs of UEP (price pressure and rebalancing), the behavior proposed in the UEP

literature—rebalancing in order to reduce currency exposure—does not seem supported by the

evidence. Indeed, if the rebalancing that we observe is to better position one’s portfolio for

higher future returns, then that rebalancing shares more in common with the uncovered interest

parity’s antithesis, the carry trade: Neither is to reduce exposure, both are to earn higher future

returns.

       We note that our results are not inconsistent with other empirical work on the

predictability of currency movements and equity prices. Because currency movements are

notoriously difficult to predict at short horizons (Meese and Rogoff 1983, Cheung, Chinn, and

Pascual 2005), it would be surprising to find that U.S. investors reallocated based on past

currency movements or were able to time future currency movements. In contrast, there is

existing evidence of equity return predictability, especially for one market relative to another.

Ferson and Harvey (1993) find some predictability of international equity returns, Kasa (1992)

finds mean reversion (and, hence, some predictability) in two-country equity portfolios, and

Richards (1995) and Balvers, Wu, and Gilliland (2000) find that country-specific returns relative

to a world index exhibit mean reversion, suggesting that the contrarian strategy of DeBondt and

Thaler (1985) and Richards (1997) might be profitable. Thus, both the partial rebalancing we

find—the selling of equity markets that performed well in the recent past—and the switching

into markets that subsequently have high abnormal returns are consistent with the literature on

the predictability of international equity market returns.




                                                 24
References

Adler, M., and B. Dumas, 1983. International Portfolio Choice and Corporation Finance: A Synthesis.
      Journal of Finance 38(3): 925-984.
Ammer, J., S. Holland, D. Smith, and F. Warnock, 2012. U.S. International Equity Investment. Journal of
      Accounting Research 50(5): 1109-1139
Balvers, R., Y. Wu, and E. Gillilland, 2000. Mean Reversion across National Stock Markets and
      Parametric Contrarian Investment Strategies. Journal of Finance 55(2): 745-772.
Bekaert, G., and C.R. Harvey, 1997. Emerging equity market volatility. Journal of Financial Economics
      43, 29-77.
Bertaut, Carol C., and Ralph W. Tryon, 2007. Monthly Estimates of U.S. Cross-Border Securities
      Positions. FRB International Finance Discussion Paper No. 910.
Bohn, Henning, and Linda L. Tesar, 1996. “US Equity Investment in Foreign Markets: Portfolio
      Rebalancing or Return Chasing?” American Economic Review, 86(2): 77–81.
Brennan, Michael J., and H. Henry Cao, 1997. “International Portfolio Investment Flows.” Journal of
      Finance, 52(5): 1851–80.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel and Lasse H. Pederson, 2010. Carry Trades and Currency
      Crashes, in J. Frankel and C. Pissarides (ed) NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics
      2008. University of Chicago Press, 314-347.
Burger, J., F. Warnock, and V. Warnock, 2012. Emerging local currency bond markets. Financial
      Analysts Journal 68(4): 73-93.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo, 2010. Carry Trade: The Gains of Diversification.
      Journal of the European Economic Association 6, 581-588.
Cai, F., and F. Warnock, 2012. Foreign Exposure through Domestic Equities. Finance Research Letters 9:
      8-20.
Cappiello, Lorenzo, and Roberto De Santis, 2005. Explaining Exchange Rate Dynamics: The Uncovered
      Equity Return Parity Condition. ECB Working Paper 529.
Cappiello, Lorenzo, and Roberto De Santis, 2007. The Uncovered Return Parity Condition. ECB
      Working Paper 812.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, and Antonio Garcia Pascual, 2005. Empirical exchange rate
      models of the nineties: Are any fit to survive? Journal of International Money and Finance 24:
      1150-1175.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Robert Kollmann, and Philippe Martin, 2007. International portfolios with supply,
      demand and redistributive shocks. NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics (ISOM).
      University of Chicago Press.

                                                    25
Curcuru, Stephanie E., 2007. U.S. Cross-Border Derivatives Data: A User's Guide. Federal Reserve
      Bulletin vol. 93 (May).
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock, 2008. Cross-Border Returns
      Differentials. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4): 1495–1530.
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock, 2010. The Decomposition of the U.S.
      External Returns Differential. Journal of International Economics 80: 22-32.
Curcuru, S., C. Thomas, and F. Warnock, 2009. Current Account Sustainability and Relative Reliability.
      in J. Frankel and C. Pissarides (ed) NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008.
      University of Chicago Press, pgs 67-109.
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Charles Thomas, Jon Wongswan, and Francis E. Warnock, 2011. U.S.
      International Equity Investment and Past and Prospective Returns. American Economic Review
      101: 3440–3455.
Dahlquist, M., and G. Robertsson, 2001. Direct foreign ownership, institutional investors, and firm
      characteristics. Journal of Financial Economics 59: 413-440.
DeBondt , W., and R. Thaler, 1985. Does the stock market overreact? Journal of Finance 40: 793-805.
Devereux, Michael, and Alan Sutherland, 2010. Valuation Effects and the Dynamics of Net External
      Assets. Journal of International Economics 80: 129-143.
Devereux, Michael, and Alan Sutherland, 2011. Country Portfolios in Open Economy Macro Models.
      Journal of the European Economic Association 9: 337-369.
Dumas, Bernard, Karen K. Lewis, and Emilio Osambela, 2010. Differences of Opinion and International
      Equity Markets. SSRN Working Paper 1570168.
Dunne, P., H. Hau, and M. Moore, 2010. International order flows: explaining equity and exchange rate
      returns. Journal of International Money and Finance 29: 358–386.
Eckbo, E., and D. Smith, 1998. The conditional performance of insider trades. Journal of Finance 53(2),
      467-498.
Edison, H. J., and F. Warnock, 2004. U.S. Investors’ Emerging Market Equity Portfolios: A Security-
      Level Analysis, Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3), 691-704.
Engel, Charles, 1996, The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: a survey of recent evidence,
      Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-191.
Engel, Charles, 2014. Exchange Rates and Interest Parity. Handbook of International Economics vol. 4
      (Elsevier)
Evans, M., and Lyons, R., 2002. Order flow and exchange rate dynamics. Journal of Political Economy
      110 (1), 170–180.
Fama, E. F., 1984. Forward and spot exchangerates. Journal of Monetary Economics 14, 319–338.

                                                   26
Ferson, W., and C. R. Harvey, 1993. The risk and predictability of international equity returns. Review of
      Financial Studies 6, 527-566.
Ferson, W., and K. Khang, 2002. Conditional performance measurement using portfolio weights:
      evidence for pension funds. Journal of Financial Economics 65, 249-282.
Filipe, Sara Ferreira, 2012. Equity order flow and exchange rate dynamics. Journal of Empirical Finance
      19(3) 359-381.
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001. How distance, language, and culture influence stockholdings and
      trades. Journal of Finance 56: 1053-67.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, 1989. Portfolio performance evaluation: Old issues and new insights. Review of
      Financial Studies 2, 393-421.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, 1993. Performance measurement without benchmarks: An examination of
      mutual fund returns. Journal of Business 60, 97-112.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1995. Momentum investment strategies, portfolio
      performance, and herding: a study of mutual fund behavior. American Economic Review 85(5),
      1088-1105.
Harvey, C., 1991. The World Price of Covariance Risk, Journal of Finance 46, 111-157.
Hau, H., and H. Rey, 2004. Can Portfolio Rebalancing Explain the Dynamics of Equity Returns, Equity
      Flows, and Exchange Rates? American Economic Review 96(2): 126–133.
Hau, H., and H. Rey, 2006. Exchange Rate, Equity Prices, and Capital Flows. Review of Financial Studies
      19: 273-317.
Hau, H., and H. Rey, 2008. Global Portfolio Rebalancing Under the Microscope. NBER Working Paper
      No. 14165.
Hnatkovska, Viktoria, 2010. Home bias and high turnover: Dynamic portfolio choice with incomplete
      markets. Journal of International Economics 80: 113-128.
Hodrick, R., 1987. The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures Foreign Exchange
      Markets. HarwoodAcademicPublishers, Chur,Switzerland.
Kang, J., and R. Stulz, 1997. Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign portfolio equity ownership
      in Japan. Journal of Financial Economics 46:3-28.
Kasa, K., 1992. Common Stochastic Trends in International Stock Markets. Journal of Monetary
      Economics 29, 95-124.
Kim, Heeho, 2011. The risk adjusted uncovered equity parity. Journal of International Money and
      Finance 30(7) 1491-1505.
Kraay, Aart, Ventura, Jaume, 2000. Current accounts in debtor and creditor countries. Quarterly Journal
      of Economics XCV, 1137–1166.

                                                    27
Kraay, Aart, Ventura, Jaume, 2003. Current accounts in the long and short run. NBER Macroeconomics
      Annual 2002.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2001. The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of
      Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries. Journal of International
      Economics 55: 263-294.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2007. The external wealth of nations mark II: Revised
      and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970–2004. Journal of International
      Economics 73: 223-250.
Leuz, C., Lins, K., and F. Warnock, 2009. Do foreigners invest less in poorly governed firms? Review of
      Financial Studies, 22, 3245-3285.
Levich, R. M., G. S. Hayt, and B. A. Ripston, 1999. 1998 Survey of Derivative and Risk Management
      Practices by U.S. Institutional Investors. Survey conducted by the NYU Salomon Center, CIBC
      World Markets, and KPMG, available at http://www.stern.nyu.edu/rlevich/.
Lustig, H.N., A. Verdelhan, 2007. The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption
      growth risk. American Economic Review 97(1), 89-117.
Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan, 2011. Common Risk Factors in Currency Markets. Review
      of Financial Studies 24 (11): 3731-3777.
Meese, R., Rogoff, K., 1983. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do they fit out of sample?
      Journal of International Economics 14, 3e24.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West, 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
      autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Obstfeld, M., 2010. Expanding Gross Asset Positions and the International Monetary System. Remarks at
      the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City symposium on “Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade
      Ahead,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26-28, 2010.
Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon, 2010. An Asset-Pricing View of External Adjustment. Journal of
      International Economics 80: 144-156.
Richards, A., 1995. Comovements in National Stock Market Returns: Evidence of Predictability, but not
      Cointegration. Journal of Monetary Economics 36: 631-654.
Richards, A., 1997. Winner-loser Reversals in National Stock Market Indices: Can They Be Explained?
      Journal of Finance 52: 2129-2144.
Tille, Cedric, and Eric van Wincoop, 2008. International Capital Flows under Dispersed Information:
      Theory and Evidence. NBER Working Paper 14390.
Tille, Cedric, and Eric van Wincoop, 2010. International Capital Flows. Journal of International
      Economics 80: 157-175.

                                                     28
Treasury Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the Federal
     Reserve System, 2011a. Report on U.S. Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Securities as of December
     31, 2010.
Treasury Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the Federal
     Reserve System, 2011b. Report on Foreign Portfolio Holdings of U.S. Securities as of June 30,
     2010.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp, 2009. Information Immobility and the Home Bias Puzzle.
     Journal of Finance 64(3):1187–215.
Warnock, Francis E. and Chad Cleaver, 2003. Financial Centers and the Geography of Capital Flows.
     International Finance 6(1): 27-59.




                                                 29
                                   Table 1: International Positions
The table shows amounts in billions of U.S. dollars as of end-2010. U.S. investment in foreign equities
foreign-currency denominated foreign bonds are from Tables 1 and 9, respectively, of Treasury
Department et al. (2011a). Outstanding foreign-currency debt issued by U.S. entities is from data that
underlie BIS Quarterly Review Tables 14a and 14b; note that the amount is much smaller than the $6
trillion listed in those tables because they include roughly $5 trillion in US-issued “international” bonds
that are denominated in U.S. dollars. Foreign-held US-issued foreign-currency debt is as of June 2010
from tables 15a and 15b of Treasury Department et al. (2011b).

US Holdings of
      Foreign Equities                                             4,647
      Foreign-Currency Denominated Debt Securities                   500

memo:
 Outstanding US-Issued Foreign-Currency Debt                       1,019
       of which, held by foreigners                                  817




                                                     30
                                            Table 2
                         Correlation Between Exchange Rates and Flows
Correlations between the log exchange rate return and the change in “net-net” equity outflows (the change
in outflows minus the change in inflows, scaled by the average change in flows) are for 42 foreign
countries for the period from January 1990 to December 2010 and for 1999-2010 for the Euro Area
aggregate. ***, **, and * denote statistically significant at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.


        Advanced Economies                               Emerging Market Economies
 Australia                   0.018                       Argentina                 0.060
 Austria                   0.137**                       Brazil                 0.208***
 Belgium                   0.155**                       Chile                     0.008
 Canada                      0.033                       China                     0.042
 Denmark                    -0.044                       Colombia                 -0.019
 Finland                     0.038                       Czech Republic           -0.081
 France                     -0.015                       Hungary                  -0.019
 Germany                    -0.019                       India                   0.113*
 Greece                   0.181***                       Indonesia                 0.025
 Hong Kong                  0.124                        Malaysia               0.362***
 Ireland                     0.031                       Mexico                    0.014
 Israel                     0.113*                       Peru                     -0.039
 Italy                       0.051                       Philippines               0.105
 Japan                      -0.009                       Poland                    0.062
 Korea                       0.090                       Russia                   -0.036
 Netherlands                 0.022                       South Africa            0.129**
 Norway                      0.007                       Thailand                0.112*
 Portugal                  0.145**                       Turkey                   -0.052
 Singapore                   0.074
 Spain                       0.101
 Sweden                     0.021
 Switzerland                0.108*
 Taiwan                      0.085
 United Kingdom              0.056
 Euro                       -0.006




                                                    31
                                        Table 3
      The Relationship between Reallocations and Past Equity and Currency Returns
The analysis in this table is for the 42 foreign countries listed in Table 2 for the period from January 1990
to December 2010. The LM statistic is a measure of momentum based on deviations of portfolio weights
from a passive buy-and-hold strategy. The BM statistic is a measure of momentum based on the positive
portfolio weight deviations from a passive buy-and-hold strategy. The SM statistic is a measure of
momentum based on the negative portfolio weight deviations from a passive buy-and-hold strategy. Lag
1, Lag 2, Lag 3, and Lag 6 correspond to the measure of momentum based on returns lagged 1, 2, 3, and 6
months, respectively. Newey and West (1987) standard errors are in parentheses. **, * denote statistically
significant at the 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                           Total Returns
                                Lag 1        Lag 2         Lag 3       Lag 6
 LM                             -0.017       -0.136        -0.215*    -0.090
 (Buy and Sell)                 (0.129)      (0.138)       (0.129)    (0.164)
 BM                             0.111        0.059         -0.016     0.125
 (Buy Only)                     (0.110)      (0.102)       (0.092)    (0.151)
 SM                             -0.123**     -0.187**      -0.197**   -0.223**
 (Sell Only)                    (0.051)      (0.059)       (0.057)    (0.058)
                                        Currency Returns
                                Lag 1        Lag 2         Lag 3       Lag 6
 LM                             -0.054       -0.004        0.049      0.140*
 (Buy and Sell)                 (0.061)      (0.065)       (0.063)    (0.081)
 BM                             -0.041       -0.008        0.020      0.092
 (Buy Only)                     (0.046)      (0.045)       (0.045)    (0.066)
 SM                             -0.013       0.006         0.032      0.044
 (Sell Only)                    (0.029)      (0.031)       (0.027)    (0.028)
                                          Equity Returns
                                Lag 1        Lag 2         Lag 3       Lag 6
 LM                             0.034        -0.134        -0.255** -0.237**
 (Buy and Sell)                 (0.123)      (0.122)       (0.122)  (0.122)
 BM                             0.147        0.064         -0.033   0.027
 (Buy Only)                     (0.090)      (0.089)       (0.085)  (0.101)
 SM                             -0.108**     -0.192**      -0.223** -0.267**
 (Sell Only)                    (0.050)      (0.050)       (0.056)  (0.056)




                                                     32
                                              Table 4
                                 Time Series Properties of Returns
The table shows the autocorrelation coefficient for the indicated returns for 42 foreign countries for the
period from January 1990 to December 2010 and from 1999-2010 for Euro Area aggregate.
Developed/developing country classifications from IMF World Economic Outlook database for April
2005. Statistics are computed using non-overlapping samples. ***, **, * denote statistically significant at
the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

                              Currency Returns                        Local Equity Returns
                       1 Month    3 Month 6 Month                1 Month 3 Month       6 Month
 Developed Countries
 Australia           0.117*         -0.122      0.074            0.036       -0.017      -0.369**
 Austria             0.102          0.098       -0.119           0.198***    -0.006      -0.138
 Belgium             0.104          0.128       -0.143           0.225***    -0.005      -0.306*
 Canada              -0.014         -0.042      -0.128           0.134**     -0.045      -0.203
 Denmark             0.103          0.132       -0.128           0.028       0.044       -0.257
 Finland             0.112*         0.115       -0.105           0.211***    0.150       -0.285*
 France              0.085          0.116       -0.126           0.110*      0.002       -0.379**
 Germany             0.098          0.103       -0.119           0.048       -0.112      -0.392**
 Greece              0.102          0.091       -0.078           0.114*      0.090       -0.265
 Hong Kong           0.058          0.066       0.993*           0.107*      0.068       0.098
 Ireland             0.077          0.063       -0.178           0.198***    0.152       -0.060
 Israel              0.044          -0.074      0.177            0.062       0.050       -0.387**
 Italy               0.124**        0.059       -0.256           0.004       0.073       -0.266
 Japan               0.032          0.299***    -0.394**         0.090       0.053       -0.122
 Korea               0.065          0.099       0.105            0.057       0.065       -0.001
 Netherlands         0.102          0.110       -0.117           0.084       0.027       -0.262
 Norway              0.140**        -0.057      -0.083           0.107*      0.075       -0.107
 Portugal            0.075          0.119       -0.103           0.155**     0.117       -0.244
 Singapore           0.093          0.152       -0.082           0.092       -0.131      -0.102
 Spain               0.097          0.072       -0.142           0.101       0.105       -0.195
 Sweden              0.151**        0.023       -0.190           0.092       0.053       -0.282
 Switzerland         0.059          0.165       -0.188           0.167***    0.037       -0.373**
 Taiwan              0.162**        -0.042      0.157            0.085       0.026       -0.099
 United Kingdom      0.152**        -0.042      0.087            0.073       -0.024      -0.324*
 Euro                0.077          0.109       -0.207           0.122       -0.131      -0.493**
 US                  n.a.           n.a.        n.a.             0.072       0.054       -0.137




                                                    33
Table 4 (cont.)
                           Currency Returns               Local Equity Returns
                    1 Month    3 Month 6 Month       1 Month 3 Month       6 Month
Developing countries
Argentina            0.138      -0.104     0.300     0.134**    0.019      -0.062
Brazil               0.011      -0.227*    0.278     0.514***   0.529***   0.221
Chile                0.230***   -0.072     -0.106    0.157**    0.029      -0.007
China                0.426***   0.019      0.624     0.116*     0.014      0.220
Colombia             0.194***   -0.011     0.205     0.140**    -0.045     -0.184
Czech Republic       0.056      -0.140     -0.017    0.048      0.094      -0.093
Hungary              0.086      -0.118     0.109     0.090      0.105      -0.203
India                0.152**    0.075      -0.012    0.084      -0.043     0.027
Indonesia            0.074      -0.197*    0.127     0.044      -0.132     0.378**
Malaysia             0.107      0.018      -0.280    0.146**    0.077      0.207
Mexico               0.146**    0.203*     -0.054    0.005      0.159      -0.336**
Peru                 0.323***   0.159      0.322*    -0.032     0.090      -0.202
Philippines          0.130*     -0.096     0.184     0.103      0.058      0.280
Poland               0.137**    -0.267**   0.221     0.030      0.001      0.141
Russia               0.531***   0.022      0.027     0.160**    -0.089     -0.019
South Africa         0.091      0.208*     -0.198    -0.051     0.071      -0.378**
Thailand             0.182***   0.115      0.133     -0.022     -0.011     -0.256
Turkey               0.322***   0.296***   0.426**   0.036      0.071      -0.054




                                              34
                                                                 Table 5
                                                 Excess Returns from Contrarian Strategy
The analysis in this table is for the 42 foreign countries listed in Table 2 for the period from January 1990 to December 2010. Portfolios are
constructed using the technique of Richards (1997). Portfolio returns are market-cap-weighted and annualized. Portfolios are based on quartiles set
during the ranking period, with Portfolio 1 being returns on a portfolio comprised of returns from the worst-performing quartile and Portfolio 4
being for the best-performing quartile. Returns are total USD returns (top panel) or of underlying equity markets (middle panel) or currencies
(bottom panel). The horizon indicates the number of months of returns used to compute ranking period and test period returns. Annualized percent
return shown.

                                       Ranking Period Returns                                              Test Period Returns
            Horizon       Port 1     Port 2    Port 3     Port 4 Contrarian                   Port 1     Port 2    Port 3     Port 4 Contrarian
 Total            1      -72.5%     -13.3%     26.1%      92.0%   -164.5%                      1.9%       6.9%       8.8%       6.7%         -4.8%
 Returns          2      -51.7%      -6.4%     22.0%      67.7%   -119.4%                      3.4%       7.5%      10.3%       4.8%         -1.4%
                  3      -41.2%      -3.5%     19.2%      55.5%    -96.7%                      5.5%       7.1%       8.0%       8.1%         -2.7%
                  6      -26.3%      -0.4%     16.5%      42.4%    -68.6%                      8.2%       6.0%       9.4%       6.8%          1.4%
                 12      -17.0%       1.6%     14.4%      33.5%    -50.6%                     12.1%       8.0%       8.2%       9.4%          2.7%

 Local             1     -63.7%     -11.1%      25.1%       90.3%      -154.0%                 2.9%       6.9%       7.6%      10.9%         -8.0%
 Equity            2     -44.6%      -5.6%      21.8%       67.7%      -112.2%                 5.0%       5.1%      10.4%      12.5%         -7.5%
 Returns           3     -35.7%      -2.9%      19.1%       57.4%       -93.1%                 5.6%       4.3%       7.6%      11.3%         -5.7%
                   6     -21.8%       0.3%      16.6%       44.4%       -66.2%                 6.4%       6.5%       8.2%      15.7%         -9.3%
                  12     -14.0%       2.6%      14.6%       37.8%       -51.8%                 8.8%       8.8%       9.6%      14.9%         -6.2%

 Currency          1     -32.9%      -9.0%        7.1%      29.3%       -62.1%                -5.1%       0.4%       1.1%        1.9%         0.7%
 Returns           2     -26.1%      -6.5%        5.0%      21.0%       -47.2%                -3.1%       0.1%       0.9%        1.1%         0.8%
                   3     -23.5%      -5.3%        4.4%      17.1%       -40.6%                -3.5%       1.4%       1.7%        0.2%         0.9%
                   6     -19.1%      -4.1%        3.1%      12.4%       -31.5%                -0.4%       1.0%       0.3%       -0.3%         0.8%
                  12     -16.5%      -3.4%        1.8%       8.8%       -25.3%                -1.9%       1.2%       0.4%       -0.8%         0.5%




                                                                        35
                                        Table 6
  The Relationship between Reallocations and Prospective Equity and Currency Returns
The table reports CWM statistics, a measure of the relationship between portfolio reallocation and future
abnormal returns, for holding periods of k=1, 2, 3, or 6 months. The analysis in the top panel of this table
is for the 42 foreign countries listed in Table 2 for the period from January 1990 to December 2010. In the
bottom panel we use a “floating sample” that excludes countries without freely floating exchange rates for
most of the sample period according to IMF AREAER reports, such as Greece (prior to its joining the
Euro area), Argentina, China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Peru, Singapore, Taiwan, and Brazil (prior to 1995)
and treats the Euro area as one country starting in 1999. Total Returns refer to total (dollar) returns. The
second and third lines in each panel reports statistics when currency or equity market returns are used.
Newey and West (1987) standard errors are in parentheses. **,* denotes statistically significant at the 5
percent and 10 percent level, respectively.
                              k=1                k=2                k=3                      k=6
 Total Returns             0.311**            0.493**             0.422**                   0.161
                            (0.126)            (0.199)            (0.247)                  (0.391)
 Currency Returns            0.070              0.006               0.025                  -0.058
                            (0.058)            (0.096)             (0.126)                 (0.206)
 Equity Returns             0.202*            0.431**             0.525**                   0.105
                            (0.113)           (0.178)             (0.229)                  (0.364)
 Floating Sample
 Total Returns             0.230**            0.461**             0.452**                   0.093
                            (0.109)            (0.155)             (0.190)                 (0.338)
 Currency Returns            0.065              0.008              -0.044                   0.005
                            (0.058)            (0.093)             (0.132)                 (0.206)
 Equity Returns             0.180*            0.421**             0.482**                   0.141
                            (0.096)            (0.142)             (0.180)                 (0.315)




                                                    36
                                         Table 7
            The Relationship between Reallocations and Future Portfolio Returns

This table uses an alternative timing measure:
              ∑            ,           ,              ∑      ∑       ,     ,


A positive and significant TMk statistic indicates that investors’ reallocations improved portfolio returns
over a k-month horizon (k=1, 2, 3, or 6). BTM and STM limit the sample to positive and negative
reallocations, respectively. Averages are of non-overlapping returns. Data are for January 1990 through
December 2010 for the “floating sample” of countries with freely floating currencies and combined euro
area countries; see Table 6 for details. Newey and West (1987) standard errors are in parentheses. **, *
denote statistically significant at the 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                                     Total Returns
                               k=1                k=2                    k=3             k=6
 TM                       0.223**                  0.271             0.352             -0.071
 (Buy and Sell)           (0.098)                (0.207)            (0.250)            (0.530)
 BTM                      0.415**                0.826**             0.745             1.258*
 (Buy Only)               (0.163)                (0.363)            (0.498)            (0.764)
 STM                       -0.191                 -0.555            -0.393             -1.328
 (Sell Only)              (0.176)                (0.355)            (0.506)            (0.910)
                                                   Currency Returns
                               k=1                k=2                    k=3             k=6
 TM                         0.018                -0.069             -0.016             -0.503
 (Buy and Sell)            (0.052)               (0.108)            (0.178)            (0.308)
 BTM                        0.015                -0.051             -0.153             -0.251
 (Buy Only)                (0.083)               (0.144)            (0.260)            (0.454)
 STM                        0.002                -0.018              0.137             -0.252
 (Sell Only)               (0.070)               (0.112)            (0.194)            (0.354)
                                                    Equity Returns
                               k=1                k=2                    k=3             k=6
 TM                       0.212**                 0.357*             0.367              0.497
 (Buy and Sell)           (0.094)                (0.197)            (0.240)            (0.533)
 BTM                      0.390**                0.908**            0.908*             1.558*
 (Buy Only)               (0.138)                (0.352)            (0.464)            (0.801)
 STM                       -0.178                 -0.551            -0.542             -1.061
 (Sell Only)              (0.157)                (0.348)            (0.455)            (0.844)



                                                     37
                                         Table 8
      The Relationship between Reallocations and Past Equity and Currency Returns:
                                 Advanced Economies
The analysis in this table is for 24 advanced foreign countries for the period from January 1990 to
December 2010. See Table 3 for details. Newey and West (1987) standard errors are in parentheses. **
and * denote statistically significant at the 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                        Total Returns
                              Lag 1       Lag 2         Lag 3      Lag 6
 LM                           -0.099      -0.200        -0.249*    -0.189
 (Buy and Sell)               (0.127)     (0.134)       (0.140)  (0.163)
 BM                           -0.006      -0.065        -0.121   0.020
 (Buy Only)                   (0.109)     (0.093)       (0.099)  (0.138)
 SM                           -0.098*     -0.136**      -0.127** -0.209**
 (Sell Only)                  (0.053)     (0.059)       (0.059)  (0.058)
                                       Currency Returns
                              Lag 1       Lag 2         Lag 3      Lag 6
 LM                           -0.065      -0.023        0.032      0.120
 (Buy and Sell)               (0.067)     (0.066)       (0.073)    (0.081)
 BM                           -0.044      -0.025        -0.001     0.088
 (Buy Only)                   (0.049)     (0.045)       (0.052)    (0.066)
 SM                           -0.023      0.002         0.033      0.031
 (Sell Only)                  (0.031)     (0.030)       (0.026)    (0.028)
                                        Equity Returns
                              Lag 1       Lag 2         Lag 3      Lag 6
 LM                           -0.035      -0.178        -0.275** -0.314**
 (Buy and Sell)               (0.122)     (0.124)       (0.130)  (0.122)
 BM                           0.038       -0.042        -0.122   -0.076
 (Buy Only)                   (0.092)     (0.086)       (0.089)  (0.094)
 SM                           -0.073      -0.136**      -0.154** -0.238**
 (Sell Only)                  (0.051)     (0.051)       (0.056)  (0.058)




                                                   38
                                        Table 9
  The Relationship between Reallocations and Prospective Equity and Currency Returns:
                                 Advanced Economies
The analysis in this table is for 24 advanced foreign countries for the period from January 1990 to
December 2010. See Table 6 for details. Newey and West (1987) standard errors are in parentheses.
** and * denote statistically significant at the 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                             k=1                k=2                k=3               k=6
                           0.210*            0.341**             0.373*             0.115
 Total Returns
                           (0.120)           (0.173)             (0.229)           (0.369)
                            0.032             -0.018             -0.063             0.059
 Currency Returns
                           (0.062)            (0.099)            (0.139)           (0.219)

                            0.122              0.241             0.402*             0.130
 Equity Returns
                           (0.108)            (0.160)            (0.224)           (0.358)

 Floating Only

 Total Returns              0.139            0.309**             0.306*             0.066
                           (0.103)           (0.140)             (0.175)           (0.304)

 Currency Returns           0.015             -0.047             -0.121            -0.029
                           (0.062)            (0.097)            (0.141)           (0.209)

 Equity Returns             0.097            0.287**             0.357**            0.020
                           (0.094)           (0.130)             (0.175)           (0.311)




                                                   39
                                        Table 10
         The Relationship between Reallocations and Future Portfolio Returns, AEs

Data are for January 1990 through December 2010 for 24 advanced foreign countries with freely floating
currencies and a combined euro area starting in 1999. See Table 7 for details. Newey and West (1987)
standard errors are in parentheses. ** and * denote statistically significant at the 5 and 10 percent levels,
respectively.
                                                     Total Returns
                             k=1                  k=2                k=3                 k=6
 TM                         0.158*               0.098              0.153              -0.431
 (Buy and Sell)            (0.095)             (0.217)             (0.280)            (0.651)
 BTM                       0.342**              0.715*              0.678             1.251*
 (Buy Only)                (0.158)             (0.365)             (0.456)            (0.760)
 STM                        -0.185             -0.618*             -0.524             -1.681*
 (Sell Only)               (0.173)             (0.371)             (0.507)            (0.933)
                                                  Currency Returns
                             k=1                  k=2                k=3                 k=6
 TM                         0.013               -0.112             -0.047              -0.362
 (Buy and Sell)            (0.054)              (0.112)            (0.181)             (0.282)
 BTM                        0.043                0.031             -0.008              -0.022
 (Buy Only)                (0.088)              (0.149)            (0.268)             (0.406)
 STM                       -0.030               -0.143             -0.039              -0.340
 (Sell Only)               (0.074)              (0.109)            (0.177)             (0.357)
                                                    Equity Returns
                             k=1                  k=2                k=3                 k=6
 TM                          0.145               0.227              0.215               0.031
 (Buy and Sell)            (0.093)             (0.212)             (0.241)             (0.515)
 BTM                       0.290**             0.723**              0.714              1.347*
 (Buy Only)                (0.138)             (0.359)             (0.444)             (0.785)
 STM                        -0.145              -0.497             -0.500              -1.316
 (Sell Only)               (0.155)             (0.353)             (0.475)             (0.890)




                                                     40
