                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ONE FUNDAMENTAL AND TWO TAXES:
         WHEN DOES A TOBIN TAX REDUCE FINANCIAL PRICE VOLATILITY?

                                           Yongheng Deng
                                              Xin Liu
                                           Shang-Jin Wei

                                        Working Paper 19974
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19974


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2014




We thank Geert Bekaert, Charles Jones, Wei Xiong, and participants in seminars at Columbia University,
UCLA Anderson School, University of Hong Kong, the World Bank finance group, the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, and the 2013 Econometric Society Far Eastern meeting in Singapore for helpful
comments, and Ellen Lin and Joy Glazener for proofreading. All errors are our responsibilities. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Yongheng Deng, Xin Liu, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
One Fundamental and Two Taxes: ¸˛When Does a Tobin Tax Reduce Financial Price Volatility?
Yongheng Deng, Xin Liu, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 19974
March 2014
JEL No. G1,G14

                                               ABSTRACT

We aim to make two contributions to the literature on the effects of transaction costs on financial price
volatility. First, by using a research design with three ingredients (a common set of companies simultaneously
listed on two stock exchanges; binding capital controls; different timing of changes in transaction costs),
we obtain a control group that has identical corporate fundamentals as the treatment group and is therefore
far cleaner than any in the existing literature. We apply the research design to Chinese stocks that are
cross-listed in Hong Kong and Mainland. Second, we entertain the possibility that a given transaction
cost can have different effects in immature and mature markets. In an immature market where trading
is dominated by retail investors with little knowledge of accounting and finance, a Tobin tax should
have the best chance of generating its intended effect. In a more mature market, higher transaction
costs may also discourage sophisticated investors, hence impeding timely incorporation of fundamental
information into prices. We find a significantly negative relation in the Chinese market, on average,
between stamp duty increase and price volatility. However, this average effect masks some important
heterogeneity. In particular, when institutional investors have become a significant part of traders’
pool, we find an opposite effect. This suggests that a Tobin tax may work in an immature market but
can backfire in a more developed market.


Yongheng Deng                                         Shang-Jin Wei
Institute of Real Estate Studies                      Graduate School of Business
National University of Singapore                      Columbia University
Singapore                                             Uris Hall 619
ydeng@nus.edu.sg                                      3022 Broadway
                                                      New York, NY 10027-6902
Xin Liu                                               and NBER
National University of Singapore                      shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
Kent Ridge Road
Republic of Singapore
liux@nus.edu.sg
1. Introduction
   One of the Economics Nobel Prize recipients in 2013 (Robert Shiller) is known for his
pioneering work that questions whether financial prices are excessively volatile. The
possibility of excessive volatility has motivated some to advocate the use of a transaction
tax to dampen short-term speculation and to reduce such volatility. Prominent proponents
of such an approach include Tobin (1978, 1984), Stiglitz (1989), and Summers and
Summers (1989). In contrast, opponents argue that security transaction taxes (also known
as a Tobin tax) could discourage fundamental-based traders more than they do noise
traders, resulting in higher, not lower, volatility in the financial market (e.g. Grundfest
(1990), Grundfest and Shoven (1991), and Kupiec (1996)). Interestingly, a large number
of empirical papers that have investigated this question have not resolved this debate
because some find a negative effect while others find a positive effect, and the
conclusions do not appear to be converging in more recent publications.
   We aim to make two main contributions to research on the effect of transaction taxes
on price volatility. The first is methodological in nature; we argue that our research
design offers us much sharper identification than any on the topic in the literature. One
key challenge for event studies is to have a proper counterfactual: what would have
happened to price volatility had the transaction tax not changed? Some of the papers in
the literature use a before-and-after analysis, with the implicit assumption that the “before”
scenario is the right counterfactual. This is vulnerable to the problem of confounding
effects from other factors that may change market volatility for reasons unrelated to
transaction costs. The best papers in the literature use a double difference research
design with a treatment and a control group together with a before-and-after comparison.
But the control and treatment group are not identical. Even if one can verify that the two
groups are similar on observable dimensions, one cannot rule out the possibility that the
two are different on unobserved dimensions in ways that could cause them to move
differently around the event dates. For example, the paper with the best publication outlet
on the topic is Jones and Seguin (1997) in the American Economic Review, which
studies the event of a sharp reduction in the commission fee in 1975 for stocks traded on
the NYSE/AMEX (their treatment group). Their control group is the set of stocks traded
on NASDAQ. The control and treatment groups are similar in many dimensions but not


                                             2
identical, and their volatility could in principle move in different directions for
unobserved reasons that are not related to the transaction cost event itself. This possibility
cannot be easily checked especially when only a single event is studied in the paper.
   Our research design has three key ingredients. (A) The treatment and control groups
are the same set of firms with identical corporate fundamentals (i.e., identical dividend
flows and voting rights) but are simultaneously listed on two separate stock exchanges.
(B) Binding capital controls exist that prevent arbitrage activities from closing the gap
between the price movements in the two markets1. (C) There are different timings of
changes in the transaction costs in the two markets. The combination of the three
ingredients offers sharp identification for the relationship between changes in the tax and
changes in the volatility. To our knowledge, this is the first paper that uses this research
design to study this question.
   We apply this research design to a sample of Chinese stocks that are simultaneously
listed in Mainland China and Hong Kong and thus face different transaction costs. The
treatment group is the Mainland listed shares (known as A shares), and the control group
is their corresponding Hong Kong listed shares (known as H shares). The treatment and
control groups share identical corporate fundamentals as they have identical cash flow
and control rights. Due to Chinese capital controls, the two markets are segmented. In
particular, only Chinese residents can register a stock account to trade A shares listed on
the Mainland exchanges. Foreign exchange controls during the sample period means it is
not practical for Mainland residents to buy or sell H shares in Hong Kong. Even though
Hong Kong does not practice capital controls, Chinese capital controls prevent Hong
Kong residents (and international investors in general) from buying and selling A shares
listed in the Mainland. One clear sign of the binding capital controls and segmentation of
the two stock markets is the price disparity of the same companies in the two stock
exchanges. Hong Kong listed H shares are often traded at a discount relative to their
Siamese twins listed in the Mainland (see Fernald and Rogers (2002) for a documentation
of the evidence and an explanation). Of course, the pools of investors in the two markets
are different and the transaction costs faced by the two sets of investors are also different.

   1
     For example, stocks cross-listed in New York and London cannot be used as valid treatment and
control groups for this research question. Without binding capital controls, arbitrage would limit the range
of disparity in price volatility of the same firms across markets.

                                                     3
Our methodology does not require the two sets of investors to have identical
characteristics. Indeed, they can be different in many ways. What we need is that during a
narrow window before and after a change in the stamp duty, the characteristics of the
pool of investors do not change except for what may be induced by the change in the
stamp duty. While the stamp duty is always low and changes are negligible in Hong
Kong, China has made several large adjustments in the stamp duty, which are very
helpful to our identification.
      The second contribution of the paper is to entertain the possibility that the effect of a
given change in transaction taxes on price volatility can depend on the sophistication of
the financial market or the level of financial development. The desirability of a Tobin tax
is not a yes-or-no judgment, but is context-dependent. In immature or “frontier” markets,
trading tends to be dominated by unsophisticated investors with little basic finance or
accounting knowledge and driven by non-fundamental noises. If a Tobin tax has any
hope of curbing excessive volatility, one should find it in such markets. On the other
hand, in more mature markets, enough investors are sophisticated in terms of
understanding the fundamentals, as represented by professional managers from pension
funds, mutual funds, and hedge funds. As opponents to the Tobin tax would argue, higher
transaction costs may discourage these arguably better informed investors from trading,
impeding or slowing down the process of incorporating fundamental information into
financial prices, and thus potentially resulting in higher, not lower, price volatility. Given
the speed of financial development, two decades of the Chinese stock market
development resemble two centuries of development of some developed economies on
some important dimensions. In particular, institutional investors were negligible in China
either in absolute numbers or as a share of market turnovers from the founding of the
stock exchange in 1990 to mid-2000s. The Chinese stock market was essentially a
“frontier” market, similar to 40 or so other frontier or early-stage emerging markets in the
world, where trading was dominated by retail investors with little knowledge of
accounting and finance. Since the late 2000s, however, there has been an explosion in the
number of institutional investors. By 2012, the share of institutional investors in the
market capitalization was around 55%2, which is comparable to the level in the United

2
    Calculated from the WIND and the CSMAR data.

                                                   4
States. By 2013, the institutional ownership for stocks in FTSE China Index was 36%,
which is higher than many high-income countries, such as Japan (20%), Germany (34%),
France (30%), Australia (24%), and Singapore (19%). This allows us to do something
else that is unique in the literature, namely, to check if the effect of higher transaction
costs on price volatility changes with a shift in market characteristics. With a changing
ratio of noise traders and fundamental-based traders, a given change in the stamp duty
may produce different effects on the price volatility. This evolutionary or regime-
dependent perspective can potentially provide a way to reconcile some of the conflicting
empirical findings in the empirical literature.
   There are two key findings in the paper. First, pooling over the seven discrete changes
in the stamp duty, we find a negative relationship between transaction tax and price
volatility, contrary to the influential papers by Jones and Seguin (1997) and Umlauf
(1993). We interpreted it as evidence that a Tobin tax may achieve its intended objective
in an immature market where retail investors dominate. However, this is not the end of
the story. Second, we find that, with a significant presence of institutional investors, the
effect of a higher transaction cost is reversed. In particular, for the two most recent
changes in transaction costs (a decrease in April, 2008, and another decrease in
September 2008) when the share of institutional ownership in Chinese stocks was closer
to the level in the United States in the early 1970s, higher transaction costs are associated
with higher price volatility. Also, across individual stocks, higher transaction costs are
more likely to be positively related to volatility for stocks with a relatively high
institutional trading but negatively related to volatility for stocks with relatively low or no
institutional trading. This result might provide a way to reconcile some of the seemingly
contradictory findings in the existing empirical literature.
   Note that our interpretation does not require all institutional investors to be
fundamental-based or all retail investors to be noise traders. We need only a weaker
assumption which is that institutional investors are more likely to be fundamental based
than retail investors. This appears highly likely as virtually all portfolio managers in
China have an advanced degree in either economics or finance with systematic training in
finance and accounting.



                                               5
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 supplies some background
information. Section 3 describes the data and descriptive statistics. Section 4 provides the
statistical analysis. Section 5 concludes.


2. Background Information
   In this section, we provide two types of background information. First, we briefly
review the existing theoretical and empirical literatures, highlighting the design of control
and treatment groups as well as the main findings. We then present some basic
background about the Chinese and Hong Kong stock exchanges and the seven discrete
events of stamp duty changes in Mainland China.


2.1 The battle of ideas in the theory
       Proponents and opponents of a Tobin tax have a different market setting in mind
in the theories. For proponents (Tobin, 1978 and 1984; Stiglitz, 1989; and Summers and
Summers, 1989), there are many non-fundamental based traders in the market whose
actions drive a wedge between the market price and the fundamental value of the
underlying asset. In that case, an increase in transaction costs, by inducing these traders
to trade less, especially to trade less on a short-term basis, can reduce the noise-to-
fundamental ratio in market prices.
       For opponents to a Tobin tax idea, the effect of transaction tax on volatility is
ambiguous and under some scenarios could be positive. (see Grundfest, 1990; Grundfest
and Shoven, 1991;Edwards, 1993; Schwert and Seguin, 1993; and Kupiec, 1996). The
market is occupied by a sufficient number of rational, fundamental traders whose trading
could stabilize the market by moving prices towards true underlying values. Noise traders
exist but the impact of their actions is limited by the arbitrage activities of fundamental-
based traders. An increase in transaction costs would indiscriminately discourage market
participation by both types of traders. Any potentially beneficial effects on financial
market from less noise trading could be partially or fully offset by a reduction in trading
activities by price-stabilizing, fundamental-based traders. Song and Zhang (2005)
highlight such effect by arguing that the net effect a transaction tax on volatility will
depend on the composition of traders. In other words, when a given fundamental trader


                                              6
is discouraged from trading, or when fewer fundamental traders participate, the noise-to-
fundamental ratio could rise rather than fall 3 , resulting in an increases rather than a
decrease in volatility. Moreover, Heaton and Lo (1995) point out that a transaction tax
may increase market volatility due to reduction in market liquidity, which makes a given
trade to have a larger price impact.
         The ability of rational, fundamental traders to eliminate mispricing caused by
noise traders has been called into question by the theory of limits of arbitrage (Shleifer
and Vishny, 1997; Shleifer, 2000; and Gromb and Vayanos, 2002). On the one hand, if
the limits of arbitrage are caused by risk (both fundamental and non-fundamental) or
limited capital, one might think that observed market volatility is excessive and an
increase in transaction costs can reduce volatility. On the other hand, if the limits of
arbitrage are primarily caused by transaction costs themselves, any additional increase in
transaction costs could further constrain the capacity of rational traders and hence lead to
a rise in the price volatility (see Gromb and Vayanos, 2010, for a recent survey of the
literature on limits of arbitrage). We are not aware of theoretical work that formally
investigates the net effect of these competing forces in the context of Tobin taxes and
financial price volatility.


2.2 Existing empirical literature
    Our study with unique A-H twin shares as treatment-control pairs contributes to the
literature with an improved understanding of the Tobin tax. Only a few studies find
empirical evidence supporting the proponent’s view of securities transaction taxes (STT).
Liu and Zhu (2009) find that commission deregulation in Japan is associated with a
statistically and economically significant increase in price volatility, which suggests that
imposing higher transaction costs might be feasible to stabilize the market by curbing
short-term noise trading. Hanke et al. (2010) also show evidence to support that a Tobin
tax would reduce speculative trading. However, neither study uses a control group that



3
 When security trading can take place in multiple locations, non-coordinated changes in transaction costs
can cause trading to migrate from a higher tax location to a lower tax one. We do not study this feature in
our paper. Trading in our sample cannot migrate from one market to the other due to binding capital
controls.

                                                      7
can be said to be the same as the treatment group. Moreover, since more studies4 find the
opposite effect of STT on price volatility, this paper contributes to the literature by
providing a potential explanation for the inconsistencies in empirical evidences. Umlauf
(1993) studies the volatility impact of the inception and increase of a Swedish tax and
finds that volatility significantly increased in response to the introduction of taxes
although stock price levels and turnover declined. Jones and Seguin (1997) find
consistent results with Umlauf (1993) that a reduction in transaction costs is associated
with a decline in price volatility. They argue that increasing the costs of trading through
transaction taxes, increasing margin requirements, or reducing the availability of low-cost
substitutes like equity futures may in fact encourage, rather than reduce the impact of
noise traders and volatility. In addition, findings of no significant impact of STT on
market volatility cast doubt on STT as an effective policy instrument. Roll (1989) uses
cross-country data to study the matter and finds that transaction taxes are inversely but
insignificantly correlated with market volatility. Hu (1998) finds with Asian market data
that increases in STT reduce the stock price, but have no significant impact on price
volatility or turnover.
    Lastly, our study has broad implications for other security classes. Several researchers
study the question with the housing market instead. Fu et al. (2012) use the Singapore
housing market data and show that prices become less informative and volatility
significantly increases in the affected market following the transaction tax increase.
Sheffrin and Turner (2001) find a capital gains tax with full loss offset at ordinary tax
rates would generate a benefit to households by reducing the volatility of housing returns;
however, the effect on the rate of return exceeds the benefits of volatility reduction.
Aregger et al. (2012) show that transaction taxes have no impact on house price growth
based on evidence from the variation of tax rates across Swiss cantons, while capital
gains taxes exacerbate house price dynamics. Note in all these studies, the treatment and
control groups are the same set of housing assets.
    As we restrict our attention to domestic securities markets, we ignore international
dimensions of the issue. When the trading of a given financial asset can be chosen from a

4
 See e.g. Hau (2006), Habemeier and Kirilenko (2001), Lanne and Vesala (2010), Aliber, et al. (2002),
Chuo and Wang (2006), Green, Maggioni and Murinde (2000), Atkins and Dyl (1997), and Westerhold
(2003), Baltagi et al. (2006), and Phylakti and Aristidou (2007).

                                                  8
menu of locations, the effect of a Tobin tax can be further limited if coordination across
the locations is difficult or infeasible.


2.3 Stamp Duties in the Chinese Stock Market
    The history of the stock trading stamp duty in China goes back to the early 90s, shortly
after the establishment of the two stock exchanges in Shenzhen and Shanghai,
respectively. While there were three adjustments in the duty during 1990-1992, there was
no cross listed stock at the time. So these adjustments are not part of our sample.
    The stamp duty is regarded by the Ministry of Finance as a revenue-generating tool.
After 1992, the year in which the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) was
established, a surge in the stock market transaction volume made stamp duty a noticeable
source of revenue. While at the beginning, the revenue was shared 50-50 between the
Ministry of Finance and local governments, the sharing rule has been adjusted a few
times, progressively more in favor of the central government. After 2002, 97% of the
stamp duty revenue has been accrued to the central government. The dominance of the
revenue consideration makes it plausible that adjustments in the stamp duty are not an
endogenous response to changes in stock price volatility.
    As shown in Table 1 and Figure 1, there are seven adjustments in stock trading stamp
duty during the sample period. After an increase in stamp duty in 1997, the duty was
adjusted downwards three times between 1998 and 2007, but raised again in 2007, before
two more downwards adjustments in 2008.
    The historical stamp duty adjustments in the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX) are
also reported in Table 1 (and Figure 1). Not only is the level of the stamp duty in Hong
Kong low, the magnitudes of the adjustments are almost negligible when compared to the
A-share market. In any case, the duty stays at a low constant level of 1‰ of transaction
value for buyer and seller after 2001. In our statistical analysis, we will ignore the
adjustments in the stamp duties in Hong Kong. If the small changes in the Hong Kong
duty are not systematically related to the changes in the Mainland5, they are essentially
noises in our analysis, and make it harder for us to find statistically significant effects.


5
 The correlation in the monthly changes in the stamp duty between the Hong Kong and Mainland Chinese
markets is -0.006.

                                                  9
2.4 A short history of institutional investors in China
   The Chinese stock market, for much of its 20-plus-year history, is known to be
dominated by retail investors. Figure 2 provides a graphical illustration of the evolution
of institutional investors in China based on the quarterly institutional holding information
from the WIND database. First, Figure 2a shows the time series of outstanding
institutional investors in the Chinese domestic stock market. Next, Figure 2b shows the
shares of institutional holdings in the Chinese A-share market and the US market,
respectively. In 1975, the year of the event studied by Jones and Seguin (1997), the share
of institutional holding in the United States reached about 22%. China did not reach this
level until 2008. (Both the number of institutional investors and the share of institutional
holdings have exploded since 2008, though the stamp duty in the A-share market stays at
a low level of 0.1% which was set in September 2008.)
   It is convenient to think of the history of Chinese institutional investors in three stages.
First, in an infant stage between 1990 and 1997, the financial market is overwhelmingly
populated by retail investors, whereas institutional investors were negligible both in
numbers and in trading volume. In the second stage – a toddler stage from 1998 to 2005,
mutual funds and insurance companies, and to a smaller degree, pension funds and hedge
funds, began to emerge in the Chinese stock market. Finally, since 2006, a growth stage
sets in when institutional investors have grown at a high speed, eventually catching up
with the U.S. level by 2012 in terms of its relative importance in both trading and
shareholding.


3. Empirical Results
3.1 Data
   Since the two Chinese stock exchanges were established in 1990 and 1991,
respectively, the government has implemented ten adjustments to the stamp duty. The
first three took place during 1990-1992, before there were any cross-listed Chinese stocks.
As a result, our sample covers the last seven changes in the stamp duties, which took
place during 1996-2009. The stamp duty during our sample period was set jointly by the
Ministry of Finance and the China Securities Regulatory Commission, and was always


                                              10
applied to stock trading on both the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges. The
changes in the stamp duty are both listed in Table 1 and graphed in Figure 1. While there
are also independent changes in the stamp duties in Hong Kong, the changes are
negligibly small when compared to the changes in the Mainland. The comparison can be
most clearly seen in Figure 1. In this paper, we will ignore stamp duty changes in Hong
Kong. Because the changes in Hong Kong are not systematically related to those in the
Mainland (and are very small anyway), they mainly add noise to our inferences.
   Our sample of stocks consists of the universe of 53 Chinese companies that are cross-
listed in both Mainland China and Hong Kong. Because the last stamp duty event took
place in September 2008, stocks that become cross-listed after 2008 do not make it into
our sample. Appendix 1 provides a list of these companies in the sample and their IPO
dates on both stock exchanges, sorted by the date they first became cross-listed.
   Because the number of cross-listed stocks increases gradually during the sample
period, the total number of unique firm-event observations is 223, less than 7×53. Daily
information of A and H shares comes from the China Securities Market and Accounting
Research Database (CSMAR), Reuters Datastream and the Pacific Basin Capital Market
Database (PACAP).
   The summary statistics of our sample is reported in Table 2. In panel A, we first show
the mean and median of firm characteristics of our cross-listed sample and the entire A-
share market for 1996 and 2008 respectively. Firm financials are obtained from CSMAR
and institutional ownership information is from WIND, which reflects the values of the
latest annual or quarter filing of the year. A few remarks are in order. First, there is a
dramatic growth in market and firm size from 1996 to 2008. Second, for both 1996 and
2008, cross-listed firms are significantly larger than the market average in terms of total
assets and sales. Interestingly, we see that cross-listed firms are less profitable than the
market average in 1996 in terms of EBIT/sales and net margin. However, the opposite
effect is seen in 2008: cross-listed firms are on average more profitable than the market
average. Consistently, cross-listed firms have higher leverage than the market average,
highlighting their advantage in accessing debt financing. Lastly, beside the dramatic
growth in the fraction of ownership held by institutional investors, cross-listed firms are



                                             11
higher on average in terms of institutional holdings, institutional turnover, and the
number of institutional investors at the firm level.
      Panel B provides the stock characteristics of A and H shares, respectively. The
average market capitalization of A-share stocks in our sample is RMB127 billion, while
the corresponding value of H-share stocks is about RMB37 billion 6 , suggesting that
domestic A-share serves as the primary market for these Chinese firms. It is easy to see
that the capital controls that produce the segmentation of the Hong Kong and Mainland
China stock markets are binding: H-share stocks see a 50% discount in stock price
relative to the A-share stocks. Although daily transaction volume and price volatility are
comparable, A-share is more liquid as suggested by the Amihud illiquidity ratio.
      For each cross-listed stock, we compute its separate volatilities, averaged over the
entire sample period, in the A and H markets, respectively. Figure 4 plots the A-share
volatility against its H-share counterpart across the 53 stocks. There is a visibly positive
correlation between the two, which should not be too surprising.
      Table 3 provides the correlation matrix of our key variables. The correlation between
A-share and H-share returns is 0.35, while the correlation in price volatility between the
A and H markets is 0.27.


3.2 Price Response to Stamp Duty Changes
      We start with examining the short-term price response of cross-listed A-H shares
around stamp duty changes. However, as Schwert and Seguin (1993) point out, the effect
of STT on stock price could go either way. First, suppose imposing a transaction tax
could effectively reduce excessive volatility and thus reduce risk borne by investors, the
risk premium of stocks should go down. Since investors now require a lower rate of
returns and cash flows are now discounted at a lower rate, share prices should go up. On
the other hand, STT could also lower stock price as transaction costs generally diminish
investors’ incentive to trade unless the projected profit is higher than the transaction cost.
Therefore, it raises investors’ required rate of return for trading and puts downward
pressure on stock price. This discussion means that the net effect of higher transaction



6
    We convert the HKD to RMB with historical daily exchange rates at each trading date.

                                                     12
costs on stock prices depends on the relative strength of the two forces and is
theoretically ambiguous.
   To examine this in the context of the stamp duty in China, a difference-in-differences
regression is adopted in the paper, and daily stock returns from two trading days before to
two trading days after each stamp duty change are tested as following:
                 ,,                  ,,         ,,        _   _         ,,          ,,         (1)

      ,,   and        ,,   are the daily returns of the treatment and control shares respectively,
and         _     _             equals to one if day t is in the higher stamp duty period and zero
otherwise. For example, for an upward adjustment in the stamp duty, the observations
after the event date will be classified as with higher tax, and vice versa. Also, F reflects a
collection of fixed effects controlled in the regressions under different specifications,
including month of the year effects, firm fixed effects, and sometimes event fixed effects.
   The results on price response with respect to stamp duty changes are shown in Table 4.
We start with regressing A-share daily return on H-share daily return, which gives a
significant coefficient of 0.57, suggesting that H-share stocks are a good control for A-
share stocks. Next, we gradually incorporate various sets of fixed effects into the model.
In column 3, the simple difference-in-differences regression on the full sample gives a
negative and significant estimate of the interaction term between H-share returns and the
higher tax dummy, suggesting a short-term return reduction of about 20 basis points
(=0.2274*0.0089). This is consistent with the average 20 basis points change in the stamp
duty in our sample events.
   In order to mitigate any potential bias due to outliers, we conduct a subsample analysis
by eliminating potential outlier stocks. In column 4, observations with A-share price over
H-share price exceeding the 90th percentile of the sample are dropped in the regression.
Overall, consistent results are found both in the full sample and subsample, suggesting a
significantly negative impact of higher transaction taxes on stock prices.


3.3 Average Effect on Price Volatility
Firm level price volatility
   In this sub-section, we examine the effect of stamp duty changes on price volatility.
For event m, the treatment group is the set of A-share stocks in our sample, while the

                                                     13
control group consists of their corresponding H-share stocks. Because we can match
stocks in the treatment and control groups one by one, we can work with firm level data
rather than portfolio level data (which is necessary in Jones and Seguin (1997)). We test
various model specifications with price volatility of 240 trading days before and after
each stamp duty change. We first regress the difference in price volatility between A and
H shares by the following specification:
    ∆    ,,                             _    _             ,,              ,,         (2)
    The dependent variable is ∆                  ,,    which captures the difference between A-share and
H-share price volatility for event m, firm i and day t. We use two forms of ∆                        ,,   :

    ,,        ,,       and         ,,   /   ,,   . The first form is the direct difference in volatility
between A and H shares, whereas the second one is the ratio. The ratio specification does
not require the A and H volatility to be on the same scale (though they are reasonably
close according to Table 2 panel B).
    For each event, we use the daily closing prices during the year before and the year
after to construct our sample. This length of the event window follows the choice of
Jones and Seguin (1997) in order to maintain comparability. We have also tried a window
of six months before and six months after each event, and obtained similar qualitative
results.
    We have considered several different measures of stock price volatility. First, we
follow Jones and Seguin (1997) and use a raw (or unfitted) price volatility, which is

measured as                  ,,    for event m stock i at day t during a window of 240 trading days

before and after an event. By multiplying the absolute change in log price with the
scaling coefficient,              /2, we obtain an unbiased estimator of the standard deviation at
the daily frequency (assuming log price follows a normal distribution). Second, we use a
fitted daily price volatility, defined as the fitted value from a 12-lag auto-regression, i.e.
σ        ∑         ,              , where             is the unsigned daily stock return scaled by   /2 .
Third, we use a daily price volatility estimated from a two-year time series, calculated as
the standard deviation of a firm’s daily return in the 240 trading days before and after
each stamp duty change.



                                                                14
   Since there are multiple events with opposite adjustment directions (increase/decrease),
we define an indicator variable, Higher Tax dummy, which takes a value of one in the
regime with a higher stamp duty to simplify the exposition. In the window of 240 trading
days before and after an event, the higher tax dummy equals to 1 if day t is in the higher
stamp duty period and zero otherwise.
   F refers to a set of fixed effect, whereas        refers to a set of additional controls,
including 12-month base interest rates in these two markets respectively. Interest rates are
a proxy for discount rates that may affect how cash flows are converted to present values.
   Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity are clustered at the firm level in
our regressions. Note we are not able to cluster standard errors at the event level because
the small number of events (7) would have led to bias in standard error estimation
according to Petersen (2009). (None of the studies in the literature on this topic cluster
standard errors at the event level.) Instead, we include both event and firm fixed effects
but cluster standard errors at the firm level. We will also report results event by event in a
later part of the paper.


Discussion of the identification strategy
   For the identification to be valid, variations in the stamp duty need to be uncorrelated
with the error term. Yet, changes in the stamp duty are presumably not purely random.
For our purpose, we need them to be exogenous with respect to the relative volatility
between the A and H share markets. We investigate this issue in two ways.
   We use an opportunity of a meeting with a senior official in the China Securities
Regulatory Commission, who also happened to be a senior officer of the Shanghai Stock
Exchange during 2008-2012, and a senior officer of the Shenzhen Stock Exchange before
2008, to develop an understanding of the determination of stamp duty changes.


            Authors: “How are the decisions on adjusting the stamp duty made? Do you
        ever look at the relative volatility between the A and H share markets and use it
        as a guide to decide on the level of the stamp duty?”
            The official: “The stamp duty is jointly decided by the Ministry of Finance
        and the CSRC (China Securities Regulatory Commission). We never look at


                                              15
        relative stock market volatility. We (at the CSRC and the stock exchanges) always
        advocate a low stamp duty in order to minimize transaction costs. The Ministry of
        Finance often wants a higher stamp duty, which is a revenue source for them.”7
              Authors: “When would your argument win over the Ministry of Finance?”
              The official: “Sometimes when the broad market index is low, the Ministry of
        Finance would consent to lowering the stamp duty. But it doesn’t always work.”


    Our takeaway from the conversation is that changes in the stamp duty might be
endogenous to the level of A-share index but is unlikely to be endogenous to the relative
volatility between the A-share and H-share markets because the latter is not something
decision makers pay attention to.
    We check this out more formally. In the first column of Table 5 panel A, changes in
the stamp duty are regressed on three lags of log A-share index. We indeed see that the
recent past levels of A-share market index have predictive power for changes in the
stamp duty. Perhaps because the policy makers often act with a lag, we see that the
coefficients on the second and the third lags of the index are negative (indicating that a
lower market index is more likely to predict an increase in the stamp duty, and vice
versa). Interestingly, the coefficient on the one-month lag of the market index is positive.
It is also noteworthy that the sum of the three coefficients is approximately zero.
    In the second column of Table 5 panel A, changes in the stamp duty are regressed on
three lags of the relative volatility in the A and H share markets (averaged equally over
all cross-listed stocks). The coefficients on each of the regressors are statistically zero
based on individual t tests. An F-test for the null that they are jointly zero, reported at the
bottom of the column, also fails to be rejected. This supports the assumption that the
decisions on changing the stamp duty do not consider the relative volatility in the two
markets.
    In the third column, changes in the stamp duties are again regressed on three lags of
the relative volatility (averaged over all cross-listed stocks), where the relative volatility
for a given stock is now measured by the ratio of the A-share volatility to the H-share

7
 A majority of the stamp duty revenue goes to the Ministry of Finance, with a small portion going to the
two local governments (Shanghai and Shenzhen) that host the two exchanges. The CSRC and the stock
exchanges keep a portion of stock account registration fees, but do not derive revenue from the stamp duty.

                                                    16
volatility. Again, we see no evidence that changes in the stamp duties take into account
the relative volatility between the two markets.
   In the last two columns of Table 5 panel A, we incorporate both lags of monthly
broad market index and lags of relative volatility. These two regressions confirm the
previous finding: while the decisions on changing the stamp duty may take into account
the recent past of broad market index, they do not appear to consider the relative
volatility between the Chinese and the Hong Kong stock markets.
   Because there are seven actual changes in the stamp duty, the monthly changes in the
stamp duty mostly take on a value of zero. In panel B of Table 5, we look at a
substantially reduced sample consisting of the seven months in which the stamp duty
changes actually take place plus the six months prior to each of the changes. We find the
same qualitative results. In particular, the coefficients on the three lags of relative
volatility are both individually and jointly zero (by three t tests and one F test). This is
true regardless of the way relative volatility is measured, and regardless of conditioning
on lags of broad market index or not. We therefore conclude that changes in the stamp
duty do not take into account relative volatility in the two markets.
   We will later report a placebo test that will further justify our identification strategy.


Regression results
   Panel A of Table 6 reports regression results following equation (2). In column 1, we
regress the difference in raw daily price volatility between A and H shares on the higher
tax dummy, and obtain a negative and significant coefficient of -0.0055. If we hold H-
share price volatility constant, this suggests a 17% (=0.0055/0.0318) reduction in the A-
share price volatility, on average, after moving from a low-tax regime to a high-tax
regime. To ensure that the results are not driven by outlier stocks, we also perform a
regression in a subsample where we exclude those stock observations whose A share
price premium over H share exceeds the 90th percentiles. The same qualitative results are
found in the subsample but the point estimate is somewhat smaller.
   In columns 3 and 4, we substitute the dependent variable with the ratio of fitted daily
price volatility of A-share over H-share. Consistently negative and significant
coefficients are obtained for both the full sample and the subsample. In terms of


                                              17
economic significance, an increase in the stamp duty in our sample is associated with a
reduction in price volatility by 15% (=0.1375/(0.000310/0.000336)). Given that the
magnitudes of stamp duty adjustments in China are large by international comparisons,
this means that a relatively large adjustment in the stamp duty yields a relatively small
reduction in price volatility.
   Instead of using separately daily price volatility as do Jones and Seguin (1997), we can
estimate two daily price volatility for each firm and each event, with one in the pre-event
period (over 240 trading days) and the other in the post-event period (also over 240
trading days). Such estimates of daily price volatility should be more precise, although
the sample size of the daily price volatility would be substantially smaller. The regression
results with this new measure of volatility are reported in columns 5 (for the full sample)
and 6 (for the subsample that excludes stocks with an A/H share price gap exceeding the
90th percentile), respectively. Reassuringly, the results turn out be qualitatively the same
as before, with the point estimates being somewhat larger than their counterparts in
columns 1 and 2.


Alternative specifications
   Following Jones and Seguin (1997), we can consider another way to link the volatility
in the treatment and control groups:
                    ,,              ,,         ,,        _    _         ,,                ,,   , (3)

   ,,   and    ,,   are the price volatilities of the stock i in event m for treatment and control
groups respectively. In this specification, the A share volatility is only assumed to be a
linear function of its H share counterpart, but they don’t have always have to have the
same scale. The key coefficient for our purpose is,           , on the interaction between the
higher tax dummy and the volatility on H shares. Under the null of no effect from a stamp
duty change,        would be zero. Under the alternative that a higher transaction cost leads
to a lower price volatility,     would be negative.
   With this specification, we work with either raw volatility or fitted volatility (from a
12 lag auto-regression). Since time trend in volatility could bias our inference, as a third
way to measure volatility, we also take out potential event-specific time trends in the
volatility. In panel B of Table 6, we report the regression results with this new

                                                    18
specification. For each of the three ways of measuring volatility, we run regressions on
both the full sample and the subsample that takes out potential outliers in terms of A/H
share price gaps.
   A total of six regressions are reported in panel B of Table 6. In all cases, the
coefficients on the interaction between the higher tax dummy and H-share volatility are
negative and statistically significant. In the first four columns, an increase in the stamp
duty, on average, is associated with a reduction in the price volatility by 3.6%. In the last
two columns, the estimates are a bit smaller; an increase in the stamp duty, on average, is
associated with a 2% reduction in the volatility.


Placebo test
   To further ensure that our results do not reflect spurious correlations, we conduct a
placebo test. We will do it in two steps. First, we will pick a set of fake event days – days
on which there are no changes in the stamp duty. Second, we perform regressions similar
to column 1 of Table 5 panel A, and see if we would falsely conclude the volatility goes
down on the fake event days when there are in fact no increases in the stamp duty.
   To pick fake event dates, we make use of the fitted values of regression 1 in Table 5
panel A during 2002-2004; these three years are the longest continuous period in the
sample in which there were no changes in the stamp duty. There are a total of six dates on
which the absolute values of predicted stamp duty changes exceed 0.20. We use them as
fake event months for a stamp duty increase if the predicted values are positive, and fake
event months for a stamp duty decrease if the predicted values are negative. To go from
the fake event months to fake event dates, we try three possibilities by defining the fake
event dates at the beginning, the middle, or the end of the fake event months, respectively.
We pool the six fake events and run three regressions, respectively, by choosing the
beginning, middle and end of a fake event month as the corresponding fake dates. We re-
do the basic difference in differences regressions on these fake events, and report the
results in Table 7.
   It turns out that the coefficients on the fake higher tax dummy are always statistically
indifferent from zero. This is reassuring as we do not obtain a negative coefficient when



                                             19
we are not supposed to. This helps to bolster our confidence that our key results are
unlikely to be driven by spurious correlations.


Extensions
      Several additional regressions are conducted in various subsamples and the results are
shown in Table 8. First, we divide up our sample into two subgroups based on the
direction of the stamp duty changes. This enables us to capture any asymmetric effect of
stamp duty changes. We report the results with the subsample of stamp duty reductions in
the first column, and those with stamp duty increases in the second column. In both cases,
stamp duty levels and price volatility are negatively related. The effect is somewhat
stronger for stamp duty increases than for decreases.
      Recognizing that firms in the financial service sector and the utility sector may be
systematically different from other manufacturing firms, we also look at a subsample that
excludes financial and utility firms. The result is reported in column 3 of Table 8. This
does not change the basic pattern that a higher transaction cost is associated with lower
price volatility; the magnitude is statistically significant but economically modest.
      The validity of an event study approach depends on the maintained assumption that
the event in question – a change in the stamp duty in our case – is the only major event
during the event window. To gain additional confidence, we manually check for
disclosure by each sample firm in the CSMAR database for any significant event around
each event date. Several companies underwent a reform where previously non-traded
shares were converted to tradable shares during 2005-2008. Some of the conversions took
place on dates close to our event dates. In column 4 of Table 8, we re-estimate the model
for      the   subsample     of   firms    without    any    key    events    recorded    in
CASMAR/Factiva/Bloomberg over the event windows. Reassuringly, we find
qualitatively similar results as the full sample.
      Taken together, our findings suggest that price volatility of A-shares relative to H-
shares is lower in the high stamp tax regime and the results are robust in various
subsamples. We interpret our findings as evidence to support the advocates’ view on the
Tobin tax and argue that in the Chinese context, on average, stamp duty does have a
positive effect on curbing speculation and reducing excessive volatility. At the same time,


                                               20
we find that the economic effect of a change in stamp duties is relatively modest. Given
that the changes in the size of the stamp duty in China are already on the high side when
compared with other countries’ practices, we conclude that an increase in the transaction
cost can only modestly reduce the price volatility.
    Events such as adjustments in the required reserve capital rate and commission fee,
which could potentially affect the price volatility, are also checked and qualitatively
similar results are found.


Portfolio level price volatility
    Most studies in the existing literature form portfolios to examine the effects of stamp
duty. This is mostly out of necessity as there is a lack of stock-by-stock correspondence
between the treatment and control groups. Nevertheless, for comparison purposes, we
follow Jones and Seguin (1997) to re-estimate the model with portfolio level data in this
section. Equally weighted portfolios of full sample and subsample are estimated
following equation (2).
    Table 9 shows the regression results. We examine the portfolio price volatility
response to stamp duty changes with two model specifications as in Table 6 panel A.
First, in columns 1 and 2 of Table 9, we regress the difference in raw price volatility
between A and H share on the higher tax dummy and find that both the full sample and
the subsample estimations give us similar results as the firm level analyses. In terms of
magnitude, the effect is strengthened with the portfolio level data. In columns 3 and 4,
we substitute the dependent variable with the ratio of fitted price volatility of A over H
shares and obtain similar results.


Initial level and change size of stamp duties
    We further examine the role of initial level and change size of stamp duty adjustments
with the following specification.
∆    ,,                      _       _       ,,

                                 _       _        ,,            _ _ _       _       _
                                 _       _        ,,        _   _       _       _       _
                   ε   ,,



                                                       21
                                                                                          (4)
        _ _ _       _          _   refers to the absolute magnitude of A-share stamp duty
change in event m, while _         _      _        _    _      refers to the initial level of
stamp duty prior to any change. Interaction terms between these two variables with the
higher tax dummy are also incorporated in the regression to capture their marginal effects
on price volatility response.
   Ex ante, the effect could go either way. On one hand, a higher initial level of stamp
duty prior to adjustment could cause a larger reduction in price volatility when transiting
from a low tax regime to a high tax regime. Intuitively, if an investor is taxed at 2‰ and
another investor is taxed at 4‰, supposing a 2‰ increase in stamp duty for both
investors, one could argue that the second investor with a higher initial level of stamp
duty could response more in reducing her investment activities. On the other hand, one
could also argue that the relation between initial level of stamp duty and price volatility
response is positive, because the effect of stamp duty has been exhausted as the level of
stamp duty rises, resulting in a diminishing effect on price volatility changes. We will let
the data speak to the issue.
   In column 1 of Table 10, we show the results on the magnitude of change in stamp
duty, while in column 2, we incorporate terms reflecting initial level of stamp duty prior
to changes to the model. Column 3 shows the results of the full sample by incorporating
both terms. We find that the adverse effect of stamp duty on price volatility change is
fully loaded on the interaction term of initial level of stamp duties. In addition, the
negative coefficient for the interaction term suggests that a higher initial level of stamp
duty and larger change magnitude are associated with a larger impact on price volatility
reduction when moving from a low tax regime to a high tax regime. Similar result for the
subsample is shown in column 4.


3.4 Trading Volume
   We also investigate the impact of stamp duty changes on trading volume. Unlike price
volatility, empirical evidence appears to agree that increases in stamp duty reduce trading
volume. In our paper, share turnover is adopted as a proxy for trading volume, and is
measured as daily trading volume scaled by market capitalization. Firm level data are


                                              22
examined in a diff-in-diff regression model as following,
            ∆            ,,                    _    _         ,,                ,,

                                                                                            (5)
∆            ,,   is the difference in daily share turnover between A and H shares for firm
i day t in event m.
    Our results in Table 11 are consistent with the literature which finds a negative
relation between stamp duty and trading volume. In column 1 of Table 11, our results
show that when switching to a higher tax regime, the turnover drops significantly by
about 65% (=0.0037/0.0057) (holding the turnover for H shares constant). Subsequently,
in Table 12, we replicate firm level turnover estimations with portfolio level data.
Equally weighted portfolios are constructed as in Table 9. Overall, the portfolio level
results are qualitatively similar to firm level ones, but with a quantitatively stronger effect.


4   Market Development and Evolving Effects of Transaction Costs
    We have argued that the effect of a higher transaction cost on price volatility depends
on whether the transaction cost drives out more informed fundamental-based traders or
more non-fundamental-based noise traders. The negative effect we have found so far
could reflect the fact that the young Chinese stock market has been dominated by non-
fundamental-based noise traders. We now aim to extract more insight by exploring a
possible heterogeneous volatility response both across time periods and across stocks.
    As shown in Figure 2a, there were no institutional shares in the Chinese market in the
early part of the sample period and they remain significantly lower than developed
markets until recently. For example, in Jones and Seguin (1997), institutional ownership
in the U.S. stock market around the time of commission deregulation in 1975 is about
22%, while for China, the number was lower until 2008. If a greater share of institutional
trading implies a proportionately smaller role of speculative noise trading, it would be
interesting to examine whether the effect of a higher transaction cost on price volatility is
reversed in the later part of the sample period.




                                              23
4.1 Evolution of Institutional Investors in China
   Guided by Figure 2b, we divide the entire history of the Chinese equity market into
three periods of approximately equal length: (1) The infant stage (1990-1997): after the
Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges were established in 1990, there were virtually
no institutional investors, and the market was almost entirely dominated by retail
investors; (2) The toddler stage (1998-2005): institutional investors have emerged though
still not significant in trading. Investors became relatively less naive after having
experienced several ups and downs in the stock market in the preceding years. (3) The
growth stage (after 2006): Institutional investors start to grow at a high speed and play a
more important role in the Chinese stock market, while some of the retail investors have
also become more sophisticated and more exposed to the knowledge of finance and
economics. At the same time, the number of stocks has increased dramatically. Figure 3
provides snapshots of the number of institutional investors and institutional ownership at
the firm level in the fourth quarter of 2000 and 2008 respectively. While the exact
dividing lines among the three periods are somewhat arbitrary, they roughly divide the
history of the Chinese equity market (from late 1990 to now) into three stages of equal
length, and are meant to capture the evolution of the relative importance of institutional
traders in the market.
   We implement the same regression specification as in column 1 of panel A of Table 6
for each time period, and report the results in Table 13. We focus our discussions on the
coefficients for the higher tax dummy. Interestingly, we see a negative coefficient for the
first two historical periods (1990-1997, and 1998-2005) but a positive coefficient in the
more recent period (after 2006). This intriguing pattern of signs is consistent with the
notion that, in earlier periods when the market is dominated by retail traders, a higher
transaction cost reduces price volatility, whereas in the most recent period when
institutional investors have started to play a more important role in the market. It is also
interesting to note that, when we allow the effects to be different in different time periods,
the volatility suppressing effect of a higher transaction cost has also become bigger in the
earlier periods. The coefficients (-0.0073 and -0.0121, respectively) are bigger than the
corresponding coefficient in Table 6.



                                             24
   This result has the potential to explain the different findings of ours and opponents’ of
Tobin tax in the literature, such as Jones and Seguin (1997). As pointed out earlier, the
institutional share in the Chinese financial market in the growth era reaches a level
similar to that of the U.S. market around the time of the commission deregulation in 1975
discussed by Jones and Seguin (1997). Therefore, our findings highlight a potentially
important role of investor structure in driving the conflicting evidence in the literature.
   In addition to looking at three sub-periods, we perform separate event studies for each
of the seven changes in the stamp duty. Table 14 provides event level evidence from
univariate and multivariate analyses. First, in panel A of Table 14, we provide the
summary statistics of univariate analyses. For each event, changes in price volatility,
share turnover, and return are calculated as value in high tax regime minus the value in
low tax regime for A and H share respectively. T-tests are performed to test the
difference between A and H shares in terms of the responses of these variables with
respect to a change in the stamp duty. For the first five effects (during 1997-2007), higher
transaction costs are associated with lower volatility. However, for the last two events
(both of which took place in 2008), the opposite correlation is observed.
   In panel B of Table 14, we examine the changes in the ratio of A share volatility to H
share volatility, event by event. The qualitative patterns are exactly the same. For the first
five events, higher transaction costs are associated with lower volatility; but for the last
two events, the correlation is reversed.
   The double differencing results at the individual event level are summarized by
Figures 5a and 5b, respectively. Across the seven events, on balance, higher transaction
costs and lower volatility go together. This can be seen from the fact that most of the data
points are in either the Northwest or the Southeast quadrants. In addition, on average,
larger increases in the stamp duty are associated with larger decreases in the price
volatility. However, this average pattern masks some interesting heterogeneity. In
particular, the observations for the last two events are different from the other five.


4.2 Institutional Share and Price Volatility
   While the results in the previous subsection are suggestive, we cannot read too much
into a data pattern from three time periods. Next, we use two direct measures of


                                               25
institutional trading in the estimations, constructed with institutional ownership level and
number of institutional investors 8 . First, we collect from WIND information on
institutional ownership at the firm level on a quarterly basis. The first available data starts
from the 2nd quarter of 1998. For firms without such information, we assign zero
institutional ownership at the reporting time. (We also omit firm-quarters with missing
information as a robustness check.)
    We first conduct the following OLS regressions and report the results in Table 15.


∆    ,,                     _     _          ,,           ,,                _    _           ,,     ,,

              ,,

                                                                                                  (6)

    ,,    refers to the measures of institutional trading. Our first measure is institutional
turnover, which is the cumulative absolute change in ownership of each institutional
investor in the latest quarter prior to each stamp duty change in our sample. Our second
measure of the relative importance of institutional investors at the stock-event level is the
log (1+ number of institutional investors in logarithm) following Cornett et al. (2007).
    The results are interesting. While the coefficients on the higher tax dummy are always
negative and statistically significant across the regressions, the coefficients on the
interaction between institutional ownership and the higher tax dummy are always positive
and significant. This means that, for stock-periods with low institutional trading, higher
transaction taxes are associated with lower price volatility. However, for stock-periods
with a sufficiently high level of institutional trading, the opposite association appears –
higher transaction costs are now associated with higher, not lower, volatility.
    Note that we do not assume that every single institutional investor is fundamental
investor, and every retail investor is a noise investor. Rather, on average, institutional
investors are more likely to be aware of fundamentals and their implication for stock
prices than retail investors.




8
 Information on institutional ownership for sample A-shares one quarter prior to the stamp duty changes is
obtained from the WIND database.

                                                    26
4.3 Instrumental variable regressions
     In order to mitigate a potential endogeniety issue in variables reflecting institutional
trading, we conduct 2SLS estimations by introducing two sets of instrument variables
(IV). The first set of IVs includes the Amihud illiquidity ratio for A-share stock and the
natural logarithm of total asset, while the second set of IVs includes the Amihud
illiquidity ratio and a dummy variable which equals to one if a stock is a member of the
CSI 300 index, and zero otherwise. Firm size and liquidity are well discussed in the
literature as correlated with institutional trading or institutional ownership. In addition,
after the CSI 300 was established in April 2005, a growing number of funds have
benchmarked to it. We argue that a stock that becomes a member of the CSI 300 would
naturally attract more institutional trading.
     The 2SLS regressions are pursued in the following way. In the first stage, we regress
our measures of institutional trading on the IVs following equation (7)
                                 ,,                                     ,,

                                                                                                (7)
     ,,    refers to the measures of institutional trading as in Table 15, while IV1 and IV2
refers to the IVs of each IV set used. Results of the first stage regression are reported in
panel A of Table 16. The predicted values of                 ,,   are obtained from the first stage
regression, and incorporated into the second stage regressions.
     In the second stage regressions, we follow equation (8) to substitute institutional
trading measures with predicted value obtained from first stage estimations with
instruments.
 ∆        ,,                 _    _          ,,         ,,                   _   _       ,,    ,,

                                  ,, .

                                                                                                (8)
     Panel B of Table 16 shows the results of 2SLS regressions. Consistent with the OLS
regressions,      is consistently negative and statistically significant across four regressions.
For the interaction terms, regressions show positive and statistically significant
coefficients. These results confirm the basic pattern: while higher transaction costs lead
to lower volatility for stocks with low institutional investor trading, the reverse is true for
stocks with high institutional trading. Based on the point estimates in column 1, the

                                                  27
switching point occurs when the absolute change in the institutional ownership reaches
14%. The switching point can be seen visually in Figure 6a (which also plots the
switching point implied by the OLS estimates for comparison). If we use the point
estimates in column 2, the switching point occurs when the number of institutional
investors at the stock level reaches 14. This can be seen in Figure 6b. Of course, the
switching point estimates should be interpreted with caution as institutional investors are
not homogeneous in terms of their size, awareness of fundamentals, and ability.
    We also conduct tests to check the validity of the instruments, and summarize the test
results at the bottom of panel B of Table 16. First, we perform a Hausman (1978) test of
the endogeneity of the regressors. Test statistics suggest rejection of the null; that is, the
regressors are exogenous, which confirms the necessity of using IVs. Second, Hansen’s
over-identification tests are conducted; we cannot reject the null that the IVs and the error
term in the main regression are not correlated. Lastly, Stock and Yogo (2001) tests of
weak IV are performed; we can easily reject the null, suggesting that the IVs used in our
estimation are not weak.
    In panel C of Table 16, we conduct regressions in the subsample that excludes
potential outliers (as defined in earlier sections). The results are consistent with panel B
of Table 16. 9


    5. Conclusion
    While the effect of a Tobin tax on price volatility is an economically important topic,
the existing empirical results in the literature are mixed. This paper makes two useful
contributions. In terms of methodology, our use of stocks that are simultaneously listed in
two segmented markets allows us to have a control group that has identical corporate
fundamental as the treatment group, and thus a much cleaner control group than any in
the existing empirical studies. In terms of the economic message, we allow the effect of a
Tobin tax on price volatility to depend on the maturity of the market; this perspective is
also unique relative to all existing empirical studies on the topic.


9
  We note that Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) also suggest a link between transaction costs and price
volatility under a combination of no short sell constraint and differential degrees of over-confidence across
traders. Their model does not generate the empirical pattern that we document here - a reversal of the
effects of higher transaction costs on price volatility as the importance of institutional investors grows.

                                                      28
   We find evidence that for immature markets, higher transaction costs tend to reduce
price volatility. This is intuitive – if the Tobin tax argument has any hope of curbing
excessive volatility, one should find it in an immature market where non-fundamental
based trading is prevalent. However, we also find evidence that higher transaction costs
tend to increase, rather than decrease, volatility in a more mature market (defined by the
relative role of institutional investors). This is also intuitive. In such markets, many
investors are fundamental based. Higher transaction costs discourage both fundamental-
based and noise traders. By impeding timely incorporation of fundamental information
into prices, a Tobin tax could backfire.




                                            29
Reference

Aliber, Robert Z., Chowdhry, Bhagwan and Yan, Shu, 2002, “Some Evidence that a
       Tobin Tax on Foreign Exchange Transactions may Increase Volatility”, European
       Finance Review 7: 481–510.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, “Illiquid and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series
       Effects”, Journal of Financial Markets, 5: 31-56.
Aregger, N., Brown, M. and Enzo, R., 2012, “Can a Transaction Tax or Capital Gains
       Tax Smooth House Prices?”, working paper
Atkins, Allen B. and Dyl, Edward A., 1997, “Stock Price Volatility, Transaction Costs
       and Securities Transactions Taxes”, Managerial and Decision Economics, 18(7-8),
       709-718.
Baltgi, Badi H., Li, Dong and Li, Qi, 2006, “Transaction Tax and Stock Market Behavior:
       Evidence from an Emerging Market”, Empirical Economics, 31(2), 393-408.
Chou, Robin K., and Wang, George H. K., 2006, “Transaction Tax and Market Quality of
       the Taiwan Stock Index Futures”, Journal of Futures markets, 26, 1195-1216.
Chow, Gregory C., 1960, "Tests of Equality between Sets of Coefficients in Two Linear
       Regressions", Econometrica, 28(3), 591–605.
Cornett, Marcia M., Marcus, Alan, Saunders, Anthony and Tehranian, Hassan, 2007,
       “The impact of institutional ownership on corporate operating performance”,
       Journal of Banking and Finance, 31, 1771-1794.
De Long, Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and R. J. Waldman, 1990,
       “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets”, Journal of Political Economy, 98(4),
       703-38.
Edwards, F. R., 1993, “Taxing Transactions in the Future Markets: Objectives and
       Effects.”, Journal of Financial Services, 7, 75-93.
Fernald, John, and John H. Rogers, 2002, “Puzzles in the Chinese Stock Market,” The
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(3): 416-432.
Fu, Yuming, Qian, Wenlan, and Yeung, Bernard, 2012, “Financial Transaction Tax: the
       Double-edged Sword Effects on Price Stability”, Unpublished working paper,
       National University of Singapore.



                                            30
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with
       financially constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2010, “Limits of Arbitrage,” Annual Review of
       Financial Economics, 2(1): 251-275.
Gompers, Paul A., and Andrew Metrick, 2001, “Institutional Investors and Equity Prices”,
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1), 229-259.
Green, Christopher J., Maggioni, Paolo and Murinde, Victor, 2000, “ Regulatory Lessons
       for Emerging Stock markets from A Century of Evidence on Transactions Costs
       and Share Price Volatility in the London Stock Exchange”, Journal of Banking &
       Finance, 24(4), 577-601.
Grundfest, Joseph A., 1990, “The Damning Facts of a New Stocks Tax”, Wall Street
       Journal, July 23rd
Grundfest, Joseph A., and Shoven, John B., 1991, “Adverse Implications of a Securities
       Transaction Excise Tax”, Journal of Accounting, Auditing, and Finance, 6(4):
       409-442.
Habermeier, Karl and Kirilenko, Andrei A., 2001, “Securities Transaction Taxes and
       Financial Markets”, IMF working paper
Hanke, Michael, Huber J., Kirchler, M. and Sutter, M., 2010, “The Economic
       Consequences of A Tobin Tax – An Experimental Analysis”, Journal of
       Economic Behavior & Organization, 74(1-2), 58-71.
Hansen, Lars Peter, 1982, “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
       Estimators”, Econometric, 50, 1029-1054.
Hau, Harald, 2006, “The Role of Transaction Costs for Financial Volatility: Evidence
       from the Paris Bourse”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(4),
       862-890.
Hausman, Jerry A., 1978, "Specification Tests in Econometrics", Econometrica, 46(6),
       1251–1271.
Heaton, John, and Lo, Andrew W., 1993, “The Impact of a Securities Transactions Tax
       on Financial Markets and Institutions.” Mimeo, Catalyst Institute, Chicago, 1993.




                                           31
Hu, Shing-yang, 1998, “The Effects of the Stock Transaction Tax on the Stock Market –
       Experiences from Asian Markets”, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 6(3-4), 347-
       364.
Jones, Charles M., and Seguin, Paul J., 1997, “Transaction Costs and Price Volatility:
       Evidence from Commission Deregulation”, The American Economic Review,
       87(4), 728-737.
Kupiec, Paul H., 1996, “Noise Traders, Excessive Volatility, and a Securities
       Transactions Tax”, Journal of Financial Services Research, 10, 115-129.
Lanne, Markku, and Vesala, Timo, 2010, “The Effect of A Transaction Tax on Exchange
       Rate Volatility”, International Journal of Finance & Economics, 15(2), 123-133.
Liu, Shinhua and Zhu, Zhen, 2009, “Transaction Costs and Price Volatility: New
       Evidence from the Tokyo Stock Exchange”, Journal of Financial Services
       Research, 36(1): 65-83.
Petersen, Mitchell A., 2009, “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets:
       Comparing Approaches”, The Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 435-480
Phylakti, Kate S. and Aristidou, Antonis., 2007, “Security Transaction Taxes and
       Financial Volatility: Athens Stock Exchange”, Applied Financial Economics,
       17(18), 1455-1467.
Roll, Richard, 1989, “Price Volatility, International Market Links, and Their Implications
       for Regulatory Policies”, Journal of Financial Services Research, 3, 211-246.
Scheinkman, Jose, and Xiong, Wei, 2003, “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 111(6): 1183-1219.
Schwert, William G. and Seguin, Paul J., 1993, “Securities Transaction Taxes: An
       Overview of Costs, Benefits, and Unresolved Questions”, Financial Analyst
       Journal, Sept/Oct, 27-35.
Sheffrin, Steven M. and Turner, Tracy M., 2001, “Taxation and House-Price Uncertainty:
       Some Empirical Estimates”, International Tax and Public Finance, 8, 621-636.
Song, Frank M., and Zhang, Junxi, 2005, “Securities Transaction Tax and Market
       Volatility”, The Economic Journal, 115, 1103-1120.
Shleifer, Andrei, 2000, Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance,
       Oxford University Press.


                                            32
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, “The Limits of Arbitrage,” The Journal of
       Finance, 52: 35-55.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1989, “Using Tax Policy to Curb Speculative Short-term Trading”,
       Journal of Financial Services Research, 3(2-3), 101-115.
Stock, James H. and Yogo, M., 2001, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
       Regression.”, NBER Technical Working Paper No. 284.
Summers, Lawrence H. and Summers, Victoria P., 1989, “When Financial Markets Work
       Too Well: A Cautious Case for a Securities Transaction Tax”, Journal of
       Financial Services Research, 3(2-3), 261-286.
Tobin, James, 1978, “A Proposal for International Monetary Reform”, Eastern Economic
       Journal, 4, 153-159.
Tobin, James, 1984, “On the Efficiency of the Financial System”, Lloyd Bank Review,
       153, 1-15.
Umlauf, Steven R., 1993, “Transaction Taxes and the Behavior of the Swedish Stock
       Market”, Journal of Financial Economics, 33(2), 227-240.
Westerholm, Joakim, 2003, “The Impact of Transaction Costs on Turnover, Asset Prices
       and Volatility: The Cases of Sweden’s and Finland’s Security Transaction Tax
       Reductions”, The Finnish Journal of Business Economics, 2(3), 213-241.




                                          33
Table 1 Historical adjustment of stamp duties on stock trading in China and Hong Kong
Table 1 lists all the historical adjustments of stock trading stamp duty in China (A-share) and Hong Kong
after 1993 when the first cross-listed firm appeared.


      Date                                                    Activities
 Panel A: Historical adjustments of stamp duty on stock trading in China
 12-May-97          Trading stamp tax increased from 6‰ to 10‰ (buyers and sellers each pay half)
 12-Jun-98          Trading stamp tax reduced from 10‰ to 8‰
 16-Nov-01          Trading stamp tax reduced from 8‰ to 4‰
 23-Jan-05          Trading stamp tax reduced from 4‰ to 2‰
 30-May-07          Trading stamp tax increased from 2‰ to 6‰
 24-Apr-08          Trading stamp tax reduced from 6‰ to 2‰
 19-Sep-08          Trading stamp tax for buyer abolished, while stamp tax for seller remains at 1‰
 Panel B: Historical adjustments of stamp duty on stock trading in Hong Kong
 1-Apr-98           Trading stamp tax reduced from 3‰ to 2.5‰
 7-Apr-00           Trading stamp tax reduced from 2.5‰ to 2.25‰
 1-Sep-01           Trading stamp tax reduced from 2.25‰ to 2‰




                                                        34
Table 2 Summary Statistics
Table 2 reports the summary statistics of our sample firms. The sample contains 223 unique firm-event
observations from 1997 to 2008. In panel A, we first provide the mean and median of firm characteristics
for our sample stocks and the entire A-share market in 1996 and 2008 respectively. The information is
acquired from CSMAR and WIND for the annual or the 4th quarter filing. In panel B, stock characteristics
of sample firms’ A and H shares are reported respectively. For each variable, the average over 2 year (480
trading days) around each stamp duty change is reported. Institutional ownership is calculated as a fraction
of total market capitalization of tradable shares in the same reporting period. Institutional turnover is
measured as absolute change in institutional holding one quarter prior to stamp duty changes, while number
of institutional investors is obtained directly from WIND database. All the value variables are reported in
RMB, and for H-shares, we convert the HKD to RMB based on the historical daily exchange rate.
Appendix has the details on variable definition.

Panel A: Firm Characteristics                       1996                                  2008
                                     Cross-listed                          Cross-listed
                                       sample          A-share market        Sample          A-share market
Currency: RMB                       Mean/Median           Mean/Median     Mean/Median        Mean/Median
No. observations                           13                   602              51                  1,712
Total asset (mil)                     5,989/3,244            1,244/ 659   703,067/56,459          9,427/1,959
Sales (mil)                           3,041/1,516             632/301     108,805/36,836          4,586/1,191
EBIT/Sales                             7.3%/5.4%           14.1%/10.7%      11.5%/5.5%            -1.6%/4.3%
Net income margin                     5.9%/3.9%            12.6%/10.1%       9.2%/4.3%            2.9%/4.7%
Sales growth                          -2.9%/1.2%            8.1%/2.3%      15.7%/17.5%           17.8%/10.0%
Cash/Total asset                     16.7%/19.1%            10.0%/8.0%      11.5%/8.1%           16.0%/12.8%
Debt/Total asset                       6.0%/3.9%            5.1%/2.2%       11.9%/8.6%            5.9%/1.0%
Institutional ownership               0.0%/0.0%             0.0%/0.0%      35.1%/29.3%           23.2%/17.3%
Institutional turnover                0.0%/0.0%             0.0%/0.0%       15.6%/9.2%            7.7%/2.7%
Number of institutional investors         0/0                    0/0          62/31                  16/6



Panel B: Stock Characteristics
Currency: RMB                                                               A-share               H-share
Market Capitalization (mil)                                                 126,836                37,326
Stock price                                                                   13.7                   6.4
Average value of daily transaction volume (mil)                               282                    248
Average daily return                                                         0.07%                 0.01%
Average daily price volatility (unfitted)                                   0.0318                 0.0355
Average daily price volatility (fitted)                                     0.0310                 0.0336
Annual price volatility                                                     0.0328                 0.0373
Average daily share turnover                                                0.0057                 0.0119
Amihud illiquidity ratio                                                    0.0015                 0.0356




                                                     35
Table 3 Variable Correlation Matrix
Table 3 provides the correlation matrix of the key variables in our analyses. Volatility refers to the fitted daily price volatility which he is measured as         ,,

for event m stock i at day t conditional on 12 previous daily price volatility followed Jones and Seguin (1997). Ret refers to daily stock return and Turnover
                                                             ,,
refers to the daily share turnover, measured as                       for event m stock i at day t. Inst. own refers to the institutional ownership which is obtained in
                                                                   ,,

the latest quarter prior to each stamp duty change. Inst turnover refers to the cumulative absolute quarterly change in ownership of each institutional investor of a
sample A-share in the latest quarter prior to stamp duty changes relative to one quarter before. No. of ins.t investor is the number of institutional investors for
each sample firm in the latest quarter prior to stamp duty changes. Initial stamp duty is the initial level of stamp duty in A-share market prior to each stamp duty
change, while change stamp duty refers to the change in stamp duty for each stamp duty change. Please note that in subsequent regressions, we use the absolute
size of stamp duty change instead of the change stamp duty which also reflects the direction of the change. Lastly, interest rate in China and HK are monthly
rates reflecting the 12-month base rates. Details on the variable definition can be found in an appendix.

                                                                                                                    No. of    Initial    Change     Interest    Interest
                         Volatility   Volatility   Ret      Ret      Turnover    Turnover     Inst.      Inst.       inst.    stamp      stamp        rate        rate
                           (A)          (H)        (A)      (H)        (A)         (H)        own      turnover   investors    duty       duty      (China)      (HK)
Volatility (A)             1.00
Volatility (H)             0.27         1.00
Ret (A)                    0.01         0.01       1.00
Ret (H)                    0.00         0.02       0.35     1.00
Turnover (A)               0.30         0.09       0.17     0.07       1.00
Turnover (H)               0.11         0.33       0.07     0.17       0.17        1.00
Inst. own                  0.10         -0.03      0.00     0.01       -0.02       0.09       1.00
Inst. turnover             0.08         -0.02      0.00     0.01       0.01        0.10       0.73      1.00
No. of inst. investors     0.03         -0.01      0.00     0.00       -0.03       0.09       0.63      0.61       1.00
Initial stamp duty        -0.18          0.13      -0.01    -0.01      -0.19       -0.02      -0.38     -0.40      -0.37        1.00
Change stamp duty          0.09         -0.06       0.02    0.01        0.10       0.01       -0.10     0.01       -0.03       -0.53       1.00
Interest rate (China)      0.05          0.15      -0.02    -0.03      -0.10       0.01       -0.29     -0.25      -0.19        0.37       0.31       1.00
Interest rate (HK)        -0.04         -0.08       0.01      0        -0.07       0.01       -0.29     -0.23      -0.29       0.24        0.36       0.40       1.00




                                                                                  36
Table 4 Price Response to Stamp Duty Changes
This table reports the price response to announcement of stamp duty adjustment. Dependent variable is
daily return of our sample A-shares. We focus on the short-term price response in 2 trading days before and
after each stamp duty change. Daily returns of H-share within the same window are used as independent
variable. Higher tax dummy equals to 1 if the day t is in the higher stamp duty period and zero otherwise. In
columns 1-3, results on full-sample estimations are reported, while results on subsample estimation
excluding observations of “crazy stocks” which have price (A-share)/price (H-share) above 90th percentiles
of the full sample are reported in column 4. Firm, year, month of the year, and event fixed effects are
controlled under different specifications. Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity and firm
level clustering are reported in the parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5%
and 10% level respectively.



                                                                     Return(A-share)
                                                               Full sample                      Subsample
VARIABLES                                         (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)
Return (H-share)                               0.5719***       0.6233***        0.6082***       0.5945***
                                                (0.0311)        (0.0360)         (0.0463)        (0.0499)
Return (H-share)*Higher tax dummy                              -0.1640***       -0.2274***      -0.2483***
                                                                (0.0551)         (0.0743)        (0.0770)

Observations                                     892              892              892             736
Firm fixed effects                                No              Yes              Yes             Yes
Year fixed effects                                No               No              Yes             Yes
Month of the year fixed effects                   No               No              Yes             Yes
Event fixed effects                               No               No              Yes             Yes
Standard error cluster                           Firm             Firm             Firm            Firm
R-square                                        0.2746           0.3121           0.3586          0.3900




                                                        37
Table 5 Stamp Duty Changes
Tables below present the results of regressions of monthly changes in the stamp duty in the Chinese market
on log A-share index of the previous three months, and on the relative volatility of the cross-listed stocks in
the A and H markets of the previous three months. In panel A, the series of regressions are run for the
entire period from 1996 to 2009, while in panel B, the same regressions are run in a subsample consisting
of the seven months in which the stamp duty changes actually take place plus the six months prior to the
change. F-tests that the coefficients for lagged variables of the logarithm of A-share index value are jointly
zero, and that those for relatively volatility of cross-listed stocks jointly zero, are reported respectively. ***,
**, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.


Panel A: full sample 1996-2009, monthly
                                                                      Change of stamp duty
VARIABLES                                    (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)         (5)
Lag(1) of Log(A index)                    2.10***                                            2.06***    2.04***
                                           (0.58)                                             (0.59)     (0.59)
Lag(2) of Log(A index)                    -1.66**                                            -1.72**     -1.65*
                                           (0.83)                                             (0.84)     (0.84)
Lag(3) of Log(A index)                      -0.47                                              -0.37      -0.43
                                           (0.57)                                             (0.58)     (0.58)
Lag(1) of [V(A)-V(H)]                                         0.01                             -0.05
                                                             (0.12)                           (0.12)
Lag(2) of [V(A)-V(H)]                                         0.20                              0.18
                                                             (0.13)                           (0.13)
Lag(3) of [V(A)-V(H)]                                         -0.06                            -0.05
                                                             (0.12)                           (0.12)
Lag(1) of [V(A)/V(H)]                                                         -0.57                       -1.90
                                                                             (3.34)                      (3.28)
Lag(2) of [V(A)/V(H)]                                                         5.71                        5.09
                                                                             (3.58)                      (3.47)
Lag(3) of [V(A)/V(H)]                                                         -0.66                       -0.50
                                                                             (3.34)                      (3.24)

Observations                                165              165              165              165        165
R-square                                    0.09             0.02             0.02             0.10       0.10
F-test (market index lags jointly =0)     4.97***                                            4.48***    4.57***
F-test (volatility lags jointly =0)                          1.09             1.10             0.69       0.80




                                                        38
Panel B: subsample includes event months and 6 months before actual event month
                                                                Change of stamp duty
VARIABLES                                 (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)       (5)
Lag(1) of Log(A index)                  4.94***                                        4.71***   4.71***
                                         (1.57)                                         (1.62)    (1.63)
Lag(2) of Log(A index)                   -4.36*                                         -4.23*     -4.14
                                         (2.41)                                         (2.49)    (2.52)
Lag(3) of Log(A index)                    -0.52                                          -0.41     -0.51
                                         (1.58)                                         (1.66)    (1.66)
Lag(1) of [V(A)-V(H)]                                       0.07                          0.03
                                                          (0.32)                        (0.30)
Lag(2) of [V(A)-V(H)]                                       0.39                          0.29
                                                          (0.34)                        (0.32)
Lag(3) of [V(A)-V(H)]                                      -0.11                         -0.13
                                                          (0.31)                        (0.29)
Lag(1) of [V(A)/V(H)]                                                    1.33                      1.64
                                                                       (8.08)                    (7.69)
Lag(2) of [V(A)/V(H)]                                                    9.04                      5.83
                                                                       (8.03)                    (7.67)
Lag(3) of [V(A)/V(H)]                                                   -1.11                     -1.95
                                                                       (7.62)                    (7.24)

Observations                              51               51           51               51        51
R-square                                 0.19             0.05         0.04             0.21      0.21
F-test (market index lags jointly =0)   3.68**                                         3.05**    3.09**
F-test (volatility lags jointly =0)                       0.76         0.63             0.38      0.29




                                                     39
Table 6 Stamp Duties and Stock Price Volatility
The table reports results on the effects of stamp duty changes on price volatility within 240 trading days before and after each adjustment date. In panel A, we
follow ∆ , ,      0    1
                                _ _            ,,            , , . , where ∆ , , measures the difference between A-share and H-share daily price volatility for

event m, firm i and day t. Higher tax dummy equals to 1 if day t is in the higher stamp duty period and zero otherwise, while C refers to the controls and F refers
to the various types of fixed effects. In columns 1 and 2, we first use the difference of raw daily price volatility between A and H share as the dependent variable.
The raw price volatility is measured as           ,,   for event m stock i at day t according to Jones and Seguin (1997). In columns 3 and 4, we substitute the
dependent variable by the ratio of fitted price volatility of A and H shares. The fitted daily price volatility is the fitted value from a 12-lag auto regression of the
raw volatility. In columns 5 and 6, the price volatility is estimated from absolute value of daily returns for each event-firm observations before and after stamp
duty changes. In addition, we control the 12-month base interest rate for China and HK respectively with monthly frequency. Firm, year, month of the year, and
event fixed effects are controlled under different specifications. Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity and firm level clustering are reported in the
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

Panel A                                           V(A)-V(H)                                      V(A)/V(H)                                    V(A)-V(H)
                                                                                                                              (estimated price volatility from one year of
                                           (Unfitted price volatility)                    (Fitted price volatility)                             data)
                                     Full sample               Subsample           Full sample               Subsample            Full sample               Subsample
VARIABLES                                 (1)                       (2)                 (3)                       (4)                  (5)                     (6)
Higher tax dummy                     -0.0055***               -0.0048***           -0.1375***                -0.1124***          -0.0071***               -0.0062***
                                      (0.0010)                  (0.0009)             (0.0206)                  (0.0170)            (0.0009)                 (0.0009)
Interest rate (China)                  0.0387                    0.0400            4.9203***                 4.3780***           0.2660***                0.2959***
                                      (0.0366)                  (0.0347)             (0.6771)                  (0.5695)            (0.0360)                 (0.0342)
Interest rate (HK)                   0.2572***                0.2202***             5.3763***                 5.0018***          0.2738***                0.2112***
                                      (0.0202)                  (0.0222)             (0.3400)                  (0.3380)            (0.0217)                 (0.0222)

Observations                           100,898                  79,244                 100,343                78,827                 446                     446
Firm fixed effects                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                    No                      No
Month of the year fixed effects          Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                    No                      No
Event fixed effects                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Standard error cluster                   Firm                    Firm                    Firm                  Firm                  Firm                    Firm
R-square                                0.0555                  0.0729                  0.1717                0.1725                0.5287                  0.5568




                                                                                  40
In panel B, we follow , ,                 ,,         ,,        _    _         ,,             , , , where  , , measures the daily price volatility for the treatment
group, while    , , measures the daily price volatility of control H-shares. In columns 1 and 2 of panel B, we first regress the unfitted daily price volatility of A-
share following the above model specification. In columns 3 and 4, we substitute the measure of daily price volatility with the value after detrending. For
detrending, we regress unfitted daily price volatility    , , on t for each stamp duty change, and use the residual of the regression as the detrended variables. In
columns 5 and 6, we follow Jones and Seguin (1997) and regress the fitted A-share price volatility following
   ,,                   ,,   ,,       _    _         ,,                 ,,   ..

Panel B                                                                                             Price volatility (A-share)
                                                              (Unfitted price volatility)      (Detrended unfitted price volatility)        (Fitted price volatility)
                                                          Full sample           Subsample       Full sample            Subsample       Full sample           Subsample
VARIABLES                                                      (1)                   (2)             (3)                  (4)              (5)                    (6)
Price volatility (H-share)                                0.1747***               0.2449***      0.1780***            0.2475***        0.1371***           0.1376***
                                                           (0.0091)                (0.0104)       (0.0090)             (0.0107)         (0.0091)            (0.0091)
Price volatility (H-share)* Higher tax dummy              -0.0361***              -0.0363***    -0.0369***            -0.0367***        -0.0176**          -0.0227***
                                                           (0.0086)                 (0.0095)      (0.0087)              (0.0114)         (0.0081)            (0.0084)
Interest rate (China)                                     0.1579***               0.1847***       0.0755*             0.1061***        0.1048***            0.1073***
                                                           (0.0399)                 (0.0343)      (0.0381)              (0.0307)         (0.0285)            (0.0282)
Interest rate (HK)                                          -0.0256                  -0.0031    -0.1148***            -0.1198***       -0.0563***          -0.0596***
                                                           (0.0248)                 (0.0255)      (0.0248)              (0.0250)         (0.0140)            (0.0147)

Observations                                               100,898                  79,244        100,898               79,244          100,343              78,827
Firm fixed effects                                           Yes                     Yes            Yes                  Yes              Yes                 Yes
Year fixed effects                                           Yes                     Yes            Yes                  Yes              Yes                 Yes
Month of the year fixed effects                              Yes                     Yes            Yes                  Yes              Yes                 Yes
Event fixed effects                                          Yes                     Yes            Yes                  Yes              Yes                 Yes
Standard error cluster                                       Firm                    Firm           Firm                 Firm            Firm                 Firm
R-square                                                    0.1362                  0.1794         0.0402               0.0927          0.3666               0.3713




                                                                                        41
Table 7 Placebo Regressions
Table 7 provides the results of placebo regressions with fake event dates chosen based on estimations in
Table 5 column 1. Specifically, we regress monthly stamp duty changes on 3 lags of log monthly market
index value from 1996 to 2009. Next, we pick fake event dates based on the predicted value of the
regression (i.e., whose absolute value is above 0.2 as the potential pool for fake event dates). Further, we
require the fake events to be within the time period without any actual event. This includes (1999.01 -
2000.11), (2002.04 -2004.01) and (2005.06-2006.05). We require the starting point to be after 6 months of
actual event and the end point to be one year before subsequent actual event date. For each selected fake
event month, we choose the beginning, middle, and end of the month to generate 3 sets of fake event dates.
For each set of fake dates, we pool the events and run the regression as in column 1 of panel A in Table 6.
To mitigate noises and ensure sufficient observations, 270 days before and after each fake stamp duty
change is examined instead of a 240 trading days. **, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5%
and 10% level respectively.


                                                                   V(A)-V(H)
                                                            (Unfitted price volatility)
VARIABLES                         Beginning of month           Middle of month            End of month
Higher tax dummy                       0.0002                        -0.0002                -0.0001
                                       (0.0007)                      (0.0008)               (0.0007)
Interest rate (China)                 -0.2407**                    -0.2793***             -0.3099***
                                       (0.0926)                      (0.0981)               (0.1060)
Interest rate (HK)                   -0.2892***                    -0.2672***             -0.2308***
                                       (0.0690)                      (0.0790)               (0.0811)

Observations                           43,252                        43,212                 43,408
Firm fixed effects                      Yes                           Yes                    Yes
Month of the year fixed effects         Yes                           Yes                    Yes
Event fixed effects                     Yes                           Yes                    Yes
Standard error cluster                  Firm                          Firm                   Firm
R-squared                              0.0494                        0.0487                 0.0484




                                                       42
Table 8 Extensions
In columns 1 and 2, we separate our sample into two groups based on the direction of stamp duty change.
Column 1 shows the results on subsample which experience stamp duty reductions, while column 2 shows
the results on subsample with increase in stamp duty. In column 3, financial and utility firms are excluded.
In column 4, firm observations with significant events, e.g. massive non-tradable shares transfer to tradable
shares, over the event window are excluded. Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity. ***, **,
and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

                                                                            V(A)-V(H)
                                              (1)                   (2)                     (3)                (4)
                                                                                        Excluding        Excluding firms
                                         Reduce stamp        Increase stamp            financial &       with significant
VARIABLES                                 duty events          duty events            utility sectors)       event)
Higher tax dummy                           -0.0049***            -0.0126***            -0.0073***          -0.0086***
                                             (0.0007)              (0.0022)              (0.0011)            (0.0013)
Interest rate (China)                      -0.1612***              0.2937*               0.0713*             0.0646*
                                             (0.0415)              (0.1592)              (0.0416)            (0.0346)
Interest rate (HK)                         0.3204***             -0.3755***             0.2291***           0.2410***
                                             (0.0241)              (0.1354)              (0.0280)            (0.0324)

Observations                                 77,414                23,484                 66,079             68,405
Firm fixed effects                            Yes                   Yes                    Yes                Yes
Month of the year fixed effects               Yes                   Yes                    Yes                Yes
Event fixed effects                           Yes                   Yes                    Yes                Yes
Standard error cluster                        Firm                  Firm                   Firm               Firm
R-square                                     0.0600                0.0683                 0.0544             0.0599


Table 9 Portfolio Price Volatility

Equally weighted portfolios and daily price volatilities in 240 trading days before and after each stamp duty
changes are tested. Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are reported
in the parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

                                                              V(A)-V(H)                             V(A)/V(H)
                                                       (Unfitted price volatility)            (Fitted price volatility)
VARIABLES                                             Full sample      Subsample            Full sample      Subsample
Higher tax dummy                                      -0.0122***          -0.0118***        -0.1885***      -0.2339***
                                                        (0.0016)           (0.0015)           (0.0207)        (0.0211)
Interest rate (China)                                    0.0011             0.0012           0.0559***       0.0511***
                                                       (0.0011)            (0.0010)           (0.0115)        (0.0096)
Interest rate (HK)                                    0.0023***           0.0019***          0.0380***       0.0500***
                                                       (0.0005)            (0.0004)           (0.0060)        (0.0062)

Observations                                            3,356               3,284               3,356          3,200
Month of the year fixed effects                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes
Event fixed effects                                      Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes
R-square                                                0.0909              0.1087             0.2012          0.2993




                                                        43
Table 10 Effects of Size of Change and Initial Level of Stamp Duties
Both absolute size of change and initial level of stamp duties are in units of ‰. Robust standard errors
adjusted for heteroskedasticity and firm level clustering are reported in the parentheses. ***, **, and *
indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.
                                                                        V(A)-V(H)
                                                               Full sample                         Subsample
VARIABLES                                    (1)                   (2)                (3)             (4)
Higher tax dummy                         0.0047***             0.0074***          0.0077***        0.0076***
                                          (0.0010)              (0.0009)           (0.0012)         (0.0011)
Size of change in A-share stamp duty*
Higher tax dummy                         -3.2587***                                 -0.1400        -1.0044***
                                          (0.4613)                                 (0.3825)         (0.3722)
Initial size of A-share stamp duty*
Higher tax dummy                                               -3.0653***         -3.0309***       -2.2268***
                                                                 (0.2626)           (0.2595)        (0.2331)
Interest rate (China)                     -0.0680*             0.1769***          0.1708***         0.1037**
                                          (0.0367)               (0.0535)           (0.0488)        (0.0421)
Interest rate (HK)                       0.2409***              0.2830***          0.2820***       0.2305***
                                          (0.0202)               (0.0195)           (0.0210)        (0.0235)

Observations                              100,898               100,898             100,898          79,244
Firm fixed effects                          Yes                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Month of the year fixed effects             Yes                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Event fixed effects                         Yes                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Standard error cluster                      Firm                  Firm                Firm            Firm
R-square                                   0.0578                0.0640              0.0640          0.0796


Table 11: Effects of Transaction Costs on Share Turnover
                                               ,,
Daily share turnover is calculated as                       for event m stock i at day t, Subsample estimations
                                                       ,,

exclude potential outliers with price(A-share)/price(H-share) above the 90th percentiles. ***, **, and *
indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

                                                     Turnover(A)-Turnover(H)           Turnover(A)/Turnover(H)
VARIABLES                                           Full sample    Subsample          Full sample    Subsample
Higher tax dummy                                    -0.0037***       -0.0036***       -1.1735***    -0.9963***
                                                     (0.0004)         (0.0005)         (0.3492)      (0.2933)
Interest rate (China)                               -0.1065***       -0.1133***         -5.3412      -0.7110
                                                     (0.0303)          (0.0318)        (16.1307)     (14.3994)
Interest rate (HK)                                   0.0311**           0.0214           8.2809        8.3708
                                                     (0.0142)          (0.0161)         (9.6805)      (7.2391)

Observations                                          100,898          79,244           95,877        79,240
Firm fixed effects                                      Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes
Month of the year fixed effects                         Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes
Event fixed effects                                     Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes
Standard error cluster                                  Firm            Firm             Firm          Firm
R-square                                               0.2641          0.2775           0.0247        0.0260



                                                      44
Table 12 Portfolio Share Turnover
The table reports the results of diff-in-diff regression with portfolio turnover. Equally weighted portfolios
are formed and daily share turnovers of the sample in 240 trading days before and after each stamp duty
changes are estimated. Subsample excludes stock observations with top 10% in terms of price (A-share)/
price (H-share). ***, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.
                                              Turnover(A)-Turnover(H)                 Turnover(A)/Turnover(H)
VARIABLES                                   Full sample      Subsample              Full sample      Subsample
Higher tax dummy                            -0.0056***            -0.0056***        -0.3860***       -0.3476***
                                              (0.0006)              (0.0006)            (0.0473)       (0.0463)
Interest rate (China)                       -0.0015***            -0.0012***             0.0135       0.0597***
                                             (0.0004)              (0.0005)           (0.0231)         (0.0212)
Interest rate (HK)                           0.0004**               0.0002           0.0392***        0.0247***
                                             (0.0002)              (0.0002)           (0.0084)         (0.0076)

Observations                                  3,356                 3,284               3,235           3,284
Month of the year fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Event fixed effects                            Yes                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
R-square                                      0.1796                0.1677              0.2015         0.1908




Table 13: Effects of Stamp Duties on Price Volatility over Time

We divide the history of the Chinese stock market into three approximately equally spaced sub-periods:
1990-1997, 1998-2005, and post-2006 period. ***, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5%
and 10% level respectively.

                                                                      Price volatility (A-share)
                                                       (1)                       (2)                    (3)
                                                   Infant stage             Toddler stage          Growth stage
VARIABLES                                          (1990-1997)              (1998-2005)            (after 2006)
Higher tax dummy                                    -0.0073**                  -0.0121***           0.0028***
                                                       (0.0026)                 (0.0009)             (0.0006)
Interest rate (China)                              -9.1857***                  -0.1292**             -0.1088
                                                       (1.3247)                 (0.0579)             (0.0700)
Interest rate (HK)                                 -16.2659***                 -0.0806**            0.2169***
                                                       (1.9743)                 (0.0370)             (0.0202)


Observations                                            6,888                   29,142               64,868
Firm fixed effects                                       Yes                      Yes                  Yes
Month of the year fixed effects                          Yes                      Yes                  Yes
Event fixed effects                                      Yes                      Yes                  Yes
Standard error cluster                                  Firm                     Firm                 Firm
R-square                                               0.1868                    0.0868              0.0586




                                                       45
Table 14: Separate Estimates by Event
In panel A, we first report the descriptive statistics of the effects of stamp duty changes on price volatility,
share turnover, and price level over 240 trading days before and after stamp duty changes. Because of
different directions of stamp duty changes among the 7 events, we report the statistics always as the value
in higher tax regime minus the value in lower tax regime. For event m, price volatility is constructed
followed Jones and Seguin (1997) as /2              , , , where     , , is the daily return of stock i and at day t.
                                             ,,
Share turnover is calculated as                         for stock i at day t. In panel B, we report the regression
                                                       ,,

estimation of the key variable higher tax dummy for each event. Month of the year and firm fixed effects
are controlled for. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and reported in the parentheses. ***,
**, and * indicate significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

Panel A


                 Initial level   Change in
                                                 No.                              Δturnover(A)-
Event date        of stamp        stamp                           ΔV(A)-ΔV(H)                         ΔR(A)-ΔR(H)
                  duty (‰)       duty (‰)
                                             observations                         Δturnover(H)

12-May-97             6                 4         13                -0.0442***      -0.0160***            -0.0049*
12-Jun-98             10                -2        16                -0.0135***      -0.0122***           0.0048***
16-Nov-01             8                 -4        21                -0.0198***      -0.0108***           -0.0042***
23-Jan-05             4                 -2        29                -0.0103***       -0.0044**            -0.0007*
30-May-07             2                 4         42                 -0.0144**      -0.0039***           -0.0121***
24-Apr-08             6                 -4        51                0.0105***         -0.0013                0.0003
19-Sep-08             1                 -1        51                0.0150***         -0.0007             0.0012*



Panel B                                     Estimation of Coefficient of Higher tax dummy
                        V(A)-V(H)                             V(A)/V(H)                        V(A)-V(H)
Event date       (Unfitted price volatility)            (Fitted price volatility)         (Annual price volatility)
12-May-97                  -0.0342***                            -0.6255***                      -0.0318***
12-Jun-98                  -0.0102***                            -0.0852***                      -0.0065***
16-Nov-01                  -0.0183***                            -0.2759***                      -0.0186***
23-Jan-05                  -0.0105***                            -0.3150***                      -0.0109***
30-May-07                   -0.0008                              -0.0180***                       -0.0022*
24-Apr-08                  0.0083***                             0.1467***                       0.0066***
19-Sep-08                  0.0122***                             0.2251***                       0.0116***




                                                            46
Table 15: Institutional Shares and Price Volatility
OLS estimates on the role of institutional                trading   for     the   stock       price
                                                                                                volatility response to stamp duty changes. We follow
∆   ,,                     _   _      ,,              _   _         ,,      ,,           ,,            , , to examine the effect of institutional trading on price
volatility response to stamp duty changes. Firm, month of the year, and event fixed effects are controlled for, and robust standard errors adjusted for
heteroskedasticity and firm level clustering are reported in the parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level respectively.

                                                                                                        Price volatility (A-share)
                                                                          V(A)-V(H)                            V(A)/V(H)                        V(A)-V(H)
                                                                                                                                      (price volatility estimated from
                                                                     (raw price volatility)              (Fitted price volatility)             annual data)
VARIABLES                                                           (1)                 (2)              (3)                  (4)          (5)                 (6)
Higher tax dummy                                               -0.0086***          -0.0156***         -0.1852***         -0.2954***   -0.0099***          -0.0162***
                                                                 (0.0013)            (0.0014)           (0.0269)           (0.0266)     (0.0013)            (0.0015)
Institutional turnover                                         -0.0194***                             -0.3342***                      -0.0158***
                                                                 (0.0046)                               (0.0973)                        (0.0046)
Institutional turnover * Higher tax dummy                       0.0318***                              0.4819***                       0.0290***
                                                                 (0.0078)                               (0.1433)                        (0.0077)
Ln(No. institutional investors +1)                                                 -0.0036***                            -0.0659***                       -0.0032***
                                                                                     (0.0005)                              (0.0101)                         (0.0005)
Ln(No. institutional investors+1)* Higher tax dummy                                 0.0049***                             0.0773***                        0.0046***
                                                                                     (0.0006)                              (0.0098)                         (0.0006)
Interest rate (China)                                            0.0520              0.0921**         5.1217***          5.7520***    0.2937***           0.3611***
                                                                (0.0380)             (0.0415)          (0.6939)            (0.7399)    (0.0383)             (0.0424)
Interest rate (HK)                                             0.2466***            0.2106***         5.2199***           4.6709***   0.2548***           0.1998***
                                                                (0.0222)             (0.0221)          (0.3769)            (0.3901)    (0.0253)             (0.0263)

Observations                                                    100,898              100,898           100,343             100,343       446                 446
Firm fixed effects                                                Yes                  Yes               Yes                 Yes          No                  No
Month of the year fixed effects                                   Yes                  Yes               Yes                 Yes          No                  No
Event fixed effects                                               Yes                  Yes               Yes                 Yes         Yes                 Yes
Standard error cluster                                            Firm                 Firm              Firm                Firm        Firm                Firm
R-square                                                         0.0580               0.0643            0.1766              0.1895      0.6393              0.7232




                                                                                    47
Table 16: Instrumental Variable Estimates
Two sets of instruments are used: The first set of IVs includes Amihud illiquidity ratio for A-share stock
and log total asset; The second set of IVs includes Amihud illiquidity ratio for A-share stock and a dummy
variable for stocks that are members of the CSI 300 index. First stage estimation follows                         ,,
                                                                        st
                        ,, . In panel  A, we   report   results of the 1   stage  regression.   In   the second   stage, we
estimate ∆ , ,                          _    _           ,,             _     _         ,,       ,,          ,,
                                                  nd
   ,, . In panel B, we provide   the results of 2    stage  estimations for  full sample  first.  In  columns   1 and 2, we
provide regression estimations when institutional trading variables are estimated with IV set 1, while in
columns 3 and 4, we provide results institutional trading variables estimated with IV set 2. In addition, for
each set of instruments, we perform Hausman (1978) test of the endogeneity of regressors, over-
identification test followed Hansen (1982), and weak IV test followed Stock and Yogo (2001). Test
statistics are reported in the following table and * denotes rejection of the null hypothesis. In panel C, we
repeat our estimations as panel B in subsample excluding “crazy stocks” with price(A-share)/price(H-share)
above 90th percentiles of the full sample. Higher tax dummy equals to 1 if the day t is in the higher stamp
duty time period and zero otherwise. In addition, we control the 12-month base interest rate for China and
HK respectively with monthly frequency. Also, firm, month of the year, and event fixed effects are
controlled in different specifications. Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity and firm level
clustering are reported in the parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%
level respectively.

Panel A: 1st stage                               Institutional turnover             Ln(no. institutional investors+1)
VARIABLES                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
Amihud illiquidity ratio (A-share)         -10.1386***          -8.5258***         -114.1341***        -123.9504***
                                             (3.0258)             (2.3287)           (35.1791)           (29.0311)
Ln(asset)                                    0.0099**                                0.2484***
                                             (0.0041)                                 (0.0426)
CSI300 member dummy                                             0.0773***                                1.2412***
                                                                  (0.0176)                                (0.1924)


Observations                                   223                  223                 223                 223
Year fixed effects                             Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Standard error cluster                         Firm                Firm                Firm                 Firm
R-square                                      0.2480              0.2772              0.6915               0.6961




                                                           48
Table 16 Panel B: 2nd stage (full sample)                                                  V(A) – V(H)
                                                                        IV set 1                                  IV set 2
VARIABLES                                                        (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)
Higher tax dummy                                           -0.0198***            -0.0219***          -0.0194***           -0.0244***
                                                            (0.0023)               (0.0025)           (0.0021)               (0.0026)
Institutional turnover                                     -0.0830***                                -0.0703***
                                                            (0.0221)                                  (0.0136)
Institutional turnover*Higher tax dummy                    0.1497***                                 0.1408***
                                                            (0.0200)                                  (0.0145)
Ln(no. institutional investors+1)                                                -0.0044**                                -0.0045***
                                                                                   (0.0017)                                  (0.0009)

Ln(no. institutional investors+1)                                                0.0081***                                0.0090***
 *Higher tax dummy                                                                 (0.0011)                                  (0.0009)

Interest rate (China)                                      0.1035***             0.0877**            0.1297***            0.1284***
                                                            (0.0379)               (0.0371)           (0.0389)               (0.0389)
Interest rate (HK)                                         0.2008***             0.2058***           0.2091***            0.2102***
                                                            (0.0236)               (0.0227)           (0.0224)               (0.0224)


Observations                                                100,898                100,898            100,898                100,898
Firm fixed effects                                               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Month of the year fixed effects                                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Event fixed effects                                              Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Standard error cluster                                           Firm               Firm                Firm                  Firm
R-square                                                     0.0603                0.0602              0.0628                0.0628



IV Tests

                                                      IV set 1                                               IV set 2
                                                                   Log (no.                                               Log (no.
                                      Institutional              Institutional               Institutional              Institutional
                                        turnover                 Investors+1)                  turnover                 Investors+1)
Hausman (H0: Regressors
are exogenous)                      F-stat= 152.31*          F-stat= 10.42*                F-stat= 266.13*           F-stat= 31.23*

Over-identification (H0:
IVs are not correlated with
the error)                            J-test=0.16                J-test=0.76                  J-test=0.02               J-test=0.22

Stock-Yogo (H0:weak IV)             F-stat= 2955.25*        F-stat=5848.84*             F-stat= 1794.35*            F-stat=7957.33*




                                                                  49
Table 16 Panel C: 2nd stage (subsample)                                  V(A) – V(H)
                                                      IV set 1                               IV set 2
VARIABLES                                    (1)                   (2)                 (3)                (4)
Higher tax dummy                          -0.0162***        -0.0182***          -0.0170***         -0.0213***
                                           (0.0020)              (0.0021)         (0.0020)              (0.0024)
Institutional turnover                     -0.0305                              -0.0550***
                                           (0.0223)                               (0.0125)
Institutional turnover*Higher tax dummy   0.1169***                              0.1208***
                                           (0.0168)                               (0.0134)
Ln(no. institutional investors+1)                                -0.0003                           -0.0036***
                                                                 (0.0018)                               (0.0008)
Ln(#institutional investors+1)                               0.0065***                              0.0078***
 *Higher tax dummy                                               (0.0009)                               (0.0008)
Interest rate (China)                     0.0879**           0.0768**            0.1156***          0.1149***
                                           (0.0378)              (0.0370)         (0.0337)              (0.0336)
Interest rate (HK)                        0.1773***          0.1797***           0.1782***          0.1790***
                                           (0.0248)              (0.0242)         (0.0239)              (0.0239)


Observations                               79,244                79,244           79,244                79,244
Firm fixed effects                           Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes
Month of the year fixed effects              Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes
Event fixed effects                          Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes
Standard error cluster                      Firm                  Firm             Firm                  Firm
R-square                                    0.0763               0.0765           0.0789                0.0790




                                              50
Figure 1 Evolution of Stamp Duties in China and Hong Kong
The figure shows the evolution of trading stamp duty (sum over buyers and sellers) in A-share and H-share
markets. Y-axis shows the absolute level of stamp duty in ‰.



 12
      Stamp duty (‰)
                                                                                        A-share
 10
                                                                                        H-share

  8

  6

  4

  2

  0




                                                   51
                    Figure 2 Evolution of Institutional Investors in China
                    Information on Chinese institutional holding is from WIND database on semi-annual basis from 1999 to
                    2012. Figure 2a reports the absolute number of institutional investors in the Chinese market. Figure 2b
                    reports the proportion of institutional holding in the market capitalization for the Chinese A-share market
                    (1998-2012) and the US market (1950-2006), respectively. The broken line indicates the level of
                    institutional investor share in the US market in 1975 (the year of the event studied by Jones and Sequin
                    (1997)).


                                                                            Fig 2a Size of Institutional Investors Group
                                                                  7000
                              Number of Institutional Investors




                                                                  6000

                                                                  5000

                                                                  4000

                                                                  3000

                                                                  2000

                                                                  1000

                                                                    0




                                                                              Fig 2b Share of Institutional Investor Holdings

                             70%                                                                                                   70%

                             60%                                                                                                   60%
                                                                         Chinese A-share                                                          US Market
                                                                                                      % of Market Captialization
% of Market Captialization




                             50%                                                                                                   50%

                             40%                                                                                                   40%

                             30%                                                                                                   30%
                                                                                                                                                          Jones and Seguin (1997)
                             20%                                                                                                   20%

                             10%                                                                                                   10%

                             0%                                                                                                    0%
                                                                  Jun-98
                                                                  Jun-99
                                                                  Jun-00
                                                                  Jun-01
                                                                  Jun-02
                                                                  Jun-03
                                                                  Jun-04
                                                                  Jun-05
                                                                  Jun-06
                                                                  Jun-07
                                                                  Jun-08
                                                                  Jun-09
                                                                  Jun-10
                                                                  Jun-11
                                                                  Jun-12




                                                                                                                                         1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2005



                                                                                                 52
Figure 3: Institutional investors and their turnovers at the stock level
The figures below provide snapshots of institutional investor share in A-share market at stock level in 2000
and 2008 respectively. Fig 4a shows the average number of institutional investors at stock level at the end
of Q4 in 2000 and 2008, while Fig 4b shows the institutional turnover at the stock level.


                              Fig 3a Number of institutional investors at stock level

                    90%
                    80%                                                                         2000Q4
    Frequency (%)




                    70%                                                                         2008Q4
                    60%
                    50%
                    40%
                    30%
                    20%
                    10%                  Number of institutional investors per firm
                     0%
                          0   1-10 11-20 21-30 31-40 41-50 51-60 61-70 71-80 81-90 91-100 >100




                               Fig 3b Institutional holding turnover at stock level
                    90%
                    80%                                                                          2000Q4
                    70%                                                                          2008Q4
 Frequency (%)




                    60%
                    50%
                    40%
                    30%
                    20%
                    10%
                    0%
                          0   1-10   11-20 21-30 31-40 41-50 51-60 61-70              71-80   81-90 91-100
                                       Quarterly institutional holding turnover (%)




                                                            53
Figure 4: Scatter Plots of Price Volatility in the Two Markets
The Y-axis is the A-share price volatility averaged over the sample period, and the X-axis is the H-share
price volatility averaged over the sample period.




                                                   54
Figure 5: Changes in Relative Volatility by Event
Figure 5a shows the double difference in price volatility of treatment group (A-shares) against control
group (H-shares) by event over 200 trading days before and after a. Double difference in price volatility is
constructed as         _            _                    _             _               . For event m, unfitted
price volatility is constructed followed Jones and Seguin (1997) as /2             , , , where   , , is the daily
return of stock i and at day t. Figure 4b shows the difference in fitted price volatility between A and H
shares for each stamp duty event over 200 trading days before and after.
      _         /     _                    _        /      _             . Fitted price volatility is the fitted
value from a 12-lag auto regression of raw price volatility. X-axis represents the magnitude of the stamp
duty adjustment, while y-axis represents the change in the relative price volatility.

                                                             Fig 5a Double difference in price volatility (raw)

                                         0.0300                                                                A-Share stamp duty events
 Double difference in price volatility




                                         0.0200                      16-Nov-01
                                         0.0100                                    12-Jun-98
                                                                                   23-Jan-05
                                         0.0000
                                                   -6           -4            -2               0           2          4            6
                                         -0.0100                     24-Apr-08
                                                                                           19-Sep-08                      30-May-07
                                         -0.0200

                                         -0.0300

                                         -0.0400
                                                                                                                          12-May -97
                                         -0.0500
                                                                                 Stamp duty change (‰)



                                                   Fig 5b Difference in price volatility (A-share)/(H-share) (fitted)

                                         0.4
                                                                                23-Jan-05                       A-Share stamp duty events
 Double difference in price volatility




                                         0.3                 16-Nov-01
                                         0.2
                                         0.1                                    12-Jun-98
                                           0                                                                                           30-May-07
                                         -0.1 -5        -4        -3       -2         -1           0   1         2        3       4         5
                                         -0.2                24-Apr-08
                                                                                           19-Sep-08
                                         -0.3
                                         -0.4
                                         -0.5
                                         -0.6                                                                                          12-May -97
                                         -0.7
                                                                                    Stamp duty change (‰)




                                                                                             55
Figure 6: Effects of Stamp Duty on Price Volatility Depends on Institutional Investor Shares
Graphical illustration of the estimated price volatility response to stamp duty changes as a function of
institutional trading. Both results of OLS regression (columns 1-2 of Table 15) and 2SLS (columns 1-2 of
Table 16) are plotted.


                                                         Fig 6a Institutional share turnover and the volatility response to higher tax


                                                    5.00%
    Percentage Impact on A-Share price volatility




                                                    4.00%
                                                                          OLS          2SLS
                                                    3.00%

                                                    2.00%

                                                    1.00%
                       (%)




                                                    0.00%
                                                             0        5         10          15        20      25         30        35    40
                                                    -1.00%

                                                    -2.00%

                                                    -3.00%
                                                                                        Institutional turnover (%)




                                                       Fig 6b Number of institutional investors and volatility response to higher tax

                                                    1.50%
   Percentage Impact on A-Share price volatility




                                                    1.00%              OLS           2SLS

                                                    0.50%

                                                    0.00%
                                                             0             10                 20            30                40         50
                                                    -0.50%
                      (%)




                                                    -1.00%

                                                    -1.50%

                                                    -2.00%

                                                    -2.50%
                                                                                     Number of Institutional Investors




                                                                                                 56
Appendix 1: Sample Cross-Listed Stocks (for online publication only)
Table below reports all 53 firms cross-listed in A-share and H-share in our sample. The time for cross-listing is in boldface.
                                                                                                                      H-share IPO                A-share IPO
   No.                         Name                                           Sector                   H-Shares           date        A-Shares       date
    1       Tsingtao Brewery Co Ltd                       Beverages                                  168 HK           7/15/1993     600600 CH    8/27/1993
    2       Guangzhou Shipyard International              Machinery                                  317 HK           8/6/1993      600685 CH    10/28/1993
    3       Sinopec Shanghai Petrochemical                Chemicals                                  338 HK           7/26/1993     600688 CH    11/8/1993
    4       Shenji Group Kunming Machine                  Machinery                                  300 HK           12/7/1993     600806 CH    1/3/1994
    5       Maanshan Iron & Steel                         Metals & Mining                            323 HK           11/3/1993     600808 CH    1/6/1994
    6       Beiren Printing Machinery                     Machinery                                  187 HK           8/6/1993      600860 CH    5/6/1994
    7       Tianjin Capital Environmental                 Commercial Services & Supplies             1065 HK          5/17/1994     600874 CH    5/17/1994
    8       Dongfang Electric Corp Ltd                    Electrical Equipment                       1072 HK          6/6/1994      600875 CH    6/6/1994
    9       Luoyang Glass Co Ltd                          Building Products                          1108 HK          7/8/1994      600876 CH    7/8/1994
   10       Sinopec Yizheng Chemical Fiber                Chemicals                                  1033 HK          3/29/1994     600871 CH    4/11/1995
   11       Northeast Electric Development                Electrical Equipment                       42 HK            7/5/1995      000585 CH    12/13/1995
   12       Nanjing Panda Electronics Co L                Communications Equipment                   553 HK           4/24/1996     600775 CH    11/18/1996
   13       Jingwei Textile Machinery                     Machinery                                  350 HK           2/2/1996      000666 CH    12/10/1996
   14       Shandong Xinhua Pharmaceutical                Pharmaceuticals                            719 HK           12/31/1996    000756 CH    8/6/1997
   15       China Eastern Airlines Corp Lt                Airlines                                   670 HK           2/5/1997      600115 CH    11/5/1997
   16       Angang Steel Co Ltd                           Metals & Mining                            347 HK           7/24/1997     000898 CH    12/25/1997
   17       Yanzhou Coal Mining Co Ltd                    Oil, Gas & Consumable Fuels                1171 HK          4/1/1998      600188 CH    7/1/1998
   18       Hisense Kelon Electrical Holding              Household Durables                         921 HK           7/23/1996     000921 CH    7/13/1999
   19       Jiangsu Expressway Co Ltd                     Transportation Infrastructure              177 HK           6/27/1997     600377 CH    1/16/2001
   20       Guangzhou Pharmaceutical Co Lt                Pharmaceuticals                            874 HK           10/30/1997    600332 CH    2/6/2001
   21       China Petroleum & Chemical Co                 Oil, Gas & Consumable Fuels                386 HK           10/19/2000    600028 CH    8/8/2001
   22       Huaneng Power International In                Independent Power Producers &              902 HK           1/21/1998     600011 CH    12/6/2001
   23       Shenzhen Expressway Co Ltd                    Transportation Infrastructure              548 HK           3/12/1997     600548 CH    12/25/2001
   24       Jiangxi Copper Co Ltd                         Metals & Mining                            358 HK           6/12/1997     600362 CH    1/11/2002
   25       Anhui Conch Cement Co Ltd                     Construction Materials                     914 HK           10/21/1997    600585 CH    2/7/2002
   26       China Shipping Development Co                 Marine                                     1138 HK          11/11/1994    600026 CH    5/23/2002
   27       Anhui Expressway Co                           Transportation Infrastructure              995 HK           11/13/1996    600012 CH    1/7/2003




                                                                                   57
28   China Southern Airlines Co Ltd                 Airlines                         1055 HK   7/31/1997    600029 CH   7/25/2003
29   ZTE Corp                                       Communications Equipment         763 HK    12/9/2004    000063 CH   11/18/1997
30   Huadian Power International Co                 Independent Power Producers &    1071 HK   6/30/1999    600027 CH   2/3/2005
31   Bank of China Ltd                              Commercial Banks                 3988 HK   6/1/2006     601988 CH   7/5/2006
32   Air China Ltd                                  Airlines                         753 HK    12/15/2004   601111 CH   8/18/2006
33   China Merchants Bank Co Ltd                    Commercial Banks                 3968 HK   9/22/2006    600036 CH   4/9/2002
34   Beijing North Star Co Ltd                      Real Estate Management & Devel   588 HK    5/14/1997    601588 CH   10/16/2006
35   ICBC                                           Commercial Banks                 1398 HK   10/27/2006   601398 CH   10/27/2006
36   Datang International Power Generation Co Ltd   Independent Power Producers &    991 HK    3/21/1997    601991 CH   12/20/2006
37   Guangshen Railway Co Ltd                       Road & Rail                      525 HK    5/14/1996    601333 CH   12/22/2006
38   China Life Insurance Co Ltd                    Insurance                        2628 HK   12/18/2003   601628 CH   1/9/2007
39   Chongqing Iron & Steel Co Ltd                  Metals & Mining                  1053 HK   10/17/1997   601005 CH   2/28/2007
40   Ping An Insurance Group Co of                  Insurance                        2318 HK   6/24/2004    601318 CH   3/1/2007
41   China CITIC Bank Corp Ltd                      Commercial Banks                 998 HK    4/27/2007    601998 CH   4/27/2007
42   Aluminum Corp of China Ltd                     Metals & Mining                  2600 HK   12/12/2001   601600 CH   4/30/2007
43   Weichai Power Co Ltd                           Machinery                        2338 HK   3/11/2004    000338 CH   4/30/2007
44   Bank of Communications Co Ltd                  Commercial Banks                 3328 HK   6/23/2005    601328 CH   5/15/2007
45   China COSCO Holdings Co Ltd                    Marine                           1919 HK   6/30/2005    601919 CH   6/26/2007
46   China Construction Bank Corp                   Commercial Banks                 939 HK    10/27/2005   601939 CH   9/25/2007
47   China Oilfield Services Ltd                    Energy Equipment & Services      2883 HK   11/20/2002   601808 CH   9/28/2007
48   China Shenhua Energy Co Ltd                    Oil, Gas & Consumable Fuels      1088 HK   6/15/2005    601088 CH   10/9/2007
49   PetroChina Co Ltd                              Oil, Gas & Consumable Fuels      857 HK    4/7/2000     601857 CH   11/5/2007
50   China Railway Group Ltd                        Construction & Engineering       390 HK    12/7/2007    601390 CH   12/3/2007
51   China Shipping Container Lines                 Marine                           2866 HK   6/16/2004    601866 CH   12/12/2007
52   China Coal Energy Co Ltd                       Oil, Gas & Consumable Fuels      1898 HK   12/19/2006   601898 CH   2/1/2008
53   China Railway Construction Cor                 Construction & Engineering       1186 HK   3/13/2008    601186 CH   3/10/2008




                                                                           58
Appendix 2: Definition of Variable (to be published online only)

Variable                                 Definition
Key variable
Return                                   Daily returns of A and H shares are obtained directly from databases
                                         including CSMAR, PACAP, and Datastream.

Share turnover                           Share turnover is calculated as                 ,,
                                                                                                                for stock i at day t.
                                                                                                           ,,


Price volatility (unfitted)
                                         Unfitted price volatility is calculated as           ,       for event m and day t as
                                         Jones and Seguin (1997).

Price volatility (fitted)                Fitted price volatility is the predicted value of                        ∑         ,        ,
                                         where     is the unsigned daily stock return scaled by                       /2 as Jones and
                                         Seguin (1997).

Higher tax dummy                         Higher tax dummy equals to 1 if the day t is in the higher stamp duty time
                                         period and zero otherwise.
Control variables
Size of stamp duty change                Absolute value of change in certain stamp duty change. (unit: ‰)

Initial level of stamp duty              Initial level of stamp duty prior to a certain stamp duty change. (unit: ‰)

Difference in interest rate (China-HK)   The variable is calculated as (12-month base interest rate (China) - 12-month
                                         base interest rate (HK)) on monthly basis. (unit: %)
Institutional share variables
Institutional ownership                  Obtained from WIND databases and reflects the latest quarter filing prior to
                                         a certain stamp duty change

Institutional turnover                   The sum of absolute value of change in ownership of each institutional
                                         investor for sample A-share in the latest quarter prior to each stamp duty
                                         change. Obtained from WIND database with unit of %.

Ln(Number of institutional investors)    Ln(number of outstanding institutional investors +1) in A-share stocks a
                                         quarter prior to stamp duty changes. Obtained from WIND database.
Instruments
CSI 300 member dummy                     Dummy variable equals to 1 if a sample A-share is a member of the CSI 300
                                         index at the time of a certain stamp duty change, and zero otherwise

Ln(asset)                                Natural logarithm of total asset obtained from CSMAR in the latest annual
                                         filing prior to each stamp duty change.

Amihud illiquidity ratio                                                                               ∑          ,      , ,
                                         Illiquidity ratio is calculated as        ,                                             , where
                                                                                                  ,                        , ,

                                               ,  is the number of valid observation days in year y, , , and
                                               , , are the daily return and dollar volume of stock I on day d of year
                                         y. The ratio is rescaled by a factor of 10
Potential outlier stocks
                                         Potential outliers refer to stock observations with price (A-share)/price(H-
                                         share) above 99th, 95th and 90th percentiles.




                                                         59
