                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOW DO ELECTRICITY SHORTAGES AFFECT INDUSTRY? EVIDENCE FROM
                                INDIA

                                             Hunt Allcott
                                         Allan Collard-Wexler
                                         Stephen D. O'Connell

                                         Working Paper 19977
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19977


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2014


Previously circulated as "How Do Electricity Shortages Affect Productivity? Evidence from India."
We thank Maureen Cropper, Jan De Loecker, Michael Greenstone, Peter Klenow, Kabir Malik, Rohini
Pande, Nick Ryan, Jagadeesh Sivadasan, Anant Sudarshan, and seminar participants at Brown, Drexel,
Duke, the Federal Trade Commission, Harvard, the 2013 NBER Summer Institute, the 2014 NBER
Winter IO/EEE meetings, Society for Economic Dynamics, Stanford, KU Leuven, Toulouse, Universidad
de los Andes, University of Chicago, University of Cologne, and the World Bank for helpful comments.
We are particularly grateful to Nick Bloom, Troy Smith, and Shaleen Chavda for insight into the textile
industry. We thank Deepak Choudhary, Anuradha Bhatta, Sherry Wu, and Mark Thomas for helpful
research assistance and the Stern Center for Global Economy and Business for financial support. We
have benefited from helpful conversations with Jayant Deo of India Energy Exchange, Gajendra Haldea
of the Planning Commission, Partha Mukhopadhyay of the Centre for Policy Research, and Kirit Parikh
of IGIDR. We also thank A. S. Bakshi and Hemant Jain of the Central Electricity Authority for help
in collecting archival data. Of course, all analyses are the responsibility of the authors, and no other
parties are accountable for our conclusions. Code for replication is available from Hunt Allcott’s website.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Hunt Allcott, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D. O'Connell. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Electricity Shortages Affect Industry? Evidence from India
Hunt Allcott, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D. O'Connell
NBER Working Paper No. 19977
March 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. D04,D24,L11,L94,O12,O13,Q41

                                               ABSTRACT

We estimate the effects of electricity shortages on Indian manufacturers, instrumenting with supply
shifts from hydroelectric power availability. We estimate that India’s average reported level of shortages
reduces the average plant’s revenues and producer surplus by five to ten percent, but average productivity
losses are significantly smaller because most inputs can be stored during outages. Shortages distort
the plant size distribution, as there are significant economies of scale in generator costs and shortages
more severely affect plants without generators. Simulations show that offering interruptible retail electricity
contracts could substantially reduce the impact of shortages.


Hunt Allcott                                           Stephen D. O'Connell
Department of Economics                                City University of New York
New York University                                    Department of Economics
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                            The Graduate Center
New York, NY 10012                                     365 Fifth Ave
and NBER                                               New York, NY 10016-4309
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu                                   soconnell@gc.cuny.edu

Allan Collard-Wexler
Department of Economics
Duke University
233 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
allan.collard-wexler@duke.edu
How Do Electricity Shortages Affect Industry? Evidence from India
                  Hunt Allcott, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D. O’Connell∗

                                                August 10, 2015



                                                     Abstract
           We estimate the effects of electricity shortages on Indian manufacturers, instrumenting with
       supply shifts from hydroelectric power availability. We estimate that India’s average reported
       level of shortages reduces the average plant’s revenues and producer surplus by five to ten per-
       cent, but average productivity losses are significantly smaller because most inputs can be stored
       during outages. Shortages distort the plant size distribution, as there are significant economies
       of scale in generator costs and shortages more severely affect plants without generators. Simu-
       lations show that offering interruptible retail electricity contracts could substantially reduce the
       impact of shortages.
           JEL Codes: D04, D24, L11, L94, O12, O13, Q41.
           Keywords: Manufacturing productivity, India, electricity shortages.
           ————————————————————————————


One of the potential contributors to the large productivity gap between developed and developing
countries is low-quality infrastructure, and one of the most stark examples of infrastructure failures
is electricity supply in India. In the summer of 2012, India suffered the largest power failure in
history, a cascading blackout that plunged 600 million people into darkness at its peak (Yardley and
Harris 2012). Even under normal circumstances, however, the Indian government estimates that
shortages currently amount to about ten percent of demand at current prices. In the 2005 World
   ∗
    Allcott: New York University, NBER, and Poverty Action Lab. NYU Economics Department, 19 W. 4th St.,
New York, NY 10012. Email: hunt.allcott@nyu.edu. Collard-Wexler: Duke University and NBER. 223 Social
Sciences Building, Durham, NC 27708. Email: allan.collard-wexler@duke.edu. O’Connell: City University of New
York - Graduate Center. Department of Economics Room 5313, 365 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Email:
soconnell@gradcenter.cuny.edu. We thank Maureen Cropper, Jan De Loecker, Michael Greenstone, Peter Klenow,
Kabir Malik, Rohini Pande, Nick Ryan, Jagadeesh Sivadasan, Anant Sudarshan, and seminar participants at Brown,
Drexel, Duke, the Federal Trade Commission, Harvard, the 2013 NBER Summer Institute, the 2014 NBER Winter
IO/EEE meetings, Society for Economic Dynamics, Stanford, KU Leuven, Toulouse, Universidad de los Andes,
University of Chicago, University of Cologne, and the World Bank for helpful comments. We are particularly grateful
to Nick Bloom, Troy Smith, and Shaleen Chavda for insight into the textile industry. We thank Deepak Choudhary,
Anuradha Bhatta, Sherry Wu, and Mark Thomas for helpful research assistance and the Stern Center for Global
Economy and Business for financial support. We have benefited from helpful conversations with Jayant Deo of
India Energy Exchange, Gajendra Haldea of the Planning Commission, Partha Mukhopadhyay of the Centre for
Policy Research, and Kirit Parikh of IGIDR. We also thank A. S. Bakshi and Hemant Jain of the Central Electricity
Authority for help in collecting archival data. Of course, all analyses are the responsibility of the authors, and no
other parties are accountable for our conclusions.


                                                         1
Bank Enterprise Survey, one-third of Indian business managers named poor electricity supply as
their biggest barrier to growth. According to these managers, blackouts are far more important
than other barriers that economists frequently study, including taxes, corruption, credit, regulation,
and low human capital.1
      In this paper, we ask: how do electricity shortages affect input choices, revenue, and productivity
in the Indian manufacturing sector? One potential prior is that because electricity is an essential
input - most factories cannot produce anything without electricity for lights, motors, and machines
- shortages could significantly reduce output. On the other hand, many firms might insure them-
selves against outages by purchasing generators or otherwise substituting away from grid electricity
precisely because the potential losses are so large. The limited existing evidence could support ei-
ther argument. Foster and Steinbuks (2009) and others argue that the cost of self-generation is
relatively small, and Alam (2013) and Fisher-Vanden, Mansur, and Wang (2015) highlight ways
in which plants substitute away from electricity when shortages worsen. In contrast, Hulten, Ben-
nathan, and Srinivasan (2006) argue that growth of roads and electric generation capacity accounts
for a remarkable 50 percent of productivity growth in Indian manufacturing between 1972 and
1992.
      There are at least two reasons why this question is difficult to answer empirically. First, the
necessary data on electricity shortages are typically not available: countries that have shortages
are often the same types of countries that do not gather and disclose high-quality data on their
infrastructure. Second, shortages are not exogenous to productivity or production. For example,
rapid economic growth could cause an increase in electricity demand that leads to shortages, or
poor institutions could lead to insufficient power supply and also reduce productivity. Either of
these two mechanisms would bias estimates of the effects of shortages, albeit in opposite directions.
      We begin by detailing an extensive array of data that we have gathered on the Indian electric
power sector, including official state-specific electricity shortage estimates dating to 1992. We have
made these data publicly available as the India Energy Data Repository (Allcott, Collard-Wexler,
and O’Connell 2015). To our knowledge, these are the only systematic accounts of electricity
shortages available historically in any country suffering endemic blackouts. We document how
electricity supply in India has continually lagged demand over the past 20 years, but shortage
levels vary substantially within states over time.
      We present a modified Cobb-Douglas production function model to predict how variation in
electricity shortages affects existing plants. For plants with generators, shortages act like a time-
varying electricity input tax: during a grid power outage, the plants self-generate electricity at
higher cost. Plants without generators shut down during outages, as if hit by an infinite input
tax. This “input tax effect” causes all plants to contract, especially those without generators. The
primary productivity loss is that plants without generators waste non-flexible inputs. For example,
when textile plants shut down, their buildings and machines continue depreciating, but they leave
  1
      For a tally of responses, see Online Appendix Table A1.



                                                          2
thread on the looms without waste. Percent revenue losses must exceed percent productivity losses,
because productivity feeds directly into revenue and plants’ contraction due to the input tax effect
further reduces revenue.
   Drawing on the model, we then estimate how variation in shortages affects plants in India’s
official manufacturing survey, the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI). We instrument for shortages
with shifts in electricity supply from hydroelectric power availability, conditional on state-level
rainfall and other controls. In support of the exclusion restriction, we show that these supply shifts
are not conditionally associated with agricultural output, electricity prices, or official estimates of
what demand would be in the absence of shortages.
   Our instrumental variables estimates show that shortages have positive but economically small
effect on variable energy input costs for plants with generators: a one percentage point increase in
shortages increases their average fuel expenditures by 0.18 percent of revenues, and this is largely
offset by the decrease in grid electricity purchases. Average revenues drop by 1.1 percent, but
materials input drops by almost exactly that same amount. Since materials represent 70 percent of
revenues on average, revenue productivity (TFPR) does not decrease nearly as much as revenues.
The results are economically similar and statistically indistinguishable under a battery of alternative
specifications.
   As the instrumental variables estimates are identified by annual variation in hydro availability,
they capture primarily “short-run” effects of shortages, i.e. holding constant decisions such as
generator capital stock and plant entry and exit. To shed light on long-run effects, we briefly study
the association between plant characteristics and the average shortages in the two years preceding
plant entry. We find suggestive evidence that plants in electricity-intensive industries are less likely
to enter when shortages worsen, implying that shortages may have deeper effects on the composition
of Indian industry.
   Finally, we apply our production function model to ASI plants to simulate the effects of short-
ages. Analogous to Todd and Wolpin (2006), we validate the structural model using the agreement
of the model’s prediction with the reduced form results. The simulated effects and IV estimates
are statistically indistinguishable, which builds confidence that the estimates are reasonable and
the model captures the first-order effects of shortages. The officially-assessed level of shortages is
controversial because it is difficult to accurately assess demand in the absence of shortages. Subject
to that caveat, we simulate that the assessed level of shortages reduced producer surplus by 9.5
percent, revenues by 5.6 percent, and productivity by 1.5 percent for the average plant in 2005.
   Aside from these headline numbers, the simulations deliver two additional insights. First, short-
ages more severely affect plants that do not have generators, and generator costs have significant
economies of scale. We simulate that as a result, variable profit losses average 2-3 times larger
for small plants compared to large plants, which could distort India’s plant size distribution in
favor of large plants. Second, we simulate the effect of interruptible electricity contracts, which
offer plants reduced retail prices in exchange for accepting more frequent power outages. These



                                                   3
contracts efficiently allocate shortages to plants that can best deal with them, and our simulations
show that if implemented nationwide, they could reduce producer surplus losses by more than an
order of magnitude. While interruptible contracts do require additional physical infrastructure to
implement, they may be a useful partial solution because political barriers have prevented reforms
to India’s significantly distorted retail electricity prices.
   The remainder of this section discusses related literature. Section I details the data. Section
II provides background on the Indian electricity sector, the causes of electricity shortages, and
manufacturers’ responses to shortages. Section III presents the production function model and
TFPR estimates. Sections IV and V present the empirical strategy and results. Section VI details
the counterfactual simulations, and Section VII concludes.

   Related Literature – Our paper builds on an extensive literature that estimates the economic
effects of investment in electricity, transportation, and other infrastructure. One early group of
studies examines the effects of infrastructure investment on growth in panel data from U.S. states,
including Aschauer (1989), Holtz-Eakin (1994), Fernald (1999), Garcia-Mila, McGuire, and Porter
(1996); see Gramlich (1994) for a review. Easterly and Rebelo (1993), Esfahani and Ramirez (2002),
and Roller and Waverman (2001) carry out analogous studies using cross-country panels.
   The cross-state and cross-country literatures faced two basic problems. First, infrastructure
spending is often endogenous to economic growth. Second, using aggregate infrastructure spending
or quantity as the independent variable often hides important variation in effects between infras-
tructure of different types or quality levels. In the Indian context, for example, spending on power
plants does not necessarily translate into electricity provision, because plants are frequently offline
due to mechanical failure or fuel shortages.
   Our paper is part of a recently-growing literature that evaluates the effects of infrastructure
by combining microdata with within-country variation generated by natural experiments. This
includes Banerjee, Duflo, and Qian (2012), Donaldson (2012), and Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013)
on the effects of railroads in China, India, and the United States, Duflo and Pande (2007) on
irrigation dams in India, Jensen (2007) on information technology, Baisa, Davis, Salant, and Wilcox
(2008) on the benefits of reliable water provision in Mexico, and Baum-Snow (2007, 2013), Baum-
Snow, Brandt, Henderson, Turner, and Zhang (2013), and Baum-Snow and Turner (2012) on urban
transport expansions in China and the United States.
   A subset of this literature focuses on electricity supply: Chakravorty, Pelli, and Marchand
(2013), Dinkelman (2011), Lipscomb, Mobarak, and Barham (2013), and Rud (2012a) study the
effects of electricity grid expansions, while Alby, Dethier, and Straub (2011), Foster and Steinbuks
(2009), Steinbuks (2011), Steinbuks and Foster (2010), Reinikka and Svensson (2002), and Rud
(2012b) study firms’ generator investment decisions. Several recent papers focus specifically on
Indian electricity supply: Ryan (2013) estimates the potential welfare gains from expanding trans-
mission infrastructure, Cropper, Limonov, Malik, and Singh (2011) and Chan, Cropper, and Malik
(2014) study the efficiency of Indian coal power plants, Abeberese (2012) tests how changes in


                                                     4
electricity prices affect manufacturing productivity, and Alam (2013) studies how India’s steel and
rice milling industries respond differently to variable electricity supply. Fisher-Vanden, Mansur,
and Wang (2015) is perhaps the most closely related paper to ours. They quantify the impacts
of electricity shortages in the early 2000s on a sample of the largest Chinese manufacturing firms,
finding that as shortages worsened, firms purchased more electricity-intensive inputs.
        Our main contribution to the literature is to estimate the effects of electricity shortages across
an entire country’s manufacturing sector. Such an aggregate estimate is important because while
Indian policymakers are well aware that shortages are a problem, India also has many other prob-
lems. Quantifying the losses from this and other distortions helps policymakers to allocate scarce
time and political capital to the most “binding” constraints to growth, as suggested by the frame-
work of Hausmann, Rodrik, and Velasco (2008). Aside from quantifying the magnitude of the
problem, we also quantify a potential partial solution: interruptible contracts, which due to their
technocratic nature could be more politically feasible than market liberalization. In addition to
policy insights, we provide additional economic insights about industry in developing countries:
we show how shortages might affect the plant size distribution and point out that while shortages
might substantially affect manufacturing output, the short-run effects we estimate explain little of
the manufacturing productivity gap between India and more developed countries.2


I        Data
We have collected comprehensive data from 1992 to 2010 on weather, the power sector, and man-
ufacturing production.3 All financial amounts are deflated to real 2004 Rupees (Rs).4 Throughout
the paper, we use the word “state” to refer to states, Union Territories, and the National Capital
Region (New Delhi).

I.A        Weather Data
Rainfall data are from the University of Delaware, which provides monthly rainfall for geographic
gridpoints spaced at 1/2 degree intervals (Willmott and Matsuura 2012). We sum to total annual
rainfall by gridpoint, then calculate state-by-year average rainfall by averaging across all grid-
points within each state. Temperature data are from the National Climate Centre, which provides
daily temperatures for geographic gridpoints at one degree intervals (Srivastava, Rajeevan, and
Kshirsagar 2009). For each day at each gridpoint, we construct cooling degrees in Fahrenheit:
max{0,Day’s Average Temperature - 65}. We then calculate state-by-year average cooling degrees
    2
      See Tybout (2000) and Hsieh and Olken (2014) for a broader discussion of the firm size distribution in developing
countries. See Banerjee and Duflo (2005), Hall and Jones (1999), Hsieh and Klenow (2009), and others for discussions
of the manufacturing productivity gap.
    3
      All data are originally reported in, or calculated to correspond to, the Indian fiscal year, which is April 1 through
March 31. In this paper, “year” thus refers to the fiscal year, and for simplicity we refer to only the fiscal year’s
initial calendar year. (For example, “1998” always means “April 1998 through March 1999.”)
    4
      The exchange rate was approximately Rs 50 per U.S. dollar at that time.


                                                            5
by averaging across gridpoints within each state.5 Panel A of Table 1 summarizes the state-by-year
observations of weather data, as well as the power sector data described below.

I.B    Power Sector Data
Power sector data are from India’s Central Electricity Authority (CEA). The CEA collects many
of the same data that the U.S. Energy Information Administration makes available online. Unfor-
tunately, the CEA’s website includes only a scattered set of recent information, and their on-site
archive of hard copies is incomplete, so individual data series must be hand-collected from CEA
staff. With the cooperation of CEA management and the help of several research assistants in
New Delhi, we gathered, digitized, and cleaned extensive data on the Indian power sector dating
back to 1992 or before. The cleaned and digitized data are now available as the India Energy Data
Repository, at www.indiaenergydata.info.
    The primary measure of electricity shortages is the percent energy deficit reported in the Load
Generation Balance Reports (CEA 1993-2011b). At the end of each year, analysts from the CEA
and Regional Power Committees estimate the counterfactual quantity that would have been de-
manded in each state and month at current prices in the absence of shortages. We refer to this
state-level annual figure as “Assessed Demand.” “Energy Available” is the sum of electricity avail-
able at power plants and from net imports. The CEA measure of shortages (hereafter, “Shortage”)
is the percent of demand in state s in year t that is unmet:

                                     Assessed Demandst − Energy Availablest
                             Sst =                                                                               (1)
                                               Assessed Demandst
    Both Assessed Demand and Energy Available are growing rapidly due to economic growth:
nationwide totals of both variables increased by a factor of 2.9 between 1992 and 2010. Thus,
shortages can be thought of as the extent to which supply growth lags demand growth.
    The CEA also estimates “Peak Shortage,” an analogous measure of power shortage in peak
demand periods. Peak Shortage and Shortage are highly correlated (R2 = 0.56), and robustness
checks will show that results are similar when we use Peak Shortage instead of Shortage.
    The Shortage variable depends on an administrative assessment of counterfactual demand, so it
is almost certainly measured with error. Potential attenuation bias is one reason why it is important
to instrument for Shortage in our empirical analysis. However, correlations with independent data
suggest that the CEA’s estimates do contain meaningful information. Columns 1-3 of Table 2 show
that in the World Bank Enterprise Survey, plants in higher-Shortage states self-generate a larger
share of electricity, report worse power quality, and are more likely to report that electricity is their
primary obstacle to growth. Column 4 shows that coal power plant capacity factors are positively
   5
     “Rainfall” is more precisely “precipitation,” as it includes winter snowfall in the Himalayan states. University
of Delaware and NCC both provide precipitation and temperatures. We use the University of Delaware rainfall
because of the finer geographic scale, although the two data sources are extremely highly correlated. We need daily
temperatures to construct cooling degrees, and the University Delaware only provides monthly average temperatures.



                                                         6
                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics
                      Panel A: Weather and Power Sector Data (state-by-year)
                                                        Mean      SD     Min. Max. Obs.
             Rainfall (meters)                           1.33    0.75    0.26    5.02     536
             Average Cooling Degrees (F)                 12.2    3.33    2.67    18.3     536
             Assessed Demand (TWh)                       20.5    22.4    0.14    128      536
             Energy Available (TWh)                      18.6    19.9    0.12    107      536
             Shortage                                   0.076 0.075        0     0.36     536
             Peak Shortage                               0.12    0.11      0     0.50     536
             Total Electricity Sold (TWh)                14.0    15.0    0.08    87.5     536
             Hydro Generation (TWh)                      2.61    3.13    0.00    15.3     536
             Hydro Capacity (MW)                         840     969       0    3618      536
             Total Capacity (MW)                         2744    3099      0    16062 536
             Reservoir Inflows (billion cubic meters)    8.78    16.4      0      116     536
             Run-of-River Generation (TWh)               0.33    0.95      0     8.89     536
             Capacity Added in Previous Year (MW)         117     250    -472    2070     536
Notes: See text for variable sources and definitions. TWh stands for terawatt-hours of electricity, and MW
stands for megawatts of capacity.
                      Panel B: Annual Survey of Industries Data (plant-by-year)
                                                 Mean Std. Dev. Min.             Max.      Obs.
          Plant Number of Observations             2.20      2.13         1        19     224,684
          Revenues (million Rupees)                139      2156          0    788,868 613,930
          Capital Stock (million Rupees)            51      1044          0    297,370 612,424
          Number of Employees                       79       431          0     52,148 576,901
          Labor Cost (million Rupees)             6.39       70.5         0     16,074 602,124
          Materials Purchased (million Rupees)      90      1562          0    636,095 607,522
          Fuels Purchased (million Rupees)         5.07      102          0     39,360 596,036
          Electricity Purchased (million Rupees)   3.81      48.1         0     9,935     561,284
          Electricity Purchased (GWh)             0.95       19.2         0     6,545     594,925
          Electricity Self-Generated (GWh)         0.44      20.8         0      7,147    553,515
          Electricity Consumed (GWh)              1.38       30.0         0      7,357    596,010
          1(Self-Generator)                       0.44       0.50         0        1      615,721
          Self-Generation Share                   0.06       0.16         0        1      546,328
          Fuel Revenue Share                      0.05       0.13         0      5.48     596,036
          Electric Intensity (kWh/Rs)             0.013     0.022         0       0.37    594,882
          1(Census Scheme)                        0.14       0.34         0         1     615,721
Notes: Plant number of observations is reported at the plant level; all other variables are reported at the
plant-by-year level. Rupees are constant 2004 Rupees. Means and standard deviations are weighted by
ASI sample weights. Observation counts differ due to non-response and due to variable-specific cleaning
procedures described in Online Appendix C.




                                                    7
associated with Shortage, suggesting that coal plants are being run more to respond to a tighter
supply-demand balance.6 Furthermore, Alam (2013) shows that Peak Shortage is correlated with
her measure of blackouts, which is based on nighttime lights measured by satellites, and our main
empirical results will show that Shortage is strongly correlated with hydroelectricity supply and
with manufacturing outcomes such as self-generation.

                         Table 2: Correlations with the Shortage Variable


                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)
                                               1(Largest       Power       Self-Gen     Capacity
                                                Barrier)       Quality      Share        Factor
                   Shortage                      1.107           -8.378       0.699       0.167
                                               (0.492)**       (3.383)**   (0.213)***   (0.062)**
                   N                             2,280           2,265        1,124       1,286
                   Dependent Var. Mean            .31             6.38         5.9         .64
                   Sample                       WBES            WBES         WBES          Coal
                                                 Firms           Firms       Firms        Plants

Notes: Sample for columns 1, 2, and 3 is the 2005 World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES). Dependent
variables in columns 1-3 are, respectively, an indicator for whether the firm’s manager reports that
electricity is the primary barrier to growth, the manager’s rating of grid power quality (from 1 (extremely
bad) to 10 (excellent)), and Self-Generation Share (omitting plants that do not own generators). Sample
for column 4 is panel data on all Indian coal power plants from 1994-2009. Columns 1-3 condition on
industry indicators, and column 4 conditions on year indicators and plant fixed effects. Robust standard
errors, clustered by state. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent
confidence, respectively.

       From a publication called the General Review (CEA 1994-2012a), we observe total electricity
sold to consumers, hydroelectric generation, total hydroelectric generation capacity, total generation
capacity, and previous year capacity added, all at the state-by-year level. The General Review also
includes state-specific allocations for power plants that are jointly owned by multiple states; see
Online Appendix Table A2.
       From the annual Review of Performance of Hydro Power Stations, we observe annual inflows
into major reservoirs and electricity generation at plants behind each reservoir. Coverage grows
over the sample, due to both new construction and entry of existing reservoirs into the sample
(CEA 1993-2011c). The 1992 data include 16 reservoirs, while the 2010 data include 31 reservoirs
with plants comprising 50 percent of national hydroelectric generation capacity. To get inflow-
predicted capacity factors separately for each reservoir-year, we regress generation on inflows and
divide predicted generation by annual generation capacity.7 We will use fdt , the demeaned inflow-
   6
     This test is inspired by Fisher-Vanden, Mansur, and Wang (2015), whose empirical analysis directly uses thermal
plant capacity factors as a proxy for shortages.
   7
     By “annual generation capacity,” we refer to potential generation at full capacity. Annual generation capacity in
megawatt-hours is power production capacity in megawatts multiplied by 8760 hours per year.


                                                           8
predicted capacity factor for reservoir d in year t, in our instrument.
    The Review of Performance of Hydro Power Stations also includes capacity and annual genera-
tion for all hydro plants in India. We divide generation by annual generation capacity and de-mean
within plant to construct demeaned capacity factors fdt . We also have collected information on
each plant’s design, primarily from the Global Energy Observatory database (Gupta and Shankar
2014). About 18 percent of plants have run-of-river designs without reservoirs, meaning that they
cannot adjust generation in response to electricity demand.
    The CEA has lost its reservoir data for 2000 and its hydro plant generation data for 1992, so
we impute data in those years using rainfall within the watershed.8 Online Appendix B provides
more information on the power sector data.

I.C     Annual Survey of Industries Data
We use India’s Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for establishment-level microdata. Registered
factories with over 100 workers (the “census scheme”) are surveyed every year, while smaller estab-
lishments (the “sample scheme”) are typically surveyed every three to five years. We use the ASI
sample weights to produce estimates valid for the population of registered factories in India.9 The
publicly available ASI includes establishment identifiers that are consistent across years beginning
in 1998. While working in India, we also gained access to a version of the ASI with establishment
identifiers before 1998, allowing us to construct a plant-level panel for the entire 1992-2010 sample.
    The ASI is comparable to manufacturing surveys in the United States and other countries.
Variables include revenues, value of fixed capital stock, total workers employed, total costs of
labor, materials, fuel, and grid electricity purchased, and the physical quantity of grid electricity
purchased, self-generated electricity, and electricity consumed. Industries are grouped using India’s
NIC (National Industrial Classification) codes, which are closely related to SIC (Standard Industrial
Classification) codes. Online Appendix C gives more detail on the ASI data preparation and
cleaning.
    Panel B of Table 1 presents sample-weighted summary statistics for the ASI. There are 615,721
   8
     Specifically, we use GIS elevation maps and the latitude-longitude coordinate of each dam to determine each hydro
plant’s “watershed,” i.e. all higher elevations that drain through the plant. We aggregate rainfall across gridpoints
within the watershed to get annual within-watershed rainfall. For each plant (or reservoir), we run a regression of
rainfall on generation (or reservoir inflows) using all years of data, then predict generation in 1992 (or reservoir inflows
in 2000). Because there are not weather stations in every watershed, these within-watershed rainfall data are largely
interpolated and/or simulated, so they are highly correlated with state-level rainfall and are not perfect predictors of
reservoir inflows or generation by run-of-river plants.
   9
     While the weighted ASI sample is representative of factories registered under the Factories Act, not all manufac-
turing establishments are registered. Small factories with fewer than ten workers (or those with fewer than 20 workers
without electricity) are not required to register under the Factories Act and are thus excluded from the sampling
frame. Nagaraj (2002) points out that there may also be some registration avoidance, especially for smaller plants
near the registration threshold. While unregistered plants comprise around 80 percent of employment in the manu-
facturing sector (Hsieh and Klenow 2014), they contribute a smaller share (around one-third) to total manufacturing
output (Sincavage, Haub, and Sharma 2010). If these smaller unregistered plants are less likely to have generators
or high-quality grid power, the effects of shortages on the full manufacturing sector could be larger than for our ASI
sample.


                                                             9
plant-by-year observations at 224,684 unique plants, although observation counts differ across vari-
ables due to non-response and cleaning procedures described in Online Appendix C. 107,032 plants
will be immediately dropped from our fixed effects and difference estimators because they are ob-
served only once. For plants observed multiple times, 60 percent of intervals between observations
are one year, while 91 percent are five years or less.
     The mean (median) plant employs 79 (34) people and has gross revenues of 139 million (20
million) Rupees, or in U.S. dollars approximately $3 million ($400,000). 1(Self-Generator) is an
indicator variable for whether a plant self-generates electricity.10 Self-Generation Share is the
ratio of electricity purchased to electricity consumed, and Fuel Revenue Share is the value of fuels
purchased divided by revenues. Forty-one percent of unweighted observations are in the census
scheme, although the table shows that 14 percent of registered factories are in the census scheme
after applying sample weights.


II     Background
II.A     Reasons for Systemic Shortages
At the end of our study period in 2010, India had 174 gigawatts of utility-scale power generation
capacity, or about one-sixth the U.S. total.11 Of this, 53 percent was coal, ten percent was natural
gas, and 22 percent was hydroelectric. While power generation has been open to private investment
since India’s 1991 liberalization, 80 percent of electricity supply in 2010 remained government
owned: 51 percent by states and 29 percent by the central government. Most retail distribution
companies are also state-run, although some have been privatized.
     The immediate reason for shortages is that the retail distribution companies cannot raise retail
prices to clear the market. In fact, conditional on state and year effects, there is no correlation
between the Shortage variable and the median electricity price paid by plants in the ASI. However,
such a disconnect between retail price and market conditions is common to nearly all power systems
around the world, including many that do not experience endemic shortages. There are several
underlying reasons why shortages arise in India and many other developing countries.
     The first reason is the “infrastructure quality and subsidy trap” (McRae 2015): distribution
companies provide low-quality electricity, consumers tolerate this low quality because they pay low
prices, government subsidies cover distribution companies’ losses from the low prices, and politicians
support the subsidies to avoid voter backlash. At least since the 1970s, state-run distribution
companies have offered un-metered electricity at a monthly fixed fee and zero marginal cost to
  10
     While the ASI does not explicitly ask plants whether they own a generator, 1(Self-Generator) is a very good
proxy, as it would be unusual in India for a plant to own a generator but never use it. Comparison with the 2005
World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES) provides supporting evidence: 81 percent of plants with 100 or more workers
and 38 percent with fewer than 100 workers in the 2005 ASI ever self-generate electricity, while 83 percent of plants
with 100 or more workers and 46 percent with fewer than 100 workers in the 2005 WBES report owning generators.
  11
     Capacity and ownership statistics in this paragraph are from the General Review (CEA 2012a).




                                                         10
agricultural consumers (Bhargava and Subramaniam 2009). These low agricultural prices are cross-
subsidized by industrial electricity prices that are nearly four times higher.                        Furthermore, 26
percent of electricity generated in India in 2010 was lost due to “technical and commercial losses,”
meaning poor transmission infrastructure and uncollected bills.12                     As a result of low prices and
losses, distribution companies’ revenues from power sales were 24 percent less than costs in 2010.
    To cover the low agricultural prices, state governments promise large subsidies, which amounted
to 20 percent of distribution companies’ revenues in 2009 and 11 percent in 2010.                            Even after
receiving subsidies, however, distribution companies lost a total of $61 billion (in real 2004 dollars)
between 1992 and 2010.           Resulting financial constraints constrain infrastructure investment and
maintenance, and degraded infrastructure further increases the probability of power outages. The
government bails out the state power utilities at irregular intervals.
    A second underlying reason for shortages is underinvestment in new generation capacity: supply
is not keeping up with rapid demand growth.                 After the 1991 liberalization, investors signed 200
memoranda of understanding with the government to build 50 gigawatts of generation capacity,
but less than four gigawatts of this was actually built (Bhargava and Subramaniam 2009). Of
the 71 gigawatts of capacity targeted to be built between 1997 and 2007, only half was actually
achieved (CEA 2013). Potential power plant investors face concerns over both output demand and
input supply. Their main customers, the distribution companies, face serious financial problems.
Meanwhile, the main coal supplier is Coal India, a government-run monopoly that is struggling to
keep pace with demand growth (Chilkoti and Crabtree 2014).
    Furthermore, existing capacity is systematically underutilized. Between 1994 and 2009, Indian
coal power plants were offline about 28 percent of the time due to forced outages, planned main-
tenance, coal shortages, and other factors. When capacity is utilized, India’s coal plants are also
substantially less efficient than comparable plants in the United States (Chan, Cropper, and Malik
2014).

II.B     Variation in Shortages
Figure 1 plots the average shortage for each state over our 1992-2010 study period against its
annualized per-capita GDP growth over the same period. The figure illustrates that shortages vary
substantially across states. The cross-sectional correlation between shortages and growth is noisy
but potentially negative, suggesting that poor institutions and other factors both cause slow growth
and worsen shortages.13 On the other hand, states such as Rajasthan and Punjab have both slow
growth and low shortages, partially because slow growth makes it easier for supply to keep up with
demand. This discussion highlights the importance of instrumenting for shortages in the empirical
analysis.
  12
     Statistics on technical and commercial losses, average revenues and costs, subsidies, and losses by state distribution
companies are from Power Finance Corporation (various years).
  13
     The best fit line slopes downward (p = 0.032), but the correlation is less strong (p = 0.145) when excluding
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Pondicherry, which are very small Union Territories.


                                                            11
                             Figure 1: Average Shortages and Per Capita GDP by State




                                 .25
                                                           Andaman and Nicobar Islands




                                             .2
                   Average 1992-2010 Shortage


                                                           Jammu and Kashmir
                                                                                   Bihar
                                   .15



                                                          Uttar Pradesh

                                                                          Madhya Pradesh        Karnataka
                                                                                                            Maharashtra
                           .1




                                                                                                                         Tripura
                                                  Nagaland Manipur                                   Gujarat
                                                                                                             Andhra Pradesh
                                                  Assam                                          Meghalaya Kerala
                                                                                                               Tamil Nadu
                 .05




                                                                Punjab                            Haryana
                                                                                    Goa, Daman, and Diu
                                                                          Rajasthan Orissa                                   Pondicherry
                                                                                            West Bengal
                                                                                                  Delhi
                                                                                     Himachal Pradesh
                                 0




                                                  .02                    .04                     .06                                       .08
                                                                 1992-2010 Annualized per Capita GDP Growth


Notes: This figure plots each state’s average shortage over the 1992-2010 study period vs. its per capita
GDP growth rate over that period. Shortage data are estimated by the Central Electricity Authority.


      Shortages also vary substantially within states over time. Figure 2 illustrates this for five large
states. Uttar Pradesh experiences relatively high and variable shortages, while West Bengal has
had consistently low shortages for the past 20 years. Karnataka faced almost zero shortage in the
mid-2000s but had significant shortages in the early to mid-1990s. Gujarat had relatively reliable
power supply by the end of the study period, but shortages were more severe in the mid-2000s.
      Several factors drive this year-to-year variation in shortages. On the demand side, fast economic
growth over a few years can increase shortages, and air conditioner use during an unusually hot
summer can substantially increase electricity demand. On the supply side, power plant outages
due to maintenance or coal shortages can worsen electricity shortages. For our instrument, we will
focus on two supply shifters: new plants coming online, which can temporarily alleviate shortages,
and variation in water availability for hydroelectricity production.
      In 2009 and 2010, respectively, five and seven percent of electricity generated nationwide was
exchanged across states.14                                   Because distribution companies are able to procure power from other
states, supply-demand imbalances do not vary as much as they would under autarky.
 14
      These are our calculations based on data in the Load Generation Balance Reports.




                                                                                           12
                                  Figure 2: Shortages Over Time in Five Large States




                            .3
                            .2
                 Shortage
                            .1
                            0




                                 1990         1995           2000              2005               2010

                                                 Andhra Pradesh            Gujarat
                                                 Karnataka                 Uttar Pradesh
                                                 West Bengal               India Average


Note: Shortage data are estimated by the Central Electricity Authority.


II.C       Industrial Electricity Use in India
A natural response to shortages is to self-generate electricity. We calculate that total electricity
generation by ASI manufacturing plants equals 35 percent of their total consumption, more than
twice the 15.8 percent for US manufacturers reported in the Manufacturing Energy Consumption
Survey (MECS) (U.S. DOE 2013). Figure 3 compares the ratio of electricity generated to electricity
consumed at Indian plants (from the ASI) to US plants (from the MECS), with each dot reflecting
a three-digit NIC industry code.15
       The figure highlights two important facts. First, there is a strong correlation between the US
and Indian data, suggesting that the ASI self-generation data are meaningful. In the United States,
where power outages are relatively unimportant, many industries still produce a substantial fraction
of electricity consumed. For example, in the sugar refining industry, byproducts from sugarcane
processing can be burned to generate electricity, so there is a natural complementarity between
manufacturing operations and electricity generation. Second, the mass of points along the vertical
  15
     This ratio of generation to consumption differs slightly from Self-Generation Share because electricity generated
also includes electricity sales by manufacturing plants to others. Several industries don’t match well between the two
datasets: chemicals and refining are not broken out into many different sub-industries in the public US data, so Indian
sub-industries such as Explosives, Chemicals Not Elsewhere Classified (NEC), Matches, and Perfumes and Cosmetics
are matched to “Chemicals,” a broader industry where other establishments are more likely to have feedstock for
self-generation, and thus a higher self-generation share. Similarly, Natural Gas and LPG Bottling, Coal NEC, and
Coke Oven Products are matched to “Petroleum and Coal Products,” another very broad category.



                                                           13
             Figure 3: Manufacturing Electricity Generation in India vs. the U.S.

                                                                                                        Sugar Refining




                                   1
                                                                                 Candles
                                                                                 Petroleum Refining

                     India Generation/Consumption
                                               .8       Synthetic Fibers
                                                        Plastics
                                                                Iron and Steel
                                                                                                         Sugar Cane
                                                        Computers                     Fertilizers and Pesticides
                                       .6


                                                                                                                              Pulp and Paper
                                                           Nut Processing
                                                         Aluminum
                                                               Salt                                         Paper Bags

                                                        Industrial Chemicals      Matches
                                                            Country Liquor       Nat
                                                                                 CokeGas andProducts
                                                                                      Oven   LPG Bottling
                             .4




                                                          Bidi
                                                        Textiles NEC
                                                                                  Perfumes and Cosmetics
                                                                                  Paint
                   .2




                                                                                                            Special-Purpose Paper
                                                                                  Chemicals NEC
                                                                                 Coal NEC
                                   0




                                                    0                   .2             .4            .6                       .8               1
                                                                                 U.S. Generation/Consumption


Notes: This figure presents the ratio of electricity generation to consumption by three-digit industry. Indian
and U.S. data are from the Annual Survey of Industries and the Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey,
respectively.


axis implies that many industries in India produce much more than their counterparts in the U.S.
For instance, plastics manufacturers in the U.S. produce none of their power, while production by
Indian plastics manufacturers equals 70 percent of their electricity consumption.


III       Model and Production Function Estimation
III.A       Setup
This section presents a model of how electricity shortages affect manufacturing plants. τ indexes
points in time, which we refer to as “days.” Every day, a plant uses capital K, labor L, electricity
E, and materials M to produce output Q. Qitτ denotes the output for plant i in year t on day τ ,
         ´
and Qit ≡ τ Qitτ dτ is the annual aggregate. The measure of “days” in a year is normalized to one.
We do not model the possibility for inter-day substitution.16
       The daily production function is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of capital, labor, electricity, and
materials, with physical productivity Ait 17 :
  16
    In Online Appendix F, we present a model that does allow inter-day substitution.
  17
    Our earlier working paper used a production function that is Leontief in electricity, thus ruling out substitution
                                                                 αK αL     αM 1
away from electricity during power outages: Qitτ = min{AKitτ        Litτ Mitτ , λ Eitτ }, where λ indexes the plant’s
electricity intensity. We show in Online Appendix F that for our particular outcomes of interest, the Leontief model’s
main predictions are similar to those from the full Cobb-Douglas model.



                                                                                             14
                                                     αK αL     αM αE
                                         Qitτ = Ait Kitτ Litτ Mitτ Eitτ .                                           (2)

       Since we observe revenues rather than physical quantities produced, we need to relate revenues
to our production function in Equation (2). We assume that plants sell into a perfectly competitive
output market with price p, and we define revenue productivity (TFPR) as Ωit = Ait p.18 This
yields the following daily revenue-generating production function:

                                                      αK αL     αM αE
                                          Ritτ = Ωit Kitτ Litτ Mitτ Eitτ .                                          (3)

III.B       Power Outages, Inputs, and Timing
On each day, there are two states of the world - a power outage state and a no-outage state. The
outage occurs with probability δ, and δ is known at the beginning of the year. If there is no
outage, plants can purchase electricity from the grid at price pE,G . If there is an outage, plants
with generators can self-generate electricity at price pE,S > pE,G . Plants without generators have
zero electricity input during an outage, so they produce zero output. Notice that setting electricity
input to zero for δ percent of the year is different from a δ percent reduction in electricity use, and
the effect of power outages can be much larger than the electricity coefficient αE .
       There are three types of inputs:

   1. Fixed inputs are chosen before δ and Ωit are known. For the model and simulations, we
         assume that capital stock Kit is fixed.

   2. Yearly-flexible inputs can be modified at the beginning of a year t after observing δ and Ωit ,
         but they cannot be modified from day to day. For the model and simulations, we treat labor
         as yearly-flexible, as plants cannot hire and fire workers from one moment to the next as
         blackouts occur. This gives Litτ = Lit .19

   3. Fully-flexible inputs can be modified for each day τ after observing whether or not there is
         an outage. We treat materials and electricity as fully flexible.
  18
     We could alternatively assume that plants sell into an imperfectly competitive output market with daily demand
                                                                                                             1     1
curve QD = BP  . This yields identical results, except with revenue productivity redefined as Ω ≡ A1+  B −  and
                                               1
production function coefficients βX = αX (1+  ) for X = {K, L, M, E}. Using a demand curve that depends on annual
output would introduce dynamics into this problem, as production on day τ would affect prices, and consequently
input choices, on other days of the year.
  19
     In some industries such as plastics, material inputs can be spoiled during a power outage. In these cases, it might
be more plausible to assume that materials are also semi-flexible, and it is straightforward to change the model in
this way.




                                                          15
III.C    The Plant’s Problem
Plants have daily profit function

                      Πitτ = ΩKitαK LαitL Mitτ
                                           αM αE
                                               Eitτ − pL Lit − pM Mitτ − pE Eitτ ,               (4)

where pL , pM and pE are labor, materials, and electricity prices, respectively. We exclude capital
costs because they are sunk before the plant makes any production decisions.
   For plants with generators, the first-order condition with respect to materials yields

                                                     Ritτ
                                               αM         = pM ,                                 (5)
                                                     Mitτ

   and the first-order condition for electricity yields
                                                 
                                       Ritτ   pE,S            if outage
                                    αE      =                                  .                 (6)
                                       Eitτ   pE,G            if grid power

   Define MitG and MitS as materials input during grid power and outage periods, respectively,
and define EitG and EitS as well as RitG and RitS analogously. For non-generators, the same first
order conditions hold except that there is no production during outages, so MitS = EitS = RitS = 0.
   When setting labor, the plant begins with its yearly profit function, which is simply the weighted
average of Equation (4) over grid power and outage periods. The first-order condition yields

                                                  RitG    RitS
                                                                        
                                    αL    (1 − δ)      +δ      = pL .                            (7)
                                                  Lit     Lit
For non-generators, this simplifies to αL (1 − δ) RLitG
                                                     it
                                                        = pL , because RitS = 0.
   These first-order conditions show that for plants with generators, power outages act exactly
like a time-varying input tax on electricity. The electricity price increase causes plants to reduce
electricity input, which reduces the marginal revenue products of materials and labor, so plants
reduce those inputs as well. We call this input reduction the input tax effect. The effect is larger
for non-generators, because power outages require them to shut down, as if facing an infinite input
tax.

III.D    Effects of Shortages on Revenues and Measured Productivity
Annual revenues are the weighted average of revenues during grid power and outage periods:

                         Rit = Ωit KitαK LαitL ((1 − δ)MitG
                                                        αM αE        αM αE
                                                            EitG + δMitS EitS )                  (8)
                             =   Ωit KitαK LαitL MitαM EitαE   · Vit ,

   where


                                                       16
                            αM αE        αM αE                         αM αE        αM αE
                    (1 − δ)MitG EitG + δMitS EitS              (1 − δ)MitG EitG + δMitS EitS
  Vit =                          αM                       αE =             αM αE             . (9)
          ((1 − δ)MitG + δMitS )) ((1 − δ)EitG + δEitS ))                Mit Eit

    Using lower-case variables to denote natural logs, revenues are:


                              rit = αK kit + αL lit + αM mit + αE eit + ωit + vit .                              (10)

    Define “measured TFPR” ω̂it as the difference between logged revenues and input contributions:


                          ω̂it = rit − αK kit − αL lit − αM mit − αE eit = ωit + vit .                           (11)

    Equation (10) shows that outages reduce revenue through two mechanisms. First, plants reduce
inputs lit , mit , and eit through the input tax effect. Second, measured TFPR ω̂it changes by vit .
The revenue loss must be larger than the measured TFPR loss because the input tax effect also
causes plants to contract.
    For plants with generators, Equation (9) shows that Vit is the effect of using different bundles of
fully-flexible inputs in outage and grid power periods, relative to using the same weighted average
bundle in all periods. In the standard case where αM + αE < 1, the daily production function is
concave in Mitτ and Eitτ , so Vit < 1. For small δ, Vit is decreasing in δ: more outages lead to more
productivity loss. We call this the input variation effect.
    For plants without generators, MitS = EitS = 0, so vit simplifies to vit = (1−αM −αE ) ln(1−δ).
Given that ln(1 − δ) ≈ −δ, we have vit ≈ −δ(1 − αM − αE ). This illustrates that the measured
TFPR loss is the waste of all inputs when outages force the plant to shut down, net of αM + αE ,
the share of inputs that can be “turned off” during the outage.

III.E      Production Function Estimation
III.E.1     Static Inputs

Under the assumption of profit maximization, we use the first-order conditions to recover production
function coefficients αL , αM , and αE from yearly ASI data.20 Although the first-order conditions
derived above depend on variables that change between outage and non-outage periods and are
thus unobserved in the ASI’s annual aggregates, each can be re-arranged to obtain the usual result
that the production function coefficient equals the annual aggregate input revenue share.
    The first-order condition for labor gives:

                                                    pL Lit         pL Lit
                                     αL =                        =        .                                      (12)
                                             (1 − δ)RitG + δRitS    Rit
  20
     For additional discussion of the first-order condition approach to production function estimation, see De Loecker
and Warzynski (2012) and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013).



                                                         17
     The first-order condition for materials shows that the materials to revenue ratio never varies,
so
                                                 pM Mitτ   pM Mit
                                         αM =            =        .                                         (13)
                                                  Ritτ      Rit
     To derive αE , we re-arrange the first-order condition and take a weighted average across outage
and non-outage periods:


                       αE ((1 − δ)RitG + δRitS ) = (1 − δ)pE,G EitG + δpE,S EitS .                          (14)

     This gives

                                           (1 − δ)pE,G EitG + δpE,S EitS
                                    αE =                                 ,                                  (15)
                                                        Rit
     where the numerator is total expenditures on grid electricity plus fuel for self-generated elec-
tricity.21
     We use median regressions to separately estimate each α parameter for each of 143 three-
digit NIC industries, allowing separate linear time trends by two-digit industry. We prefer median
regressions because they are highly robust to outliers. See Online Appendix C for additional details.

III.E.2      Estimating the Capital Coefficient

It is not realistic to assume a static first-order condition for capital analogous to those for other
inputs, because capital has substantial adjustment costs and irreversibilities (Asker, Collard-Wexler,
and De Loecker 2014). Instead, we estimate αK using GMM.
     We define r̃it ≡ rit − α̂L lit − α̂M mit − α̂E eit as “transformed revenue,” after netting out the
fitted contribution from labor, materials, and electricity. We then regress transformed revenue on
capital:


                                              r̃it = αK kit + ωit .                                         (16)

     If more productive plants invest in more capital and if productivity ωit is serially correlated,
E[ωit kit ] 6= 0 and estimation in OLS would yield an upward-biased α̂K . We thus use a standard
approach from control function estimators, exploiting the fact that capital investments take time
to plan and implement. Specifically, we assume that capital requires a one year time-to-build, so
Kit = (1 − κ)Kit−1 + I(Kit−1 , ωit−1 ), where κ represents depreciation and I(Kit−1 , ωit−1 ) represents
the investment policy function, which depends on past productivity. We allow productivity to
evolve according to a general first-order Markov process ωit = g(ωit−1 ) + ξit . Under the one-year
time-to-build assumption, the productivity innovation ξit is uncorrelated with contemporaneous
  21 E,S
   p    is unobserved, so we assume that pE,S is 7 Rs/kWh, reflecting the median price reported in the 2005 World
Bank Enterprise Survey.




                                                       18
                Table 3: Production Function Parameter Estimates and TFPR

                                                             (1)      (2)     (3)
                                                            Mean    25%     75%
                              Labor (αL )                   0.078   0.053   0.101
                              Materials (αM )                0.71    0.66    0.76
                              Electricity (αE )             0.019   0.016   0.022
                              Capital (αK )                  0.16   0.10    0.21

                              Capital (αK ) from OLS        0.19    0.12     0.24
                              Returns to Scale              0.96    0.94     1.00

                              Measured TFPR (ωit )       2.12     1.44    2.61
Notes: Distribution statistics for production function coefficients and returns to scale are based on 2,424
three-digit NIC industry-by-year observations. Distribution statistics for measured TFPR are based on
589,779 plant-year observations.


capital stock: E[ξit kit ] = 0. We use this moment condition in GMM to estimate αK from Equation
(16), with bootstrapped standard errors.22

III.E.3      Production Function Estimates

Table 3 presents summary statistics on the estimated production function parameters. There are 19
years of coefficients for 143 different industries, so we present the mean and 25th and 75th percentiles
of the distribution of each α. The mean labor, materials, electricity, and capital coefficients are
0.078, 0.71, 0.019, and 0.16, respectively.
       The mean returns to scale coefficient is 0.96. Slightly decreasing returns to scale are common
in the production function literature; see, for instance, Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2015). For
comparison, we also include the αK from OLS estimation of Equation (16). As predicted above,
the OLS estimates are biased slightly upward.


IV        Estimation Strategy
IV.A        Translating the Model to an Estimating Equation
The model suggests a set of outcomes that might be affected by electricity shortages. Plants
with generators will use them during outages, so shortages should be positively associated with
Self-Generation Share and Fuel Revenue Share for self-generators. Both self-generators and non-
generators will reduce electricity, materials, and labor inputs, and measured TFPR will also de-
crease. Revenues should decrease due to decreases in both inputs and measured TFPR.
  22
     We could also estimate equation (16) in OLS with first differences if we made the stronger assumption that
productivity is a random walk, i.e. ωit = ωit−1 + ξit . Thus, the purpose of the GMM procedure is to allow a more
flexible time-series process for productivity.



                                                       19
       We use i, j, s, and t, respectively, to index plants, two-digit NIC industries, states, and years.
A simplified version of our estimation strategy is to regress outcomes Yijst on the CEA Shortage
variable Sst , controlling for year indicators θt , industry-by-year indicators µjt , and plant indicators
φi :


                                       Yijst = ρSst + θt + µjt + φi + εijst .                                      (17)

       This equation uses Shortage Sst as a proxy for the model’s outage probability δ. In reality, the
supply-demand imbalances captured by Sst are translated to plant-specific outage probabilities δ
through potentially-endogenous decisions by electricity distribution companies. For example, larger
or more productive plants may be able to secure preferential electricity access as shortages worsen.
Using Shortage instead of δ captures the “reduced form” of this process. Of course, estimates of
ρ from this equation are also “reduced form” in the sense that they are not constrained by the
assumptions of the model.23

IV.B        Instrumenting for Shortages
There are several reasons why shortages might be endogenous in Equation (17). For example,
improvements in state-level economic conditions or institutions could increase productivity and
revenue, and the resulting increase in electricity demand could cause shortages. Alternatively,
shortages could be measured with error, causing attenuation bias.
       A valid instrument for shortages must shift electricity supply but affect manufacturers only
through shortages. Our instrument exploits supply shifts from hydroelectricity generation: because
hydro plants have very low physical marginal cost, their annual output depends primarily on a water
availability constraint determined by rainfall at higher elevations (or snowfall in the Himalayan
states). The instrument Zst is predicted hydro generation Hst as a share of predicted electricity
demand Q̃st :

                                                             Hst
                                                     Zst =        .                                                (18)
                                                             Q̃st
       Because shortages directly affect actual consumption, we predict state s electricity demand
using the product of total electricity sold in all other states in year t and the sample average ratio
  23
    Several unmodeled effects of shortages might be relevant. First, if plants substitute production across days in
response to outages, our estimates capture this by estimating net effects of shortages over a year. Second, if shortages
reduce output quality, this will appear in revenues and/or TFPR. Third, effects on input demand are not constrained
by our yearly-flexible vs. fully-flexible categorizations or by Cobb-Douglas substitution patterns. Fourth, if inputs
or outputs are traded on local markets instead of national or international markets with exogenous prices, shortages
could affect plants through changes in other input or output prices, not just through the price and availability of
electricity.




                                                          20
of sales in state s to sales in all other states. Indexing other states by r and years by y, this is:

                                                            2010
                                            X               X            Qsy
                                   Q̃st =          Qrt ·            P            .                 (19)
                                            r6=s           y=1992       r6=s Qry


   For Hst , one option is to use actual hydroelectricity generation. In theory, however, reservoirs
can store water for future years if demand is low in the present year, which means that hydro
generation might be simultaneously determined with manufacturing production. For our primary
specification, we thus predict state-level hydro generation using reservoir inflows and generation
from “run-of-river” hydro plants that have no reservoirs to store water.
   More precisely, recall that Section I introduced fdt , reservoir or plant d’s demeaned capacity
factor in year t. We get the state average capacity factor, weighting by annual generation capacity
cd and by ads ∈ [0, 1], the share of d’s output that is contractually allocated to state s. Multiplying
by C̃st , the state’s predicted annual hydro generation capacity, translates the capacity factor to
predicted hydro generation Hst . Denoting Ds as the set of reservoirs and run-of-river plants ever
observed in state s, we have:
                                                       P
                                                  d∈Ds             cd ads fdt
                                     Hst = C̃st · P                           .                    (20)
                                                                d∈Ds cd ads

   We predict hydro capacity C̃st using Equation (19), except with C substituted for Q. We
use predicted instead of actual hydro capacity because the latter is determined endogenously by
economic growth over the study period.

IV.B.1    Rainfall Controls

Of course, precipitation affects India’s economy in ways other than just relaxing water availability
constraints for hydroelectricity plants. To address this, we include rainfall controls in our primary
specification. We get each state’s sample average annual rainfall R̄s and include indicator variables
for five bins above and five bins below R̄s at 60 millimeter intervals. (We also present alternative
specifications with 50 millimeter bins, 100 millimeter bins, and a simple linear control.) Because
rainfall is also correlated with temperature, which also can affect manufacturers, we control for
average cooling degrees Wst .
   There are three sources of variation in the hydro instrument conditional on rainfall. First, the
cross-state contracts measured by allocations ads mean that in some cases, shortages in a given state
will depend on water availability in another state. Second, rainfall in hydro plant watersheds differs
from rainfall in the same state outside of the watersheds. Half of the geographic gridpoints in our
rainfall data are not in or near a hydro plant watershed, and rainfall can vary substantially across
even small geographic regions (Dell, Jones, and Olken 2014, Auffhammer, Hsiang, Schlenker, and
Sobel 2013). Furthermore, dams are more likely to be placed in more steeply-sloped terrain (Duflo
and Pande 2007), where local rainfall variation can be especially significant (Lipscomb, Mobarak,


                                                           21
and Barham 2013).
       Third, even if there were no cross-state contracts and every point in a state received the same
rainfall, the slope of the relationship between rainfall and Zst differs across states because states
capture different shares of rainfall for hydroelectricity generation. Some states, such as West
Bengal, receive relatively high rainfall but convert little into hydroelectricity. Other states, such
as Karnataka, have lower-than-average rainfall but derive a relatively large share of electricity
from hydro. The same variation in rainfall thus has a much larger effect on electricity supply in
Karnataka than in West Bengal.24

IV.C        Estimating Equation
Our empirical specification takes the intuition from Equation (17) and instruments for Sst , adding
the vector of rainfall bins Rst , cooling degree controls Wst , state-specific time trends ψs t, and also
state split indicators Λst that control for three changes in state geographic definitions:25


                      Yijst = ρSst + βRst + νWst + Λst + ψs t + θt + µjt + φi + εijst .                              (21)

       Observations are weighted by ASI sample weights. Our primary specifications use the fixed
effects estimator, although we also present estimates using the difference estimator. Because Sst
and Zst vary by state and year, errors are clustered by state-year. Our primary specifications use
two-way clustering by plant and state-year (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).26

IV.D        Discussion
Several features of the empirical strategy merit discussion. First, we include state-specific trends
ψs t because they substantially improve first stage power. They are especially important in two
robustness checks, one which uses ln(Energy Available) instead of Shortage Sst as the endogenous
variable, and another that uses actual hydro generation for Hst . Both ln(Energy Available) and
actual hydro generation have highly heterogeneous state-specific trends, the former because of
differing economic growth rates and the latter because of differing trends in the importance of
  24
     In fact, the first stage relationship between hydro production and shortages is clearly visible in the raw data
in Karnataka. We illustrate this in Online Appendix Figure A4. Online Appendix Figure A5 plots each state’s
sample average rainfall against the average ratio of hydro generation to total consumption; the two quantities are
uncorrelated.
  25
     In November 2000, three new states (Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, and Uttarakhand) were split from three existing
states (Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and Uttar Pradesh). Weather, hydro plants and reservoirs, and ASI plants can be
assigned to post-2000 state definitions in all years of the sample. However, the CEA reports Shortages and other
state-level variables only for the combined state areas before 2001 or 2002 (depending on the variable). Before those
years, we assign data for the combined states to plants in either of the eventually-separate states. State split indicators
Λst take different values when a state’s geographic definition changes.
  26
     We do not have the downward-biased standard errors described by Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004).
They study traditional differences-in-differences estimators, in which the dependent variable of interest is serially
correlated. By contrast, Online Appendix Table A6 shows that the instrument Zst is not serially correlated. Notwith-
standing, we also present robustness checks with standard errors clustered by state.



                                                            22
hydro relative to other generation sources.27 Unless they are absorbed by the ψs t controls, these
heterogeneous trends substantially reduce precision.
       Second, because the estimates include year indicators, ρ measures effects of shortages Sst on
plants in state s relative to plants in other states in the same year. If there are cross-state spillover
effects, for example if customers substitute to plants in other states as production in state s is
slowed by outages, our estimates reflect some reallocation of output across states, not just a loss
of aggregate output. Thus, the estimates are relevant for state-level policymakers who want to
know how improvements in electricity supply in their state affect outcomes for their manufacturers
relative to manufacturers in other states. The estimates are informative about a national-level
supply improvement only if cross-state spillovers are relatively small.
       Third, the coefficients will largely be identified by states with more variation in hydro generation,
which tend to also be the states where hydro represents a large share of total supply. While
some hydro-heavy states are small mountainous areas such as Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, and
Uttarakhand, other states such as Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Orissa, and Punjab are
both large and rely heavily on hydroelectricity.28
       Fourth, the empirical estimates will primarily reflect short-run effects. Because of the plant
fixed effects φi , the ρ parameter reflects impacts of shortages only on continuing plants. Entry,
exit, and even generator adoption or resale are unlikely responses to variation in shortages Sst
driven by year-to-year variation in hydro availability Zst .

IV.E        Evaluating the Instrument with State-Level Data
Table 4 evaluates the instrument. All regressions are analogues to the first stage, regressing a
dependent variable on the hydro instrument Zst , controlling for weather Rst and Wst , state trends
ψs t, year indicators θt , and state split controls Λst . These regressions are estimated at the state-
by-year level, with observations weighted by the number of ASI establishments. Column 1 presents
the direct analogue to the first stage, showing that a one percentage point increase in instrumented
supply decreases shortages by 0.177 percentage points. The fact that the coefficient is smaller
than one (in absolute value) implies that states partially offset an increase in supply by decreasing
generation from other sources and by importing less from or exporting more to other states.
       For an instrument to be valid, it must shift supply without affecting manufacturing other than
through shortages. Columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 present evidence that this is the case. Recall that the
CEA separately reports the two components of shortages: Assessed Demand and Energy Available.
  27
     Online Appendix Figures A6 and A7 illustrate this. For example, the economy in Andhra Pradesh grows rapidly
over the study period, while Uttar Pradesh grows relatively slowly. Residual of year effects θt , ln(Energy Available)
trends steeply downward in Uttar Pradesh and steeply upward in Andhra Pradesh. For hydro generation, states such
as Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka have relatively steep downward trends in the share of consumption supplied by
hydro, while states such as Gujarat and West Bengal have small and relatively flat hydro generation over the study
period. Thus, residual of year effects θt , the instrument constructed with actual hydro generation slopes steeply
downward in Karnataka and steeply upward in West Bengal.
  28
     Online Appendix Figure A5 and Table A4 present more detail.



                                                         23
Column 2 shows that Energy Available is associated with the instrument, but column 3 shows that
Assessed Demand is not. It is difficult to conceive of a story under which the exclusion restriction
is violated but the instrument is not associated with electricity demand. Column 4 provides further
evidence on this, showing that agricultural output is not associated with the instrument (conditional
on rainfall).

                            Table 4: Evaluating the Hydro Instrument


                                        (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                 ln(Energy    ln(Assessed    ln(Agri    ln(Median
            Dependent Variable:      Shortage    Available)    Demand)       Output)      Price)
            Hydro                     -0.163       0.206         0.029        -0.274       -0.149
                                    (0.059)***   (0.074)***      (0.092)      (0.246)     (0.140)
            Number of Obs.             536          536           536          518          540

Notes: Observations weighted by number of ASI establishments in the state-year cell. Robust standard
errors. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.

    If supply shocks affected electricity prices instead of shortages, this would be equally interesting
but should be interpreted differently. Column 5 regresses the median electricity price paid by ASI
plants in each state and year on the instrument, finding no statistically significant correlation. This
confirms that that when hydro production shifts supply, distribution companies clear the market
by adjusting outages, not by adjusting prices.


V     Empirical Results
V.A     First Stages
Table 5 presents first stage estimates. There are two panels of estimates, corresponding to two
groups of outcomes: energy inputs and then materials, labor, revenue, and TFPR. Regressions
with Self-Generation Share and ln(Fuel Revenue Share) include only the 54 percent of plants in the
2005 ASI that ever self-generate electricity, because Self-Generation Share is mechanically zero for
non-generators, and our model similarly predicts zero impact of outages on Fuel Revenue Share for
non-generators.29 For this reason, and also because of missing data and outlier flags, the sample
sizes differ across columns.
    While the exact coefficient estimates differ slightly due to the different samples, the estimates
across all columns are very similar to each other and to the state-level estimates in column 1 of
Table 4. The instruments are powerful: the cluster and heteroskedasticity-robust Kleibergen-Paap
F-statistics range from 14 to 17. For comparison, the Stock and Yogo (2005) critical values for one
  29
     Online Appendix Table A17 plus additional regressions confirm that shortages have no effect on fuel revenue
shares for non-generators.



                                                      24
instrument and one endogenous regressor are 8.96 and 16.38 for maximum 15 and 10 percent bias,
respectively.

                           Table 5: First Stages for Base IV Estimates
                                        Panel A: Energy Inputs
                                               (1)         (2)                 (3)
                        Second Stage        Self-Gen    ln(Fuel           ln(Electric
                        Dependent Var:       Share    Rev Share)           Intensity)
                        Hydro                -0.168      -0.171              -0.156
                                          (0.0407)*** (0.0422)***        (0.0403)***
                        Obs.                240,743     291,759             479,616
                        Clusters             47,575      55,939             111,819
                        Clusters (2)           535         535                 536
                        1st Stage F-Stat      17.00       16.53               14.98
                           Panel B: Materials, Labor, Revenue, and TFPR
                                   (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)
        Second Stage                                        ln(Earnings/
        Dependent Var:       ln(Materials) ln(Workers)         Worker)      ln(Revenue)     ln(TFPR)
        Hydro                    -0.152           -0.152        -0.161         -0.152          -0.155
                              (0.0403)***     (0.0403)***    (0.0422)***    (0.0404)*** (0.0400)***
        Obs.                    495,043          502,724       456,443        501,130         479,313
        Clusters                115,040          116,803       110,213        116,231         112,371
        Clusters (2)               536             536            482            536             536
        1st Stage F-Stat          14.23           14.19          14.63          14.17           14.90
Notes: This table presents the first stage estimates for the IV regressions in Tables 6 and 7. The dependent
variable for these first stage regressions is Shortage Sst . Samples for columns 1 and 2 in Panel A are
limited to plants that ever self-generate electricity. F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-
robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by plant and
state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.



V.B     Effects of Shortages
V.B.1     Energy Inputs

Table 6 presents estimates of Equation (21) for energy inputs. Panels A and B present OLS and
instrumental variables results, respectively. The IV estimates show that a one percentage point in-
crease in Shortage (for example, an increase from 0.1 to 0.11) causes manufacturers to increase the
share of electricity self-generated by 0.442 percentage points. If manufacturing electricity demand
were fully inelastic and shortages mapped one-for-one into increases in outages δ for manufacturers,
then the coefficient on Shortage in column 1 would be one. However, plants with generators will
substitute away from electricity through the input tax effect, and electricity distribution compa-
nies may impose more or less of the marginal shortage on manufacturers instead of agricultural,
residential, or other consumers.


                                                     25
    The IV estimate in column 2 shows that a one percentage point increase in Shortage increases
fuel revenue share by 3.294 percent. Using the fact that the mean fuel revenue share is 0.055, the
point estimate suggests that a one percentage point increase in shortages increases fuel costs by
(3.294×1%) × 0.055 ≈0.18 percent of revenues. Even a large shortage increase thus imposes only a
relatively small fuel cost increase to plants with generators - and this is largely offset by a decrease
in purchased electricity costs.
    Can plants become less electricity-intensive, in the short-run, as electricity becomes scarce?
Column 3 shows that on average, the answer is no: shortages do not statistically affect the ratio of
physical electricity use to revenue. The standard errors rule out that the average plant responds
to a one percentage point increase in shortages by reducing electric intensity by more than about
1.5 percent.
    The OLS point estimates differ from the IV estimates, and the directions are consistent with two
biases hypothesized earlier: simultaneity bias (economic growth causes shortages) and measurement
error. Self-Generation Share is less subject to the former bias, as it is not clear that economic growth
would have any direct effect on this variable. The fact that the OLS point estimates are smaller
than the IV estimates suggests that instrumenting helps slightly to address attenuation bias. The
variables in columns 2-3, however, are ratios to revenues, which increase with economic growth.
The coefficients are thus strongly downward biased.

                         Table 6: Effects of Shortages on Energy Inputs

                                                  (1)            (2)          (4)
                                               Self-Gen       ln(Fuel    ln(Electric
                          Dependent Var:         Share     Rev Share) Intensity)
                                               Panel A: OLS
                          Shortage               0.282          0.917       -0.539
                                             (0.0337)*** (0.176)*** (0.122)***
                                                Panel B: IV
                          Shortage               0.442          3.294       0.0926
                                              (0.153)***    (1.032)***     (0.755)
                          Obs.                 240,743        291,759      479,616
                          Clusters              47,575         55,939      111,819
                          Clusters (2)            535            535          536
                          1st Stage F-Stat       17.00          16.53       14.98
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (21). Panel B instruments for Shortage using hydro
availability. Samples for columns 1 and 2 are limited to plants that ever self-generate electricity. F-statistic
is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard
errors, with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90,
95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                      26
V.B.2     Non-Energy Inputs, Revenue, and TFPR

Table 7 presents effects of shortages on non-energy inputs, revenue, and revenue productivity.
Column 1-3 measure impacts on materials and labor. Column 1 shows that a one percentage point
increase in Shortage causes a 1.137 percent decrease in materials input. Column 2 shows that
shortages do not statistically affect labor input, as measured by total persons ever employed during
the year. This is not entirely surprising, since our instrument captures year-to-year variation in
shortages that might not be observed by the plant at the time it hires labor. Even though plants
might not be able to reduce their number of workers, they might reduce hours worked in response
to shortages. However, column 3 confirms that plants are unable to reduce earnings per worker as
shortages worsen. This suggests that materials inputs tend to be determined after plants recognize
electricity supply shifts - perhaps on a day-to-day basis - while labor input is less flexible.

         Table 7: Effects of Shortages on Materials, Labor, Revenue, and TFPR

                                (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)         (5)
                                                            ln(Earnings/
          Dependent Var:       ln(Materials) ln(Workers)       Worker)      ln(Revenue) ln(TFPR)
                                               Panel A: OLS
          Shortage                -0.00711      -0.0138         0.161            0.116     0.0543
                                  (0.0631)     (0.0461)      (0.0421)***      (0.0631)*   (0.0387)
                                                 Panel B: IV
          Shortage                 -1.137        -0.243         -0.267          -1.091      -0.304
                                 (0.511)**      (0.339)        (0.218)        (0.536)**    (0.259)
          Obs.                    495,043       502,724        456,443         501,130    479,313
          Clusters                115,040       116,803        110,213         116,231    112,371
          Clusters (2)               536          536            482              536        536
          1st Stage F-Stat          14.23        14.19          14.63           14.17       14.90
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (21). Panel B instruments for Shortage using hydro
availability. F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument
test. Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically
different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.

   Columns 4 and 5 present effects on log revenue r and log TFPR ω, respectively. The IV estimates
in column 4 show that a one percentage point increase in shortages causes a 1.091 percent decrease
in revenues. In the special case distribution companies impose the marginal shortage proportionally
to manufacturers vs. other consumers, no plants self-generate, plants have no yearly-flexible inputs,
and δ is small, this coefficient would be approximately one - for example, an increase in shortages
from 0 to 0.01 would reduce revenue by one percent. In reality, some plants have generators, which
attenuates the revenue effects, while all plants can reduce yearly-flexible inputs, which magnifies
the revenue effects.
   Column 5 shows that shortages have statistically zero effect on log TFPR, with a 90-percent
confidence interval from -0.69 to 0.085 percent. Given the standard errors, a statistically zero


                                                     27
effect is exactly what the model predicts. For plants without generators, Equation (11) predicts a
ln(TFPR) loss of vit = (1 − αM − αE ) ln(1 − δ). As shown in Table 3, the mean αM and αE are 0.71
and 0.019, respectively. Thus, a one percentage point increase in δ would reduce non-generators’
TFPR by approximately (1-0.71-0.019)× 1% ≈ 0.27%, and the effect on self-generators’ TFPR
should be smaller. In Section VI, we show that our point estimate of -0.304 is very close to the
simulated model prediction.
   The model also predicts that the ln(TFPR) loss is weakly smaller than the ln(revenue) loss,
because the revenue loss equals the TFPR loss plus losses from reductions in yearly-flexible and
fully-flexible inputs. The point estimates in columns 4 and 5 bear this out. Statistically, the TFPR
coefficient in column 5 is less negative than the revenue coefficient in column 4 with a p-value of
0.077 in a one-sided test and 0.15 in a two-sided test.
   Comparing the OLS estimates in Panel A to the IV estimates in Panel B strongly suggests
simultaneity bias. All input, output, and TFPR coefficients are positively biased relative to the IV
estimates, suggesting that the improved economic conditions that increase shortages also increase
wages, productivity, and revenue. Without instrumenting for shortages, one might falsely conclude
that shortages are good for manufacturers.

V.C     Robustness Checks
Tables 6 and 7 are highly robust to a battery of robustness checks and alternative specifications.
Here we present the overview; see Online Appendix E for details.
   Estimates are very similar and statistically indistinguishable when using the difference esti-
mator, omitting industry-by-year controls µjt , eliminating or tightening the criteria for dropping
outliers, or using the CEA’s estimated Peak Shortage or supply (i.e. ln(Energy Available)) instead
of Shortage as the endogenous right-hand-side variable. The fact that using supply instead of Short-
age as the endogenous variable gives similar estimates is unsurprising, because as shown in Table 4,
the instrument affects only supply, not demand. It is reassuring, however, because unlike Shortage,
Energy Available does not rely on the CEA’s assessment of counterfactual demand. The similarly
in results suggests that the Shortage variable does not suffer from some non-classical measurement
error that an instrumental variable cannot address. Clustering by state instead of using two-way
clustering only mildly changes the standard errors; no discrete significance levels change, and no
first-stage F-statistic drops below 10.
   Estimates are economically similar and statistically indistinguishable when using linear rainfall
or 100mm or 50mm rainfall bins instead of 60mm bins, or when using rainfall data from the National
Climate Centre instead of University of Delaware. Estimates are statistically indistinguishable
when constructing the instrument with actual hydro generation for Hst instead the prediction from
reservoirs and run-of-river plants, except that the Self-Generation Share coefficient is statistically
larger and the ln(Electric Intensity) coefficient is statistically negative. This latter result suggests
that plants may indeed become less electric intensive as electricity shortages worsen. Finally,


                                                  28
results are qualitatively similar under six different approaches to calculating production functions
and TFPR.

V.D     Associations with Longer-Term Shortage Variation
Our main IV results identify the effects of year-to-year shortage variation. How do shortages affect
manufacturers in the long run? Rigorous causal evidence is challenging, because we do not have a
plausible instrument for long-run shortage variation. This section addresses long-run effects using
correlational evidence.
   Specifically, we test how shortages preceding the year of entry are associated with entrant plants’
technology choices. Define Yijst as an outcome for plant i which enters in year t, and define ζs as
state-specific indicator variables. S̄st is the average of Shortage in state s in year t and the one year
before; this proxies for potential entrants’ beliefs about future shortages. Averaging over two years
both reduces measurement error and smooths over idiosyncratic year-to-year variation that should
not impact potential entrants’ beliefs about future shortages. We run the following regression with
plant-level data:


                                Yijst = ρS̄st + Λst + ζs + θt + µjt + st                           (22)

   Standard errors are clustered by state.
   Table 8 presents results. Column 1 considers the industry average electric intensity, i.e. the
average ratio of electricity use to revenues for all plants in the same three-digit industry as plant
i. (This column excludes industry-by-year indicators µjt .) For readability, electric intensity is
normalized to units of kWh per 100 Rupees of revenue; the mean is 1.35 kWh/100 Rupees. A
negative coefficient would imply that plants in electricity-intensive industries are less likely to enter
when shortages are higher. This would be predicted by an extension of our model in Section III in
the direction of Melitz (2003), in which potential entrant plants decide whether to enter based on
expectations of δ and their productivity shock Ωit . For each expected δ and production technology
α, there is a cutoff productivity Ω(δ, α) above which plants will enter. An increase in δ reduces
profitability more (and thus increases Ω(δ, α) more) for self-generators in industries with high αE ,
because more self-generation causes larger cost increases when αE is large. Thus, an increase in
expected shortages should reduce entry more for higher-αE industries, reducing entrants’ overall
average electric intensity. Indeed, the point estimate shows that a one percentage point increase in
shortages is associated with a 0.00463 kWh/Rs decrease in the industry-level electric intensity of
entrant plants, or about 0.34 percent of the mean.
   Higher shortages should also increase the return to generator ownership. Indeed, Column 2
shows that shortages in the entry year S̄st are positively associated with higher generator ownership
rates for entrants. This association is small, however: a one percentage point increase in shortages
is associated with a 0.246 percentage point increase in generator ownership. Such a small coefficient
is quite remarkable: generator ownership rates vary substantially across states, ranging from a low

                                                   29
         Table 8: Association Between Entering Plant Characteristics and Shortages


                                           (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)
                                       Ind. Elec/      1(Self     ln(Capital/     ln(Labor/     ln(Matls/
            Dependent Variable:           Rev          Gen)          Rev)            Rev)          Rev)
            Shortage at Entry            -0.463        0.246         -0.701         -0.078        -0.025
                                        (0.179)**    (0.074)***      (0.422)        (0.135)      (0.073)
            Number of Obs.              100,496       100,496        99,306        100,246       99,529
            Industry-by-year effects      No            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (22). “Shortage at Entry” is the mean of Sst in the plant’s
entry year and the one year before. Robust standard errors, clustered by state. *,**, ***: Statistically
different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.


near 10 percent in some lower-income states to more than 80 percent in Uttar Pradesh, New Delhi,
and Haryana. Column 2 suggests that little of this variation is driven by state average shortages.
       Aside from the generator adoption and extensive margin choices, entrant plants can also choose
production technologies. Columns 3-5 test whether shortages at the time of entry are associated
with entrants’ factor shares.30 Theory gives no unambiguous prediction about whether shortages
should increase or decrease various factor shares. For example, higher shortages increase generator
adoption, which mechanically increases capital stock. On the other hand, higher shortages also
decrease expected capital utilization, especially for non-generators, and this could cause them to
switch to a less capital-intensive technology. Column 3 shows that a one percentage point increase
in shortages is associated with a marginally significant 0.7 percent decrease in capital intensity.
As predicted, additional (unreported) regressions shows that the negative association is stronger
(ρ̂ = −0.96) for non-generators. Columns 4 and 5 show that labor and materials shares are not
associated with S̄st .


VI        Simulations
VI.A        Overview
In this section we apply the model in Section III to the plants and production function param-
eters in the Annual Survey of Industries data. There are several objectives. First, we simulate
effects of shortages and test whether they line up with the estimates in Section V. Second, we
simulate heterogeneous effects of shortages, which we do not have the power to detect empirically.
Third, we simulate a counterfactual policy, offering interruptible electricity contracts, which could
substantially reduce the effects of shortages.
  30
    Specifically, these are the natural log of the ratio of average input to average revenue, where the averages are
taken across all years a plant is observed. The logs help to reduce the influence of outliers, which is the same role
that median regressions play when estimating the production function parameters α in Section III.E.


                                                         30
       The simulations consider the population of plants that appear in the ASI in 2005.31 Each plant
is characterized by estimated production function parameters α and exogenous state variables
Ki2005 , Ωi2005 , and generator ownership. For the price ratio of grid-purchased to self-generated
electricity, we use the World Bank Enterprise Survey medians: pE,S /pE,G = 7/4.5 ≈ 1.56. Given
this information and an assumed δ, we simulate production decisions using the first-order conditions
in Section III. See Online Appendix F for more details on the simulation procedure.
       For the next several subsections until Section VI.E, our reported “effects of shortages” reflect
a change from δ = 0 to δ = Ss2005 , the CEA estimated Shortage in the plant’s state in 2005. The
mean Ss2005 across all plants observed in 2005 is 7.2 percent. Although we have shown that the
variation in Sst is meaningful for empirical estimates, we caution that this official assessment is a
highly imperfect proxy for the level of Indian manufacturers’ true outage probability δ.
       To more closely match our empirical estimates, we weight by each plant’s sampling weight and
report the weighted average simulated effect of the change in δ. This is different than reporting
output-weighted effects, which might be informative about aggregate sectoral implications. As we
discuss below, output-weighted effects on most outcomes would be smaller, because the largest
plants are much more likely to own generators.

VI.A.1        Modeling Generator Adoption

We model the decision to purchase a generator as a binary choice: either a plant owns a generator
that is large enough to provide full backup during a power outage, or it does not own a generator.
Because the ASI does not include data on generator capacity, we construct a back-of-the-envelope
estimate of each plant’s capacity requirement: we transform a plant’s total electricity consumption
Eit (in kilowatt-hours) into required generation capacity assuming that plants use a constant flow
of power while operating an average of six hours per day.32 Under this assumption, the median
generator capacity requirement is 500 kilowatts.
       We model that a plant will purchase a generator if the simulated variable profit increase exceeds
the cost. The simulated variable profit increase is just the simulated profits with vs. without
a generator, given the plant’s α, Ki2005 , Ωi2005 , and an outage probability δ. We assume that
generator cost C G (ci ) is log-linear in plant i’s required capacity ci , i.e. ln C G (ci ) = σ0 + σ1 ln(ci ).
       We estimate σ0 and σ1 in GMM using the 1(Self-Generator) variable from the ASI and assuming
δ = Sst , matching mean generator adoption and also the covariance between generator adoption
and ln(ci ). Estimates reflect strong economies of scale in generator costs: the estimated σ1 is 0.83
(se=0.01), and this is statistically and economically similar to direct quotes of generator purchase
costs. The estimated intercept σ0 is also comparable to direct price quotes, implying that fixed
  31
     We chose 2005 because it allows comparison to the 2005 World Bank Enterprise Survey and because the assessed
shortages are close to average: over the 1992-2010 sample, the average nationwide shortage ranged from 6.4 to 11.1
percent, and the mean reported in Table 1 is 7.6 percent. Online Appendix Figure A8 presents predicted revenue
losses when simulating with each year between 1992 and 2010, showing that 2005 is not unusual.
  32
     Changing this assumption about the number of operating hours per day would only rescale our generator cost
estimates; the simulation predictions would otherwise be unchanged.


                                                       31
costs are large enough to explain why so many Indian plants do not have generators. See Online
Appendix VI.A.1 for details.

VI.B      Effect of Shortages
VI.B.1      Comparing Empirical Estimates to Short-Run Simulations

Panel A of Table 9 presents the effects of changing δ from zero to Ss,2005 on average revenue,
TFPR, self-generation share, material and labor inputs. Column 1 presents “exogenous generator
simulations,” i.e. simulated short-run effects holding fixed the generator ownership observed in
the ASI. This is appropriate for comparison to the IV estimates because the instrument uses
annual electricity supply shifters, and plants are unlikely to have responded by adopting or selling
generators. Column 2 adds predictions based on the instrumental variable estimates: the predicted
effects of a 7.2 percent shortage given the IV point estimates in Tables 6 and 7.33 Column 3 presents
the p-value of a test that the simulation result differs from the IV estimate.
    There is remarkable agreement between the empirical estimates and simulation results. Average
revenue losses are 5.6 percent in the simulations and 7.7 percent from the IV. Both the simulations
and IV predict that TFPR losses are much smaller than revenue losses, with predictions of 1.5
percent and 2.2 percent from the simulations and IV, respectively. Given that the TFPR effect is
relatively small, the decrease in revenues must be caused by decreased input use. This is indeed
the case: the model predicts a 5.6 percent decrease in materials and labor, respectively, while the
IV estimates show 8.1 and 1.7 percent decreases. The simulated and estimated increases in Self-
Generation Share also line up closely. Column 3 shows that the simulation and IV estimates are
highly statistically indistinguishable except for the effects on labor input, which has a p-value of
0.11. The model assumes that labor is set with knowledge of the current year’s shortage; if workers
are instead hired before the effects of new power plant capacity or hydro availability are known,
this would explain the difference between the estimated and simulated effects.
    Column 4 presents self-reported revenue losses from the 2005 World Bank Enterprise Survey; this
number is closely comparable to the simulation and IV estimates. Overall, the close correspondence
between our model and estimates using different datasets and identification strategies gives us
confidence in the empirical estimates as well as our understanding of the underlying mechanisms.

VI.B.2      Effects for Generators and Non-Generators

Panel B of Table 9 presents effects of the same change in δ (from zero to Ss2005 ) on producer
surplus separately for plants with vs. without generators. Producer surplus is relevant because
under our modeling assumption that output markets are perfectly competitive and there are no
  33
     Because the empirical estimates are identified off of relatively modest annual variation, column 2 is not a realistic
estimate of the long-run effects of eliminating shortages. Online Appendix Table A21 shows very similar agreement
between simulated and estimated results when comparing in terms of semi-elasticities, i.e. the effects of a one
percentage point change in shortage.



                                                           32
other market failures, the change in producer surplus is equivalent to overall welfare effects. We
decompose producer surplus loss into generator fixed costs and variable profit changes, including
the component due to decreases in measured TFPR. We compute fixed costs of generators observed
in the 2005 ASI by applying estimated generator costs σˆ0 and σˆ1 to required capacity ci , and we
assume for simplicity that no plants would own generators in the scenario with δ = 0. We find
that generator costs amount to 7.7 percent of profit losses for plants with generators, or 3.9 percent
when averaged across all plants.
    The simulations predict very different effects on plants with vs. without generators. Plants
with generators lose only 0.3 percent of variable profits. They lose no output to shutdown; all
revenue losses come from the decrease in the marginal products of materials and labor due to
higher-cost self-generated electricity. The decrease is small because this implicit tax is small:
given that electricity costs increase by 55 percent when self-generating, electricity has a 5 percent
revenue share, and Ss2005 averages 7.2 percent, the weighted average input cost rises by only about
55%×5%×7.2%≈0.2 percent of revenues.
    In contrast, variable profits fall by 10 percent for the average plant without a generator. This
effect is larger than the 7.2 percent of the time when the plants shut down, because the input
tax effect magnifies the effect of shortages: expected power outages reduce the expected marginal
revenue product of the semi-flexible input (labor) by δ, causing plants to reduce labor input.
    The bottom row of Panel B shows that predicted effects on measured TFPR are also very
different for non-generators vs. self-generators: 2.6 percent vs. almost zero, respectively, with an
average over all plants of 1.5 percent. Recall that for plants with generators, the TFPR loss is
due to the input variation effect: with a concave daily production function, it would have been
more efficient to produce with a constant input bundle instead of different input bundles during
outage vs. non-outage periods. This input variation effect is so small because plants do not reduce
production very much during outages given the small implicit input tax.
    By contrast, the TFPR loss for non-generators is much larger. To understand the magnitude,
recall from the model that measured TFPR loss vit ≈ −δ(1 − αM − αE ). In the limiting case with
no fully flexible inputs, shutting down 7.2 percent of the time would cause a 7.2 percent TFPR loss.
In another extreme with αM + αE = 1, there is also no TFPR loss, because with constant return
to scale in the daily production function the plant could costlessly shift production to a non-outage
day. In the data, the average αE + αM is 0.73, and the simulations predict a TFPR loss is 2.6
percent for the average plant without a generator.34
  34
     Online Appendix E.F presents empirical estimates of how generator ownership moderates effects of shortages; we
do not have the power to detect differences between plants with vs. without generators. Notice that such empirical
estimates would likely understate the average causal effects of generator ownership because generator adoption is
endogenous, so plants without generators will tend to have unobservably smaller losses. For example, plants with
unobservably better electricity supply are both less likely to adopt generators and potentially less affected by an
increase in shortages.




                                                        33
                                    Table 9: Effect of Shortages
                    Panel A: Effects of Shortages: Model and IV Estimates
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)                (4)
                                                                p-Value for          World
                                                          IV     Columns              Bank
                                            Simulation Estimate (1) vs. (2)          Survey
             Self-Generation Share Increase    3.1%      3.1%     (0.98)
             Materials Reduction               5.6%      8.1%     (0.49)
             Labor Reduction                   5.6%      1.7%     (0.11)
             Revenue Loss                      5.6%      7.7%     (0.57)              7.8%
             TFPR Loss                         1.5%      2.2%     (0.72)

                         Panel B: Producer Surplus Effects of Shortages
                                                         With        Non-
                                                 All  Generators Generators
                    Producer Surplus Loss:      9.5%     8.0%       10.0%
                    of which ∆ Generator Costs: 3.9%     7.7%        N.A.
                    of which ∆ Variable Profit: 5.6%     0.3%       10.0%
                           of which ∆ TFPR:     1.5%     0.0%        2.6%

          Panel C: Producer Surplus Effects of Shortages with Interruptible Contracts
                                                                          With         Non-
                                                                 All    Generators Generators
            Share of plants opting into interruptible contracts  8%        13%          3%
            Variable Profit Loss:                               0.4%      0.1%         0.7%
                   of which ∆ TFPR:                             0.0%      0.0%         0.1%
Notes: This table presents the effects of changing δ from zero to the CEA’s 2005 assessed shortage level.
In Panel A, “Simulation” refers to the predictions of the model using the 2005 ASI and described in the
text. “IV Estimate” refers to the estimates in Tables 6 and 7, extrapolated under a 7.2 percent shortage.
“p-Value” is the p-value for the test of whether the model’s prediction with exogenous generators is equal
to the IV estimate, with standard errors calculated using the Delta method. “World Bank Survey” refers to
self-reported data from the 2005 World Bank Enterprise Survey. Panels B and C are simulated effects, as
described in the text.




                                                   34
VI.C        Counterfactual with Interruptible Contracts
Given that 44 percent of manufacturing plants have generators, this “distributed generation” pro-
vides production capacity that would optimally be exploited when power is scarce. Currently, there
are plants that have generators but do not use them because they receive grid power, while other
nearby plants without generators simultaneously experience outages. Interruptible electricity con-
tracts offer manufacturers and other electricity consumers a rebate for accepting outages during
times of scarcity. If distribution companies offer both uninterruptible and interruptible contracts
and allow consumers to sort into their preferred contract, this provides a mechanism to allocate
outages to plants that are least affected.35
       We simulate the effects of allowing plants to select into one of two electricity supply contracts,
an uninterruptible contract with no outages and an interruptible contract that will allow outages
14.4 percent of the time - twice the assessed national average outage rate. The market-clearing
rebate for the interruptible contract is pinned down by the maximum profit loss among the plants
comprising 50 percent of manufacturers’ grid electricity consumption. When this 50 percent of
consumption is interrupted 14.2 percent of the time, this allows the uninterruptible contracts to
be fulfilled. Panel C of Table 9 presents the effects of shortages under this contract structure.
Because larger plants are more likely to have generators and are thus willing to accept interruptible
contracts at lower rebates, only eight percent of plants need to opt into the interruptible contract
to clear the market. Under this counterfactual policy, shortages of δ = Ss2005 instead of δ = 0
reduce variable profits by 0.4 percent, more than an order of magnitude less than the 5.6 percent
loss when outages are evenly distributed within states. With interruptible contracts, there is no
noticeable decrease in TFPR.
       There are two important caveats to this analysis. First, it holds constant the manufacturing
sector’s total power allocation. In practice, the grid electricity conserved through interruptible
contracts with manufacturers could be allocated to homes, agriculture, or other sectors, where the
marginal social value of electricity could be different. Second, even holding constant the manufac-
turing power allocation, we do not observe which specific plants are subject to shortages, so the
losses without interruptible contracts could be larger or smaller than we simulate here.

VI.D        Comparing Effects for Large vs. Small Plants
How do shortages differentially affect small vs. large plants? Panel (a) of Figure 4 shows that
the share of plants that report self-generating electricity increases with plant size. The figure
reflects the same economy of scale in generator ownership discussed above. Because outages more
severely affect plants without generators, this economy of scale makes small plants more exposed
to outages than large plants. The solid line in Panel (b) of Figure 4 illustrates this, showing
  35
     Interruptible contracts have been studied by Baldick, Kolos, and Tompaidis (2006) and are common in the U.S.
They are more suitable for large electricity consumers such as manufacturing plants, because a fixed cost is required
to install switches to turn off electricity to the specific establishment.



                                                         35
the relationship between employment and the predicted variable profit loss from shortages in the
exogenous generator simulation. While the average ten-employee plant is predicted to lose about six
percent of profits, the average 100-employee plant loses only about two percent. These differences
between large and small plants are driven entirely by differential generator ownership: the dashed
line in Panel (b) shows that the predicted profit losses would be roughly constant in plant size in
an alternative simulation in which no plants have generators.

VI.E        Effects of Shortages with Endogenous Generator Adoption
Given that generators moderate the effects of shortages, increased shortages should increase gener-
ator adoption. How much does this moderate the producer surplus losses from shortages? Figure
5 plots the effects of raising all plants’ δ from zero to a homogeneous δ up to 0.2, as listed on
the x-axis. Panel (a) uses the “exogenous generator simulations,” while Panel (b) uses “endoge-
nous generator simulations,” which endogenize generator adoption at the given δ using the model
detailed above in Section VI.A.1.36
       In the exogenous generator simulation in Panel (a), the variable profit losses increase approxi-
mately linearly from zero to 18 percent as shortages worsen from zero to 20 percent. Since generator
capital stock is held fixed in this simulation, the fixed cost of generators is invariant to shortages
at 2.9 percent.
       Panel (b) illustrates a starkly different pattern when generator ownership is endogenously ad-
justed. As shortages worsen, the variable profit loss peaks at 1.7 percent with a three percent
shortage, drops slightly, and approaches only 1.5 percent as shortages approach 20 percent. The
reason for this non-monotonicity is that many plants adopt generators at low levels of δ, and for
these low δ, generator adoption more than offsets the “direct effect” of an increase in δ. Once δ is
large and most plants have generators, the effects of shortages rise relatively slowly with increases
in δ. Generator investments are costly, however, and at a 20 percent shortage, generator fixed
costs decrease profits by 4.2 percent. Thus, as shortages worsen, the cost of shortages increasingly
consists of the cost of purchasing backup generators.




  36
    Online Appendix Table A22 presents more detailed statistics used to construct these figures, and Online Appendix
Figure A9 presents generator adoption rates as a function of δ.


                                                        36
            Figure 4: Generator Ownership and Shortage Effects by Plant Size




                                      .8
                    Share of Plants that Self-Generate
                       .2           .40         .6




                                                              0                      1                 2                    3             4
                                                                                         log10(Number of Employees)
                                                         kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .12, pwidth = .18


                                                                   (a) Generator Ownership and Plant Size
                                               15
                            Percent Profit Loss
                             5              10 0




                                                          0                      1                   2                      3             4
                                                                                         log10(Number of Employees)

                                                                           Profit loss                     Profit loss if no generators

                                                                   (b) Simulated Profit Loss and Plant Size
Notes: Panel (a) presents local mean-smoothed estimates of the share of plants in all years of the Annual
Survey of Industries that ever self-generate electricity, as a function of number of employees. Panel (b) shows
the simulated effect of shortages on profits as a function of the number of employees.




                                                                                                 37
                  Figure 5: Counterfactuals Under Varying Shortage Levels


                   Percent Profit Loss           20


                                                 15


                                                 10


                                                  5


                                                  0
                                                      0          .05               .1              .15      .2
                                                                                Shortage

                                                                   Variable Profit Loss
                                                                   Generator Cost as Fraction of Profits
                                                                   Total Profit Loss

                                                          (a) Profit Loss (Exogenous Generators)


                                                 6
                           Percent Profit Loss




                                                 4




                                                 2




                                                 0
                                                      0           .05              .1               .15      .2
                                                                                Shortage

                                                                    Variable Profit Loss
                                                                    Generator Cost as Fraction of Profits
                                                                    Total Profit Loss

                                                          (b) Profit Loss (Endogenous Generators)
Note: These figures show the simulated effects of assigning the δ on the x-axis to all plants in the 2005 ASI,
relative to δ = 0. Panel (a) holds fixed the generator ownership observed in the ASI. Panel (b) uses the
model in Section VI.A.1 to endogenously adjust generator ownership at the given δ.




                                                                              38
VII     Conclusion
India’s lack of reliable electricity supply is a stark example of how poor infrastructure might affect
economic growth. But while the problem is apparent, there had been no quantification of the result-
ing losses, making it difficult to prioritize relative to other economic distortions. We estimate the
effects of shortages on manufacturers using archival data on shortages, instrumenting for shortages
with supply shifts from hydro availability.
   There are four main conclusions. First, we estimate that shortages are a substantial drag on
Indian manufacturing, reducing revenue by 5.6 percent (in the simulations) to 8.6 percent (in the
IV estimates) for the average plant in the short run. Producer surplus drops by 9.5 percent for
the average plant, of which 3.9 percent is due to the capital costs of backup generators. Second,
because plants also reduce inputs in response to shortages, shortages affect productivity much less
than they affect revenue. Thus, the short-run effects of electricity shortages do not explain much of
the productivity gap between firms in developing vs. developed countries discussed by Banerjee and
Duflo (2005), Hall and Jones (1999), Hsieh and Klenow (2009), and others, although the long-run
effects could be different. Third, because shortages more strongly affect plants without generators
and there are substantial economies of scale in generator costs, shortages more severely affect
small plants. This adds another distortion to the firm size distribution in developing countries,
related to the discussion of Hsieh and Olken (2014), Tybout (2000), and others. Fourth, policy can
help: interruptible contracts or similar mechanisms can substantially reduce the costs of shortages.
Because such contracts can be offered at a discount on an opt-in basis, they may be more politically
feasible than raising prices or changing allocations.




                                                 39
References
 [1] Abeberese, Ama Baafra (2012). “Electricity Cost and Firm Performance: Evidence from India.” Working
     Paper, Columbia University (November).

 [2] Alam, Muneeza (2013). “Coping with Blackouts: Power Outages and Firm Choices.” Working Paper,
     Yale University (November).

 [3] Alby, Philippe, Jean-Jacques Dethier, and Stephane Straub (2011). “Let There be Light! Firms Op-
     erating under Electricity Constraints in Developing Countries.” Working Paper, Toulouse School of
     Economics (July).

 [4] Allcott, Hunt, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D. O’Connell (2015). “The India Energy Data Repos-
     itory.” Available from www.indiaenergydata.info.

 [5] Aschauer, David (1989). “Is Public Expenditure Productive?” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.
     23, No. 2 (March), pages 177-200.

 [6] Asker, John, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Jan De Loecker (2014) “Dynamic Inputs and Resource
     (Mis)Allocation” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 122, No. 5, pages 1013-1063.

 [7] Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker and Adam Sobel (2013). “Using Weather
     Data and Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses of Climate Change.” Review of Environmental
     Economics and Policy, Vol. 7, No. 2, pages 181-198.

 [8] Baisa, Brian, Lucas Davis, Stephen Salant, and William Wilcox (2008). “The Welfare Costs of Unreliable
     Water Service.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 92, No. 1 (May), pages 1-12.

 [9] Baldick, Ross, Sergey Kolos, and Stathis Tompaidis (2006). “Interruptible electricity contracts from an
     electricity retailer’s point of view: valuation and optimal interruption.” Operations Research, Vol. 54,
     No. 4, pages 627-642.

[10] Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo (2005). “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development Eco-
     nomics.” In Aghion, Philippe, and Steven Durlauf, Eds., Handbook of Economic Growth.

[11] Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Nancy Qian (2012). “On the Road: Access to Transportation
     Infrastructure and Economic Growth in China.” Working Paper, Yale University (February).

[12] Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta (2013). “Cross-Country Differences in Pro-
     ductivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection.” American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No. 1 (Febru-
     ary), pages 305-334.

[13] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel (2007). “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 122, No. 2, pages 775-805.

[14] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel (2013). “Urban Transport Expansions, Employment Decentralization, and the
     Spatial Scope of Agglomeration Economies.” Working Paper, Brown University (October).




                                                    40
[15] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Loren Brandt, J. Vernon Henderson, Matthew Turner, and Qinghua Zhang
     (2013). “Roads, Railroads, and the Decentralization of Chinese Cities.” Working Paper, Brown Univer-
     sity (October).

[16] Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Matthew Turner (2012). “Transportation and the Decentralization of Chi-
     nese Cities.” Working Paper, Brown University (May).

[17] Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should We Trust
     Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 1 (February),
     pages 249-275.

[18] Bhargava, Anjuli, and Kandula Subramaniam (2009). “Watts Not Happening.” Business World, July
     6th.

[19] Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller (2011). “Robust Inference with Multi-Way Clus-
     tering.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 29, No. 2, pages 238-249.

[20] CEA (Central Electricity Authority) (1994-2012a). “All India Electricity Statistics: General Review.”
     New Delhi: Central Electricity Authority.

[21] CEA (Central Electricity Authority) (1993-2011b). “Load Generation Balance Report.” New Delhi:
     Central Electricity Authority.

[22] CEA (Central Electricity Authority) (1993-2011c). “Review of Performance of Hydro Power Stations.”
     New Delhi: Central Electricity Authority.

[23] CEA     (Central     Electricity    Authority)   (2013).       “Planwise      Capacity     Addition.”
     http://www.cea.nic.in/reports/planning/plan_addition.pdf

[24] Chakravorty, Ujjayant, Martino Pelli, and Beyza Ural Marchand (2013). “Does the Quality of Electricity
     Matter? Evidence from Rural India.” Working Paper, Tufts University (April).

[25] Chan, Hei Sing (Ron), Maureen Cropper, and Kabir Malik (2014). “Are Power Plants in India Less
     Efficient than Power Plants in the United States?” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
     forthcoming.

[26] Chilkoti, Avantika, and James Crabtree (2014). “India Eyes End to State Coal Monopoly.” Financial
     Times (October 23).

[27] Collard-Wexler, Allan and Jan De Loecker (2015). “Reallocation and Technology: Evidence from the
     US Steel Industry” American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 1, pp. 131-71.

[28] Cropper, Maureen, Alexander Limonov, Kabir Malik, and Anoop Singh (2011). “Estimating the Impact
     of Restructuring on Electricity Generation Efficiency: The Case of the Indian Thermal Power Sector.”
     NBER Working Paper No. 17383 (September).

[29] De Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski (2012). “Markups and Firm-Level Export Status.” American
     Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 6 (October), pages 2437-2471.



                                                    41
[30] Dell, Melissa, Benjamin Jones, and Benjamin Olken (2014). “What Do We Learn from the Weather?
     The New Climate-Economy Literature.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 52, No. 3 (September),
     pages 740-798.

[31] Dinkelman, Taryn (2011). The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence from
     South Africa.” American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 7 (December), pages 3078-3108.

[32] Donaldson, David (2012). “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastruc-
     ture.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[33] Donaldson, David, and Richard Hornbeck (2013). “Railroads and American Economic Growth: A
     “Market Access” Approach.” NBER Working Paper No. 19213 (July).

[34] Duflo, Esther, and Rohini Pande (2007). “Dams.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122, No. 2,
     pages 601-646.

[35] Easterly, William, and Sergio Rebelo (1993). “Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth.” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, Vol. 32, pages 417-458.

[36] Esfahani, Hadi Salehi, and Maria Teresa Ramirez (2002). "Institutions, Infrastructure, and Economic
     Growth.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 70, pages 443-477.

[37] Fernald, John (1999). “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link Between Public Capital and Produc-
     tivity.” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3 (June), pages 619-638.

[38] Fisher-Vanden, Karen, Erin Mansur, and Qiong (Juliana) Wang (2015). “Electricity Shortages and
     Firm Productivity: Evidence from China’s Industrial Firms.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol.
     114, Pages 172-188.

[39] Foster, Vivien, and Jevgenijs Steinbuks (2009). “Paying the Price for Unreliable Power Supplies: In-
     House Generation of Electricity by Firms in Africa.” World Bank Policy Research Paper 4913 (April).

[40] Garcia-Mila, T., McGuire, T. and Porter, R. H., (1996). “The effect of public capital in state-level
     production functions reconsidered.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 78, No. 1 (February),
     pages 177-180.

[41] Gramlich, Edward (1994). “Infrastructure Investment: A Review Essay.” Journal of Economic Litera-
     ture, Vol. 32 (September), pages 1176-1196.

[42] Gupta,    Rajan and Harihar Shankar (2014). Global Energy                   Observatory.    Available:
     http://globalenergyobservatory.org/. Accessed: September 20, 2014.

[43] Hall, Robert and Charles Jones (1999) “Why do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
     Worker than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics (1999), Vol. 114, No. 1, pages 83-116.

[44] Hausmann, Ricardo, Dani Rodrik, and Andrés Velasco (2008). “Growth diagnostics.” in The Washington
     consensus reconsidered: Towards a new global governance, edited by Narcís Serra and Joseph Stiglitz,
     pages 324-355.



                                                    42
[45] Holtz-Eakin, Douglas (1994). “Public-Sector Capital and the Productivity Puzzle.” Review of Economics
     and Statistics, Vol. 76, No. 1 (February), pages 12-21.

[46] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow (2014). “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico.” Quaterly
     Journal of Economics, Vol. 129, No. 3, pages 1035-1084.

[47] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow (2009). “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
     India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, No. 4 (November), pages 1403-1448.

[48] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Benjamin Olken (2014). “The Missing “Missing Middle.”” The Journal of Eco-
     nomic Perspectives, Vol. 28, No. 3 (Summer), pp. 89-108.

[49] Hulten, Charles, Esra Bennathan, and Sylaja Srinivasan (2006). "Infrastructure, Externalities, and
     Economic Development: A Study of the Indian Manufacturing Industry.” World Bank Economic Review,
     Vol. 20, No. 2, pages 291–308.

[50] Jensen, Robert (2007). “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance, and
     Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122, No. 3 (August),
     pages 879-924.

[51] Lipscomb, Molly, Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Tania Barham (2013). “Development Effects of Elec-
     trification: Evidence from the Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants in Brazil.” American
     Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 5 No. 2, (April), pages 200–231.

[52] McRae, Shaun (2015). “Infrastructure Quality and the Subsidy Trap.” American Economic Review,
     Vol. 105, No. 1, pages 35-66.

[53] Melitz, Marc (2003). “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
     Productivity.” Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 6 (November), pages 1695-1725.

[54] Nagaraj, R. (2002). “How to Improve India’s Industrial Statistics,” Economic and Political Weekly, Vol.
     37, No. 10 (Mar. 9-15), pages 966-970.

[55] Power Finance Corporation (various years). “Report on The Performance of The State Power Utilities.”
     New Delhi, India: Power Finance Corporation Limited.

[56] Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson (2002). “Coping with Poor Public Capital.” Journal of Develop-
     ment Economics, Vol. 69, pages 51-69.

[57] Roller, Lars-Hendrik, and Leonard Waverman (2001). "Telecommunications Infrastructure and Eco-
     nomic Development: A Simultaneous Approach.” American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Septem-
     ber), pages 909-923.

[58] Ryan, Nicholas (2013). “The Competitive Effects of Transmission Infrastructure in the Indian Electricity
     Market.” Working Paper, MIT (September).

[59] Rud, Juan Pablo (2012a). “Electricity Provision and Industrial Development: Evidence from India.”
     Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 97, pages 352-367.



                                                     43
[60] Rud, Juan Pablo (2012b). “Infrastructure Regulation and Reallocations within Industry: Theory and
     Evidence from Indian Firms.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 99, pages 116-127.

[61] Sincavage, Jessica R., Carl Haub, and O.P. Sharma (2010). “Labor costs in India’s organized manufac-
     turing sector.” Monthly Labor Review, pages 3-22.

[62] Srivastava, AK, M Rajeevan, and SR Kshirsagar (2009). “Development of a high resolution daily gridded
     temperature data set (1969–2005) for the Indian region.” Atmospheric Science Letters, Vol. 10, No. 4
     (October), pages 249-254.

[63] Steinbuks, Jevgenijs, and Vivien Foster (2010). “When Do Firms Generate? Evidence on In-House
     Electricity Supply in Africa.” Energy Economics, Vol. 32, pages 505-514.

[64] Steinbuks, Jevgenijs (2011). “Financial Constraints and Firms’ Investment: Results from a Natural
     Experiment Using Power Interruption.” Working Paper, Purdue University (October).

[65] Stock, James, and Motohiro Yogo (2005). “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression.” In
     Stock, James, and Donald Andrews, Eds., Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays
     in Honor of Thomas J. Rothenberg. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

[66] Todd, Petra and Kenneth Wolpin (2006) “Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in Mexico:
     Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling and Fertility”,
     American Economic Review, Vol. 96, No. 5, pages 1384-1417.

[67] Tybout, James (2000). “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They Do, and
     Why?” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 38, No. 1 (March), pages 11-44.

[68] U.S. DOE (Department of Energy) (2013). “Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey.”
     http://www.eia.gov/consumption/manufacturing/index.cfm

[69] Willmott,       Cort,       and     Kenji     Matsuura     (2012).     “Terrestrial    Precipita-
     tion:       1900-2010     Gridded     Monthly   Time    Series     (1900    -    2010)   V3.02.”
     http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/html_pages/download.html#P2011rev.

[70] Yardley, Jim, and Gardiner Harris (2012). “2nd Day of Power Failures Cripples Wide Swath of In-
     dia.” New York Times, July 31. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/01/world/asia/power-outages-hit-
     600-million-in-india.html




                                                   44
           Online Appendix: Not for Publication



How Do Electricity Shortages Affect Industry? Evidence from India

  Hunt Allcott, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D. O’Connell




                               45
Online Appendix                                                 Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


A     2005 World Bank Enterprise Survey: Barriers to Growth

                             Table A1: Biggest Obstacle for Growth


                          Problem                                      Percent
                          Electricity                                    33
                          High Taxes                                     16
                          Corruption                                     10
                          Tax Administration                              8
                          Cost of and Access to Financing                 6
                          Labor Regulations and Business Licensing        5
                          Skills and Education of Available Workers       4
                          Access to Land                                  3
                          Customs and Trade Regulations                   2
                          Other                                          12

Notes: These data are from the 2005 World Bank Enterprise Survey in India. The table presents responses
to the question, “Which of the elements of the business environment included in the list, if any, currently
represents the biggest obstacle faced by this establishment?”




                                                    46
Online Appendix                                             Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


B     Power Sector Data Appendix
This appendix provides additional details on the power sector data in Section I.B.
    Appendix Table A2 presents the state allocations from jointly-owned power plants.
    Appendix Table A3 presents summary statistics for the reservoir and hydro plant microdata.
Panel A presents the reservoir microdata; 31 reservoirs ever appear. A reservoir scheme may
include multiple hydro plants, so generation and generation capacity are for all plants within the
reservoir scheme. All reservoir data are missing for the year 2000, so inflows are imputed using
rainfall at gridpoints within the reservoir watershed. For each reservoir, we then run a regression
of generation on inflows; the fitted values are then divided by generation capacity and transformed
into a predicted capacity factor.
    Panel B of Appendix Table A3 presents the hydro plant microdata; 181 plants ever appear, of
which 18 percent (32 plants) are known to be run-of-river plants. All plant-level data are missing
for the year 1992, and generation data are occasionally missing in other years. Just less than
six percent of generation observations are imputed using rainfall at gridpoints within the plant’s
watershed.
    Appendix Table A4 presents summary statistics on electricity supply for the ten largest states.
    Figures A1, A2, A3 present maps of shortage severity, hydro power plants and weather stations,
and four example hydro plant watersheds, respectively.




                                                47
Online Appendix                                               Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


              Table A2: State Allocations from Jointly-Owned Hydro Plants

                                                               Share          Total
              Power Station               State               (Percent)   Capacity (MW)
              Bhakra Nangal Complex       Haryana               33.91         1479.5
                                          Punjab                50.87
                                          Rajasthan             15.22
              Dehar                       Haryana                 32           990
                                          Punjab                  48
                                          Rajasthan               20
              Pong                        Haryana                16.6          396
                                          Punjab                 24.9
                                          Rajasthan             58.5
              Gandhi Sagar                Madhya Pradesh          50           115
                                          Rajasthan               50
              Jawahar Sagar               Madhya Pradesh          50           99
                                          Rajasthan               50
              Rana Pratap Sagar           Madhya Pradesh          50           172
                                          Rajasthan               50
              Machkund                    Andhra Pradesh          70         114.75
                                          Orissa                  30
              Tungabhadra/Hampi           Andhra Pradesh          80           72
                                          Karnataka               20
              Pench                       Madhya Pradesh        66.67          160
                                          Maharashtra           33.33
              Sardar Sarovar              Gujarat                 16          1450
                                          Madhya Pradesh          57
                                          Maharashtra             27
              Rajghat                     Madhya Pradesh          50           45
                                          Uttar Pradesh           50
              Ranjit Sagar                Punjab                 75.4          600
                                          Jammu & Kashmir         20
                                          Himachal Pradesh        4.6
Source: Central Electricity Authority, General Review 2012.




                                                  48
Online Appendix                                                    Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




           Table A3: Reservoir and Hydro Plant Microdata Summary Statistics
                                     Panel A: Reservoir Microdata
                                                     Mean Std. Dev.             Min.   Max.    Obs.
          Reservoir Years Observed                    12.4     7.0                4     19      31
          Reservoir Inflows (billion cubic meters)     9.0    11.1              0.14   77.4    362
          Reservoir-Level Generation (GWh)            1926    1669               27    8016    367
          Reservoir-Level Generation Capacity (MW)     676     547               75    1956    383
          Capacity Factor Predicted by Inflows        0.36    0.14              0.09   0.75    383
                            Panel B: Hydro Plant Generation Microdata
                                             Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max. Obs.
                     Plant Years Observed     14.0        6.1         1       19     181
                     Run-of-River Plant       0.19        0.4       0.00      1.0    177
                     Generation (GWh)         654        1042         0     13211 2395
                     Capacity (MW)            207         304         0     1956 2505
                     Capacity Factor          0.37       0.19         0      1.57   2387
Notes: Reservoir Years Observed is at the reservoir level; all other variables in Panel A are at the reservoir-
by-year level. Plant Years Observed and run-of-river categorization are at the plant level; all other variables
in Panel B are at the plant-by-year level.




                  Table A4: Electricity Statistics for the Ten Largest States

                                       1992-2010 Shortages       2010     1992-2010
                                                              Capacity   Generation
                   State               Mean Min. Max. (gigawatts) Share Hydro
                   Andhra Pradesh      0.08    0.01   0.22       10.8        0.21
                   Gujarat             0.08    0.03   0.16       11.4        0.03
                   Karnataka           0.12    0.01   0.27        9.1        0.47
                   Madhya Pradesh      0.12    0.05   0.20        4.9        0.14
                   Maharashtra         0.10    0.02   0.21       16.1        0.11
                   Punjab              0.05    0.01   0.14        5.1        0.40
                   Rajasthan           0.03    0.00   0.07        5.7        0.18
                   Tamil Nadu          0.06    0.00   0.14       11.6        0.13
                   Uttar Pradesh       0.15    0.10   0.22        5.5        0.11
                   West Bengal         0.02    0.00   0.06        7.4        0.03
Notes: Shortage data are estimated by the Central Electricity Authority. 2010 Generation Capacity is
reported in the CEA General Review 2012, and Generation Share Hydro is is the ratio of hydroelectricity to
total generation, both of which are reported in the General Review.




                                                      49
Online Appendix                                                  Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


                         Figure A1: Map of Average Shortages by State




Notes: This figure presents each state’s average Shortage assessed by the Central Electricity Authority over
1992-2010, with darker color illustrating higher Shortage.




                                                    50
Online Appendix                                                                                                                                          Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




      Figure A2: Hydro Power Plants, Rainfall Gridpoints, and Weather Stations




                                                        !                    !   !
                                                                                     !


                                                                                     !
                                                                                                             Legend
                                                                                                                         GSOD and GHCN weather stations, 1992-2010
                                                        !!#!
                                                        !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                        !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                 #
                                                      ! !!
                                                                                                                         Hydroelectric power plants
                                                        !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !



                                                          !! !
                                                            !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                         !!!! !     !    !   !
                                                                               ! !   !   !

                                                           !!!
                                                      # ! !!!!#                                                          Univ. Delaware 1/2-degree rainfall gridpoints
                                                           !!
                                                               ! !!!
                                                                !   !    !   !   !   !   !

                                                                                                                 !
                                                            !   !   !
                                                                     !!  !   !   !   !   !   !



                                                                       ! !
                                                              # !!!!!#!!
                                                            !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                        !   !
                                                             #  !   !
                                                                       ! !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                    #
                                                    !
                                                    !   !   !   !   !!!  !
                                                                             !
                                                                             !   !   !   !

                                                                        ! #
                                                                                             !   !   !   !


                                                !   !   !
                                                         #  !   !   !    !

                                                                           !
                                                                           !
                                                                             !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !                                                                                                                   !       !




                                        !
                                            !


                                            !
                                                !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !
                                                                                 #
                                                                                 #
                                                                                 !   !   !   !   !


                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                     !   !                                                                                                               !   !   !   !   !




                                                #
                                                !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !                                                                                               !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                        !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !

                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                             !   !
                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                     !   !                                               !

                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                             !                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         !   !   !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !# #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                    !   !   !


                            #
                                !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                    #
                                                                         !   !   !
                                                                                     #
                                                                                     !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                 !   !   !   !   !


                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                     !   !
                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                         !

                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                             !                           !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                    !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                            #
                                                !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                         !

                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                             !   !       !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                             !   !   !   !   !   !


                        !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !
                                                                                      #  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                     #!
                                                                                                                                                     !   !   !   !   !   !       !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  #! !

                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !  !   !   !   !   !


                                #                                                                                                            #                                                    ## !
                            !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !

                                                                                     !
                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                                                                     ## #
                                                                                                                         !   !   !   !

                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !               !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                    #
                                                                    !

                                                                    !
                                                                    !#   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                          !  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                              #  !   !   !   !           !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                !   !   !   !   !
                                                    #
                                                    !   !   !   !
                                                                    !
                                                                    !    !   !
                                                                                 #
                                                                                 !   !
                                                                                         !
                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                             !   !   !   !   !   !   !!  !
                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                             !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                      # !#   !   !   !   !


                !       !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                 !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                 !   !
                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                               # !   !   !                               !   !   !   !   !


        !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   #
                                                                                             !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                             !   !   !   !                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                 !   !   !   !   !


            !   !
                    #
                    !   !   !   !   !   !
                                            #
                                            !   !
                                                    ! !
                                                    !   !   !   !   !    !   !
                                                                                 #
                                                                                 !   !   !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !   !   !
                                                                                                      #  !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                 !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                 #! !
                                                                                                                                                 !   !   !   !#  !   !   !                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !       !   !



                                                                    #                                 !              #                                   #               ##
                            !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                             !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !                               !


                #           #                                                        !
                !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                        !!
                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !                               !


                    !   !   !   !   !       !   !   !
                                                    !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   #
                                                                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !



                                            #       !                                            !
                                                                                                                     #               !           !           #
                        !


                        #
                            !   !   !       !   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                              #
                                                                                              #  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                                                                                                                         #
                            !                   !   !   !   !   !   !    !
                                                                             #
                                                                             #
                                                                             !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                     !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !

                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                         !   !


                                            !   !
                                                    #
                                                    !

                                                    #
                                                        !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                     !   !


                                            !   !

                                                !
                                                    !   !   !   #
                                                                !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !

                                              !!                !
                                            #! !!
                                            #   !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !

                                                                                      !
                                                                                         !   !   !


                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                     !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                       # !!
                                                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !




                                              !!
                                                !

                                                #
                                                #
                                                    !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !
                                                                                     #
                                                                                     !
                                                                                     !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !

                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                             !   !   !   !


                                                !   !   !   !   !

                                                                !
                                                                    !    !   !   !
                                                                                     !
                                                                                     !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                       ! !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                         #
                                                !
                                                !
                                                !   !
                                                      # !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !!!
                                                                                                                     !   !   !
                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                 !


                                                !
                                                !   !   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !   #
                                                                                         #
                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !

                                                # # !   !
                                                         !  !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !   #
                                                                                                                         !


                                                  ! !
                                                    ! ! !
                                                        !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !
                                                                                     !   !   !
                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                 !   !   !
                                                                                                             ##
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                              #
                                                                                             !
                                                  !#!   !   !   !   !    !   !   !   !
                                                                                         #
                                                                                         !   !   !   !   !

                                                 # ! # !!
                                                                                                         #
                                                    !
                                                            !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                        !!
                                                        !


                                                        #!
                                                            !   !
                                                                   #!
                                                                    !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                                                      #
                                                            !
                                                                #
                                                                !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !



                                                           ! !
                                                            !   !   !    !   !   !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                     !


                                                            !


                                                          #! ! #
                                                                !


                                                                !
                                                                    #
                                                                    !


                                                                    #
                                                                    !
                                                                         !


                                                                         !
                                                                             !


                                                                             !
                                                                                 !


                                                                                 !
                                                                                     !


                                                                                     !
                                                                                         !


                                                                                         !
                                                                                             !


                                                                                             !
                                                                                                 !


                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                     !


                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                         !


                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                              ! !!
                                                                !   !    !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                             !
                                                                                             !   !   !                                                                                                       !




                                                                 ! !!
                                                                    !    !   !   !
                                                                                  #  !   !   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                            #                #!! !
                                                                 !  # #  !   !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                         !   !
                                                                              #  !#  !   !   !   !   !

                                                                       !! #
                                                                     #!! !   !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                     #  !
                                                                       !!
                                                                        !! !#
                                                                         !   !   !   !   !   !


                                                                        !
                                                                        !
                                                                        !
                                                                        !!
                                                                             !
                                                                                #!   !   !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                        #!!
                                                                         !   !   !   !


                                                #                                !   !




Notes: This figure plots the 1/2 degree gridpoints in the University of Delaware rainfall data, the weather
stations whose measurements underlie the gridded data, and the locations of all hydroelectric power stations
in India.




                                                                                                                         51
                     D       D            D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D




            D       D        D            D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D
Online Appendix                                                                       Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell

            D        D       D            D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                     D       D            D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                     D       D            D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D
                                                                                                                      u
                                                                                                                      "
                         u
                         "   u
                             "
                   Figure A3: Example of
                                       D Hydroelectric Plant Watersheds
                    D      D     D          D      D      D    D     D                                        D
                                                                                                                  u
                                                                                                                  "       D   D       D


                                                             u
                                                             "
                             u
                             "
                     D       D   u
                                 "        D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                             u
                             "
                     D       D            D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                             D            D            D         D            D          D
                                                                                                 u
                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                 D     D      D           D   D       D


                                                                                                 u
                                                                                                 "
                                     u
                                     "
                             D            D            D         D            D
                                                                                  u
                                                                                  "      D       D     D
                                                                                                             u
                                                                                                             "D           D   D       D

                                                   u
                                                   "                                                                              u
                                                                                                                                  "

                             D           u
                                         "D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                                          D    u
                                               "       D         D            D          D   u
                                                                                             "
                                                                                             u
                                                                                             "   D     D      D           D   D       D

                                                 u
                                                 "
                                              " u
                                              u "
                                          D            D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D
                                                                                                              u
                                                                                                              "


                                                       D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D
                                                       u
                                                       "u
                                                        "
                                                       u
                                                       "

                                                       D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D
                                                            u
                                                            "u
                                                             "            u
                                                                          "


                                                       D         D            D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D



                                                                      u
                                                                      "
                                                     D        D      D
                                                                       u
                                                                       "     D       D       D       D                        D       D
Notes: This figure presents an example of four hydrolectric plant watersheds in Southern India, with plants
circled in red. Other hydroelectric plants are marked by “H” u  "
                                                                symbols, and 1/2-degree rainfall gridpoints
                                                                                   "u
                                                                                   u
are marked by “+” symbols. The river network is extrapolated based Don the predicted
                                                                                    "
                                                     D        D              D
                                                                                 " D flow of Dwater accross
                                                                                 u                   D                        D
                                                                                                                                  u
                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                                      D


India.

                                                                              D          D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                                                                                         D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                                                                                         D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                                                                 52                      D       D     D      D           D   D       D




                                                                                                 D     D      D           D   D
Online Appendix                                                 Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


C     Annual Survey of Industries Data Appendix
This appendix presents additional information on the Annual Survey of Industries data.
    We extract a subset of variables from the raw data separately for each year and then stack all
years of data together to apply the following cleaning processes.37 We correct observations in 1993-
94 to 1997-98 whose values have been supplied in “pre-multiplied” format from the India’s Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI). We create a separate consistently-defined
state variable which takes into account the creation of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Uttaranchal
(now Uttarakhand) in 2001 from Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, respectively. We
assign establishments to the last observed state, which correctly places establishments despite state
splits, as long as the establishment is surveyed after 2001.
    India classifies manufacturing establishments with its National Industrial Classification (NIC),
which resembles industrial classifications commonly used in other countries. The classifications
were revised in 1987, 1998, 2004, and 2008. We convert all industry classifications to the NIC-1987
scheme using concordances provided by MOSPI.
    All financial amounts are deflated to constant 2004-05 Rupees. Revenue (gross sales) is deflated
by a three-digit commodity price deflators as available in the commodity-based table “Index Num-
bers Of Wholesale Prices In India – By Groups And Sub-Groups (Yearly Averages)” produced by
the Office of the Economic Adviser-Ministry of Commerce & Industry.38 Each three-digit NIC-1987
code is assigned to a commodity listed in this table. The corresponding commodity deflator is used
to deflate revenues. To deflate material inputs, we construct the average output deflator of a given
industry’s supplier industries based on India’s 1993-94 input-output table, available from the Cen-
tral Statistical Organization. Fuel and electricity costs are deflated by the price index for “Fuel,
Power, Light, and Lubricants.” Capital is deflated by an implied national deflator calculated from
“Table 13: Sector-wise Gross Capital Formation” from the Reserve Bank of India’s Handbook of
Statistics on the Indian Economy.39 Electricity costs are deflated using a national GDP deflator.
    The sampling rules have changed somewhat over time. The census scheme included factories
with 100 or more workers in all years except 1997-2003, when it included only factories with 200
or more workers. The sample scheme included one-third of factories until 2004 and one-fifth since
then (MOSPI 2014).
    The ASI data have at least two well-known shortcomings. First, while the data are represen-
tative of small registered factories and a 100 percent sample of large registered factories, not all
factories are actually registered under the Factories Act. Nagaraj (2002) shows that only 48 per-
cent and 43 percent of the number of manufacturing establishments in the 1980 and 1990 economic
  37
     We thank Jagadeesh Sivadasan for helpful discussions and for providing Stata code that facilitated the
read-in of 1992-1997 ASI data, and Olivier Dupriez for similarly helpful discussions and pointing us to
read-in programs for ASI data from 1998 to 2007 available at the International Household Survey Network
(http://catalog.ihsn.org/index.php/catalog/central).
  38
     Available from http://www.eaindustry.nic.in/
  39
     Available from http://www.rbi.org.in



                                                    53
Online Appendix                                                     Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


censes appear in the ASI data for those years. Although it is not clear how our results might
differ for unregistered plants, the plants that are observed in the ASI are still a significant share of
plants in India. Second, value added may be under-reported, perhaps associated with tax evasion,
by using accounting loopholes to overstate input costs or under-state revenues (Nagaraj 2002). As
long as changes in this under-reporting are not correlated with electricity shortages, this will not
affect our results.

C.A     Determination of Base Sample
Appendix Table A5 details how the sample in Panel B of Table 1 is determined from the original set
of observations in the ASI. The 1992-2010 ASI dataset begins with 949,992 plant-year observations.
Plants may still appear in the data even if they are closed or did not provide a survey response. We
drop 172,697 plants reported as closed or non-responsive. We drop a trivial number of observations
missing state identifiers and observations in Sikkim, which has only been included in the ASI
sampling frame in the most recent years. We drop 45,664 observations reporting non-manufacturing
NIC codes. We remove a small number of observations (primarily in the early years of our sample)
which are exact duplicates in all fields, assuming these are erroneous multiple entries made from the
same questionnaire form. Due to the importance of revenue and productivity results, we remove
the 102,036 observations with missing revenues. We also drop the 9,095 observations with two or
more input revenue share flags, from the flagging process described below.
    With this intermediate sample, we use median regression to estimate revenue productivity
(TFPR) under a full Cobb-Douglas model in capital, labor, materials, and energy and assuming
constant returns to scale. This full Cobb-Douglas revenue productivity term is used only for the
final sample restriction, which is to drop 4,521 plant-years which have log-TFPR greater than 3.5 in
absolute value from the sample median. Such outlying TFPR values strongly suggest misreported
inputs or revenues. The final sample includes 615,721 plant-year observations, of which 362,151 are
from the sample scheme and 253,570 are from the census scheme.

C.B     Variable-Specific Sample Restrictions
After the final sample is determined, there may still be observations which have correct data for
most variables but misreported data for some individual variable. When analyzing specific variables
(such as self-generation share, energy revenue share, or output in Table 6), we therefore additionally
restrict the sample using the following criteria:

   • We generate “input revenue share flags” for labor and materials if input cost is more than
      two times revenues, and we generate input revenue share flags for electricity and fuels if input
      cost is greater than revenues.40 Because we also observe physical quantities for labor and
  40
     The flags would be slightly different if applied to deflated inputs and revenues, but this will have minimal
implications for the results.



                                                       54
Online Appendix                                               Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


                          Table A5: Determination of Base Sample

                                                         Dropped         Resulting
                    Step                                Observations    Sample Size
                    Original ASI dataset                                  949,992
                    Closed plants                         172,697         777,295
                    Missing state codes or in Sikkim          99          777,196
                    Non-manufacturing NIC codes            45,664         731,532
                    Exact duplicates                         311          731,221
                    Missing revenues                      102,036         629,185
                    Multiple input revenue share outliers   8,943         620,242
                    Productivity outliers                   4,521         615,721
                    Total observations                                    615,721
Notes: This table details how the sample in Panel B of Table 1 is   determined from the original set of
observations in the Annual Survey of Industries.


     electricity, we generate analogous input revenue share flags by multiplying physical quantities
     by prices, resulting in an implied revenue share based on these physical quantities. For
     electricity, we use the median real price (in Rs/kWh) of purchased electricity in any given
     state and year. For labor, we assume a very conservative 1,000 Rs per person per annum
     wage rate. When using either of these inputs as an outcome, we omit observations with an
     input revenue share flag for that input.

   • There are a trivial number of observations which report unrealistic count of workers (greater
     than 200,000 persons engaged), which we make missing in those cases.

   • We generate “within-plant outlier” flags for observations with unrealistically large year-to-
     year fluctuations in revenue, TFPR, or any input. We flag observations if the change in logged
     value is more than 3.5 (or 1.5 in a robustness check) from both adjacent observations. For a
     plants’ first or last year, an observation is flagged if the change is more than 3.5 (or 1.5) from
     the subsequent or previous observation.

C.B.1    Cleaning Electricity Variables

We clean plant electricity measures in the following ways:

   • We make electricity consumption missing for all observations (other than brick kilns) that
     report zero electricity consumption.

   • We make all electricity variables missing if the plant reports consuming more than 110 percent
     or less than 90 percent of the total amount of electricity they report purchasing and generating.

   • We make missing the values of electricity purchased and sold if the implied price per kilowatt-
     hour is less than 2 percent or more than 5,000 percent of the median grid electricity price


                                                 55
Online Appendix                                                  Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


         calculated across plants in the same state and year. We also make missing the reported
         quantities of electricity purchased and sold if the respective price flag is triggered.

C.B.2       Production Function and Productivity Estimation

We recover production function coefficients given by Equations (12), (13), and (15) for each of
the 143 three-digit industries in the dataset. (To ensure sufficient sample size in each three-digit
industry, we adjust industry definitions slightly to ensure each three-digit industry has at least 100
plant-year observations.) We use separate median regression for each two-digit industry, allowing
for a linear time trend and separate intercepts for each underlying three-digit industry. After
calculating production function coefficients, we compute TFPR using Equation (11).
   For our main TFPR estimates, we define materials to be the plant’s original reported materials
plus fuels not used for self-generation. This latter variable is: Total Fuel Cost - (7 Rs/kWh)×(kWh
Self-Generated), where 7 Rs/kWh is the median price reported in the 2005 World Bank Enterprise
Survey. This allows us to account for the plant’s full input costs when calculating production
function parameters and TFPR. (In regressions where we use materials as the outcome variable,
we use the original reported materials without adding any fuel costs.)
   We use several alternative methods for calculating production function coefficients and TFPR
for robustness checks, seen in Appendix Table A16. In the order of that table, these are:

   • Including or excluding all fuel costs from the materials variable

   • Removing the linear time trend when estimating production coefficients, which amounts to
         taking the unconditional median revenue share by industry

   • Relaxing the assumption that factor shares are constant by plant size, allowing all production
         function coefficients to vary by plant median ln(Revenue). To implement, we add ln(Revenue)
         as a term in the median regressions for αL , αM , and αE and then segment plants into five
         size classes when estimating αK in GMM.

   • Backing out the capital coefficient αK under an assumption of constant returns to scale

   • Assuming production is Leontief in electricity and calculating the capital coefficient under an
         assumption of constant returns to scale. (This is the approach in our original working paper.)

None of these changes affects the estimated coefficient by more than about half of the standard
error.




                                                     56
Online Appendix                                                  Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


D     Empirical Strategy Appendix
This appendix presents a table and figures that support the empirical strategy section.

                Table A6: Serial Correlation Tests for the Hydro Instrument


                                                         (1)      (2)
                                   1st Lag Z          0.107      0.111
                                                      (0.081)    (0.088)
                                   2nd Lag Z                     0.008
                                                                 (0.075)
                                   3rd Lag Z                     -0.130
                                                                (0.066)**
                                   4th Lag Z                     -0.104
                                                                 (0.083)
                                   5th Lag Z                     -0.025
                                                                 (0.068)
                                   Number of Obs.        540      420
                                   F-Stat                1.72     1.90
                                   R-Squared             0.01     0.07

Notes: This table presents regressions of the hydro instrument Zst on its lags. Robust standard errors.
*,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                    57
Online Appendix                                                   Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


                 Figure A4: Shortages and Hydro Generation in Karnataka




                    .8
                    .6
                    .4
                    .2
                    0




                         1990         1995            2000             2005               2010
                                                      year

                                   Shortage          Hydro Generation/Total Consumption


Notes: Shortage data are estimated by the Central Electricity Authority. Hydro Generation/Total Electricity
Consumption is a simplified version of the hydro availability instrument. The figure gives a simple graphical
example of the first stage of our IV estimator.




                                                     58
Online Appendix                                                                                                     Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell



                 Figure A5: Rainfall and Hydro Share of Electricity by State




                                         4
                                                                                                                                       Meghalaya



                    1992-2010 Mean Rainfall (meters)
                                                                   Andaman and Nicobar Islands

                                               3

                                                                     Assam

                                                                                                                Kerala
                                                                        Tripura
                                  2




                                                                  Nagaland
                                                                Manipur
                                                                 West Bengal
                                                                                                                Orissa
                                                                  CG      Tamil Nadu                                Himachal Pradesh                 UK
                                                                 Bihar
                                                                GA      MH      Andhra Pradesh    Karnataka
                       1




                                                                        UPMadhya Pradesh
                                                                  Gujarat                    Punjab
                                                                Chandigarh
                                                                Delhi                HaryanaJammu and Kashmir
                                                                             Rajasthan
                                         0




                                                               0                              .5                              1
                                                                          1992-2010 Mean of Hydro Generation/Total Consumption


Notes: This figure plots sample average annual rainfall against the mean ratio of hydroelectricity generation
to total electricity consumption. The figure emphasizes that there is substantial variation in hydro generation
conditional on rainfall.


 Figure A6: Hydro Share of Predicted Consumption Over Time in Five Large States
                                                         .6
                    Hydro Generation/Predicted Consumption
                    0          .2            .4




                                                              1990                 1995              2000                   2005                   2010

                                                                                       Andhra Pradesh                    Gujarat
                                                                                       Karnataka                         Uttar Pradesh
                                                                                       West Bengal                       India Average


Notes: This figure presents the ratio of hydro generation to predicted consumption over 1992-2010 for five
large states. Different states have different slopes, illustrating the importance of including state-specific time
trends as control variables.


                                                                                                  59
Online Appendix                                                           Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




              Figure A7: ln(Energy Available) Over Time in Five Large States
                               11.5     11
                    ln(Energy Available)
                     10      10.5
                               9.5




                                             1990   1995           2000       2005         2010

                                                       Andhra Pradesh      Gujarat
                                                       Karnataka           Uttar Pradesh
                                                       West Bengal


Notes: This figure presents the natural log of Energy Available over 1992-2010 for five large states. Different
states have different slopes, illustrating the importance of including state-specific time trends as control
variables.




                                                                 60
Online Appendix                                                      Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


E     Robustness Checks for Tables 6 and 7
This appendix presents robustness checks for Tables 6 and 7. We first present estimates from the
difference estimator. We then present a series of robustness checks for the fixed effects estimator,
including alternative weather controls, alternative instruments, and alternative constructions of
TFPR.

E.A     Estimates with Difference Estimator
Tables A7, A8, and A9 are analogous to Tables 5, 6, and 7, except that they use the difference
estimator. Mechanically, we difference each variable within-plant and run OLS regressions with the
differenced observations; the sample sizes thus differ from the fixed effects estimates. Note that
the initial and final years of a differenced observation are not necessarily one year apart due to the
irregularly-spaced ASI sample.

                     Table A7: First Stages Using the Difference Estimator
                                         Panel A: Energy Inputs
                                                (1)         (2)                    (3)
                         Second Stage        Self-Gen    ln(Fuel              ln(Electric
                         Dependent Var:       Share    Rev Share)              Intensity)
                         Hydro                -0.189      -0.193                 -0.174
                                           (0.0401)*** (0.0405)***           (0.0405)***
                         Obs.                177,822     234,384                363,572
                         Clusters               504        504                     506
                         Clusters (2)           505        505                     506
                         1st Stage F-Stat      22.15      22.68                   18.41
                                    Panel B: Other Inputs and Outputs
                                   (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)             (5)
        Second Stage                                           ln(Earnings/
        Dependent Var:       ln(Materials) ln(Workers)            Worker)     ln(Revenue)     ln(TFPR)
        Hydro                    -0.170          -0.170            -0.178        -0.170          -0.173
                              (0.0404)***     (0.0403)***       (0.0432)***   (0.0405)*** (0.0404)***
        Obs.                    378,256         385,716           332,324       384,713         360,996
        Clusters                   506             506               451           506             506
        Clusters (2)               506             506               451           506             506
        1st Stage F-Stat          17.69           17.66             16.98         17.67           18.24
Notes: This table presents the first stage estimates for the IV regressions, estimated using the difference
estimator. The dependent variable for these first stage regressions is Shortage Sst . Samples for columns 1 and
2 in Panel A are limited to plants that ever self-generate electricity.F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity
and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering
by state-by-initial year and state-by-final year of the differenced observation. *,**, ***: Statistically different
from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                        61
Online Appendix                                                     Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




   Table A8: Effects of Shortages on Energy Inputs Using the Difference Estimator

                                                  (1)             (2)          (4)
                                               Self-Gen         ln(Fuel   ln(Electric
                           Dependent Var:        Share       Rev Share) Intensity)
                                               Panel A: OLS
                           Shortage              0.274           0.874       -0.595
                                             (0.0383)*** (0.202)*** (0.132)***
                                                 Panel B: IV
                           Shortage              0.349           2.419        0.339
                                              (0.135)***      (0.713)***    (0.724)
                           Obs.                 177,822         234,384     363,572
                           Clusters               504             504          506
                           Clusters (2)           505             505          506
                           1st Stage F-Stat      22.15           22.68       18.41
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (21) using the difference estimator. Panel B instruments for
Shortage using hydro availability. Samples for columns 1 and 2 are limited to plants that ever self-generate
electricity. F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument
test. Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by state-by-initial year and state-by-final year of the
differenced observation. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence,
respectively.




Table A9: Effects of Shortages on Materials, Labor, Revenue, and TFPR Using the
Difference Estimator

                                  (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                                              ln(Earnings/
         Dependent Var:        ln(Materials) ln(Workers)         Worker)      ln(Revenue) ln(TFPR)
                                                Panel A: OLS
         Shortage                  0.0203        0.0254           0.201            0.158         0.0724
                                  (0.0841)      (0.0526)       (0.0508)***      (0.0762)**     (0.0394)*
                                                  Panel B: IV
         Shortage                  -0.959         -0.397          -0.243           -0.828        -0.106
                                 (0.460)**       (0.315)         (0.224)         (0.491)*       (0.238)
         Obs.                     378,256        385,716         332,324          384,713       360,996
         Clusters                    506           506             451              506           506
         Clusters (2)                506           506             451              506           506
         1st Stage F-Stat           17.69         17.66           16.98            17.67         18.24
Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (21) using the difference estimator. Panel B instruments
for Shortage using hydro availability. F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-
Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by state-by-initial year and
state-by-final year of the differenced observation. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and
99 percent confidence, respectively.



                                                        62
Online Appendix                                                      Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


E.B     Robustness Checks
This section presents robustness checks for Tables 6 and 7. Tables are organized separately for
each of the main outcomes for ease of comparison. Column 1 excludes industry-by-year effects
µjt . Column 2 uses a tolerance of 1.5 natural logs in the outlier flagging process described in
Online Appendix C.B, while column 3 does not exclude any flagged outliers. Columns 4 and 5
use ln(Energy Available) and Peak Shortage, respectively, instead of Shortage. Column 6 clusters
standard errors by state.
    We make two explanatory comments. First, the first stage F-statistics for ln(Energy Available)
in column 4 are smaller than when using Shortage as the endogenous variable in the main estimates,
which is unsurprising: unlike Shortage, ln(Energy Available) grows monotonically within states over
the sample, and the state-specific linear time trends ψs t do not control very well for different states’
actual growth rates. Second, the first stage F-statistics increase in two specifications when clustering
by state in column 6, and this may be a small sample bias from having only 30 state-level clusters.

                          Table A10: Robustness Checks: Energy Inputs

                                   (1)        (2)        (3)                 (4)           (5)          (6)
                                No Ind.-    Tighter      No                  Use          Use         Cluster
                                by-Year     Outlier    Outlier            ln(Energy       Peak          by
  Change from Base Spec:       Effects µjt   Flags      Flags             Available)    Shortage       State
                                         Self-Generation Share
  Shortage                        0.455      0.394      0.450                0.433        0.404         0.442
                               (0.156)*** (0.141)*** (0.158)***           (0.163)***    (0.169)**    (0.129)***
  Number of Obs.                 240,743    223,128    293,866              240,743      240,743       240,743
  First Stage F-Stat              15.08      16.97      17.02                9.285        9.705         35.12

                                             ln(Fuel Revenue Share)
  Shortage                        3.675            2.700     3.022      3.133             3.107         3.294
                               (1.158)***       (1.001)*** (1.298)** (1.215)***         (1.274)**    (0.961)***
  Number of Obs.                 291,759          268,663   300,697    291,759           291,759       291,759
  First Stage F-Stat              14.79            16.49     16.56      9.829             8.773         37.85

                                            ln(Electric Intensity)
   Shortage                       -0.177       -0.0320       0.0247        0.0764       0.0726        0.0926
                                 (0.735)       (0.708)      (0.753)       (0.616)       (0.591)       (0.694)
   Number of Obs.                479,616       453,482      483,843       479,616      479,616        479,616
   First Stage F-Stat              13.89        14.86         14.99         13.71        11.38         13.41
Notes: This table presents alternative estimates for Table 6, instrumenting for Shortage using hydro avail-
ability. Samples for the first two panels are limited to plants that ever self-generate electricity. F-statistic is
for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard errors,
with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and
99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                        63
Online Appendix                                                 Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




         Table A11: Robustness Checks: Materials, Labor, Revenue, and TFPR

                                   (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                                No Ind.-      Tighter      No          Use         Use        Cluster
                                by-Year       Outlier   Outlier     ln(Energy      Peak         by
    Change from Base Spec:     Effects µjt     Flags     Flags      Available)   Shortage      State
                                              ln(Materials)
    Shortage                     -1.048        -1.017    -1.237       -0.917       -0.915      -1.137
                                (0.548)*     (0.472)** (0.595)**    (0.392)**    (0.433)**   (0.561)**
    Number of Obs.              495,043       478,152   498,464      495,043      495,043     495,043
    First Stage F-Stat            13.20         14.20    14.22         13.91        10.29       12.52

                                               ln(Workers)
    Shortage                      -0.230       -0.253    -0.248       -0.195       -0.196      -0.243
                                 (0.358)      (0.311)   (0.349)      (0.260)      (0.271)     (0.391)
    Number of Obs.               502,724      496,474  503,217       502,724      502,724     502,724
    First Stage F-Stat             13.15        14.21    14.20         14.12        10.27       12.45

                                           ln(Earnings/Worker)
    Shortage                      -0.321        -0.384   -0.367       -0.234       -0.260      -0.267
                                 (0.239)      (0.220)*  (0.244)      (0.180)      (0.241)     (0.243)
    Number of Obs.               456,443       440,524  461,131      456,443      456,443     456,443
    First Stage F-Stat             13.45         14.76   14.45         12.49        7.354       9.508

                                               ln(Revenue)
    Shortage                     -1.050        -0.993    -1.255       -0.877      -0.880      -1.091
                                (0.555)*     (0.494)** (0.638)**    (0.385)**    (0.458)*    (0.646)*
    Number of Obs.              501,130       484,753   503,664      501,130     501,130     501,130
    First Stage F-Stat            13.13         14.02    14.19         14.04       10.22       12.45

                                                    ln(TFPR)
     Shortage                      -0.0733        -0.246     -0.408      -0.247      -0.242     -0.304
                                   (0.252)       (0.231)    (0.283)     (0.203)     (0.216)    (0.348)
     Number of Obs.                479,313      472,612     480,243     479,313    479,313    479,313
     First Stage F-Stat             13.86          14.98     14.84        14.05       10.99      13.28
Notes: This table presents alternative estimates for Table 7, instrumenting for Shortage using hydro avail-
ability. F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test.
Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different
from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                    64
Online Appendix                                                      Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


E.C     Alternative Weather Controls
This section presents estimates of Tables 6 and 7 with alternative weather controls. Column 1
controls linearly for rainfall instead of including rainfall bins. Columns 2 and 3 use 100mm and 50
mm rainfall bins, respectively, instead of 60mm bins. Column 4 uses rainfall data from the National
Climate Centre instead of the University of Delaware.

                   Table A12: Alternative Weather Controls: Energy Inputs

                                                 (1)   (2)                   (3)           (4)
                                                     100mm                  50mm          NCC
                                         Linear     Rainfall               Rainfall      Rainfall
               Change from Base Spec:   Rainfall      Bins                   Bins         Data
                                      Self-Generation Share
               Shortage                   0.412       0.458                  0.442         0.406
                                       (0.175)**   (0.155)***             (0.153)***    (0.150)***
               Rainfall                 0.00130
                                       (0.00892)
               First Stage F-Stat         16.12       19.05                 17.00         21.63

                                           ln(Fuel Revenue Share)
               Shortage                          2.797      3.049      3.294              1.901
                                              (1.052)*** (0.934)*** (1.032)***          (0.826)**
               Rainfall                          0.185
                                             (0.0663)***
               First Stage F-Stat                15.41      18.20      16.53              20.98

                                            ln(Electric Intensity)
               Shortage                        -0.0294       0.0583        0.0926        0.0894
                                               (0.775)      (0.696)       (0.755)       (0.665)
               Rainfall                        -0.0264
                                              (0.0358)
               First Stage F-Stat               15.37         18.12        14.98         18.57
Notes: This table presents alternative estimates for Table 6, instrumenting for Shortage using hydro avail-
ability. Samples for the first two panels are limited to plants that ever self-generate electricity. F-statistic is
for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard errors,
with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and
99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                        65
Online Appendix                                                   Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




  Table A13: Alternative Weather Controls: Materials, Labor, Revenue, and TFPR

                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                        100mm         50mm        NCC
                                              Linear    Rainfall     Rainfall    Rainfall
                 Change from Base Spec:      Rainfall     Bins         Bins       Data
                                               ln(Materials)
                 Shortage                      -0.969    -1.014        -1.137      -0.915
                                            (0.481)** (0.431)**      (0.511)**   (0.426)**
                 Rainfall                     -0.0118
                                             (0.0228)
                 First Stage F-Stat             14.99    17.56        14.23       18.42

                                                ln(Workers)
                 Shortage                      -0.219    -0.228        -0.243      -0.249
                                              (0.337)   (0.301)       (0.339)     (0.297)
                 Rainfall                    0.00649
                                             (0.0152)
                 First Stage F-Stat             14.93    17.49        14.19       18.30

                                         ln(Earnings/Worker)
                 Shortage                     -0.181   -0.214          -0.267      -0.189
                                             (0.206)  (0.191)         (0.218)     (0.190)
                 Rainfall                   0.00188
                                            (0.0116)
                 First Stage F-Stat            16.14   18.24          14.63       20.50

                                                ln(Revenue)
                 Shortage                      -0.913    -0.988        -1.091     -0.792
                                             (0.504)* (0.456)**      (0.536)**   (0.433)*
                 Rainfall                     -0.0262
                                             (0.0233)
                 First Stage F-Stat             14.87    17.44        14.17       18.25

                                                   ln(TFPR)
                   Shortage                      -0.299      -0.294     -0.304      -0.235
                                                (0.254)     (0.232)    (0.259)     (0.221)
                   Rainfall                     -0.0142
                                               (0.0116)
                   First Stage F-Stat             15.55      18.13      14.90       18.87
Notes: This table presents alternative estimates for Table 7, instrumenting for Shortage using hydro avail-
ability. F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test.
Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different
from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                     66
Online Appendix                                               Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


E.D    Alternative Instruments
This section presents estimates of Tables 6 and 7 with alternative instruments. Column 1 repli-
cates the base estimates except using actual hydro generation instead of generation predicted from
reservoirs and run-of-river plants. Columns 2 and 3 add Nst , the predicted generation from plants
that came online in the previous year, as an additional supply shifter to increase power. Because
Indian states are still not large compared to generation from a single plant, new plants generate
lumpy reductions in shortages the year they come online. Power plants have a long and potentially
unpredictable time-to-build, so we assume that the year that a plant comes online is exogenous
conditional on state trends. The instrument in columns 2 and 3 is:

                                                Hst + Nst
                                        Zst =             .                                     (23)
                                                   Q̃st
   To get Nst , we simply multiply the capacity added in the previous year by the national average
thermal plant capacity factor in year t. Column 2 uses Hst from reservoirs and run-of-river plants
(as in the base estimates), while column 3 instead uses actual hydro generation (as in column 1).
   The results below show that adding Nst provides a moderate increase in precision but does not
otherwise change the results. We used this in an earlier working paper version, although it does
not appear in the body of the published version due to concerns about the exogeneity of Nst .




                                                67
Online Appendix                                                    Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




                      Table A14: Alternative Instruments: Energy Inputs

                                               (1)          (2)          (3)
                                              Base         With New Supply
                                            Actual    Predicted with   Actual
                                             Hydro     Run-of-River     Hydro
                      Instrument:         Generation and Reservoirs Generation
                                         Self-Generation Share
                      Shortage               0.794         0.463        0.788
                                          (0.176)***    (0.142)***   (0.167)***
                      Number of Obs.        240,743       240,743      240,743
                      First Stage F-Stat     17.61         19.74        19.44

                                         ln(Fuel Revenue Share)
                      Shortage                 3.597       3.318                3.596
                                            (1.049)***  (0.955)***           (1.003)***
                      Number of Obs.          291,759     291,759              291,759
                      First Stage F-Stat       17.76       19.36                19.72

                                          ln(Electric Intensity)
                      Shortage                -1.392            0.173            -1.217
                                             (0.718)*          (0.698)          (0.673)*
                      Number of Obs.         479,616           479,616          479,616
                      First Stage F-Stat       14.24            17.73             16.18
Notes: This table presents estimates of Table 6 with alternative instruments. Samples for the first two
panels are limited to plants that ever self-generate electricity. F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and
cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by
plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence,
respectively.




                                                      68
Online Appendix                                                  Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




      Table A15: Alternative Instruments: Materials, Labor, Revenue, and TFPR

                                                (1)           (2)           (3)
                                              Base           With New Supply
                                            Actual     Predicted with    Actual
                                             Hydro      Run-of-River      Hydro
                     Instrument:          Generation and Reservoirs Generation
                                               ln(Materials)
                     Shortage                -1.370         -1.216        -1.415
                                           (0.607)**      (0.473)**     (0.576)**
                     Number of Obs.         495,043        495,043       495,043
                     First Stage F-Stat       13.88          17.05        15.89

                                               ln(Workers)
                     Shortage                -0.232         -0.302           -0.280
                                            (0.356)        (0.313)          (0.341)
                     Number of Obs.         502,724       502,724           502,724
                     First Stage F-Stat       13.82         16.99            15.82

                                        ln(Earnings/Worker)
                     Shortage               -0.542      -0.225                -0.487
                                          (0.270)**    (0.199)              (0.247)**
                     Number of Obs.        456,443    456,443                456,443
                     First Stage F-Stat      13.25      17.09                 15.07

                                               ln(Revenue)
                     Shortage                -1.019        -1.182            -1.097
                                            (0.586)*     (0.498)**          (0.560)*
                     Number of Obs.         501,130       501,130           501,130
                     First Stage F-Stat       13.84        16.95              15.83

                                                ln(TFPR)
                     Shortage                0.158           -0.297            0.128
                                            (0.274)         (0.236)           (0.257)
                      Number of Obs.        479,313         479,313           479,313
                      First Stage F-Stat     14.21            17.75            16.22
Notes: This table presents estimates of Table 6 with alternative instruments. F-statistic is for the het-
eroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test. Robust standard errors, with
two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99
percent confidence, respectively.




                                                    69
Online Appendix                                                 Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


E.E    Alternative TFPR Measures
Table A16 presents estimates of Equation (21), using alternative measures of TFPR described in
Appendix C.B.2.

      Table A16: Robustness Check: Estimates with Alternative TFPR Measures


                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
                                  Include     Include    No Time     α Varies             Leontief
                                  All Fuels   No Fuels    Trend      by Size     CRS       CRS
        Shortage                    -0.285     -0.150      -0.097     -0.112    -0.110     -0.211
                                   (0.240)     (0.248)    (0.211)     (0.212)   (0.221)    (0.266)
        Number of Obs.             479,609    479,484     480,100    494,210    479,755   477,720
        Number of Clusters         112,405    112,330     112,472    115,015    112,397   112,014
        Number of Clusters (2)       536        536         536        536        536       536
        First Stage F-Stat          14.87      14.88       14.84      14.32      14.85     14.89

Notes: F-statistic is for the heteroskedasticity and cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test.
Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically different
from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                    70
Online Appendix                                                        Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


E.F    Heterogeneous Effects of Shortages
Table A17 presents estimates of heterogeneous effects of shortages for plants with generators and
for plants in industries with above-median electric intensity. Denote Mi as a 3-by-1 vector of these
two moderators and a constant. The estimating equation is identical to Equation 21 except with
Mi interacted with all right-hand-side variables other than µjt .
   Table A17 presents the estimated interactions with the Shortage variable. As expected, column
2 shows that self-generators increase fuel use more when shortages worsen, while non-generators do
not. However, we do not have the power to detect heterogeneous effects on revenues or TFPR. As
a benchmark, in the World Bank Enterprise Survey, generators and non-generators report 7.3 and
8.4 percent losses from power cuts, respectively - a ratio of 8.4/7.3≈1.15. Our revenue estimates
are statistically indistinguishable from this benchmark ratio.
   These empirical results are not interpretable as the average causal effects of generator ownership,
because endogenous generator adoption decisions could imply that the plants without generators
have unobservably smaller losses. For example, plants without generators might have unobservably
better electricity supply, reducing their losses from not adopting generators and also reducing the
effects of an increase in shortages.

                        Table A17: Heterogeneous Effects of Shortages


                                            (1)           (2)                 (3)          (4)
                                         Self-Gen       ln(Fuel
             Dependent Variable:          Share        Rev Share)         ln(Revenue)   ln(TFPR)
             Shortage                     -0.027            -0.867          -0.478       -0.201
                                          (0.065)           (1.748)         (0.695)      (0.445)
             Shortage x Elec Intensive     0.022            0.189           -0.936        0.130
                                          (0.131)           (2.181)         (1.212)      (0.551)
             Shortage x Self-Generator     0.470            4.050           -0.384       -0.413
                                         (0.155)***        (1.956)**        (0.716)      (0.386)
             Number of Obs.               428,969          477,005          501,130      479,313
             Number of Clusters           102,995          109,715          116,231      112,371
             Number of Clusters (2)         536              536              536          536

Notes: Robust standard errors, with two-way clustering by plant and state-year. *,**, ***: Statistically
different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                      71
Online Appendix                                               Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


F     Simulation Appendix
This appendix presents full detail on the simulations, as well as additional robustness checks using
different assumed production functions.

F.A     Simulation Inputs
Table A18 presents the sources of the parameters used in the simulations.

                                   Table A18: Simulation Inputs

       Parameter             Source                                               Level
       αK , αL , αM , αE     Production function estimates from ASI               Industry Level
       δ                     Shortage Sst from CEA or other assumed value         State-Year
       Generator ownership Inferred from non-zero electricity generation in ASI   Plant
       K                     Capital stock in ASI                                 Plant-Year
       Ω                     Estimated revenue productivity                       Plant-Year
         M   L
       p ,p ,p               Normalized to 1                                      Constant
       pE,G =4.5 Rs/kWh      Median grid electricity price from WBES              Constant
         E,S
       p =7 Rs/kWh           Median self-generated electricity cost from WBES     Constant
Notes: WBES refers to the 2005 World Bank Enterprise Survey.



F.B     Exogenous Generators: Cobb-Douglas
This section presents full details on how the simulations in Section VI determine optimal input
and output bundles conditional on exogenous generator ownership. Here we present the Cobb-
Douglas model in Section III; subsequent sections present alternative models (Leontief and Constant
Elasticity of Substitution).
    The procedure takes production function parameters {αE , αL , αM , αK } and exogenous state
variables capital Kit , productivity Ωit , and shortages δit . The optimal input choices of labor and
materials are solved using profit maximization conditions, and L∗ , M ∗G , M ∗S , E ∗G , E ∗S , and
R∗ are determined (where the superscripts S and G refer to shortage and non-shortage – grid –
respectively) . This procedure is repeated for each plant i observed in the ASI data.

    1. Plants without generators
      The optimal input bundles can be found analytically, using the first-order conditions. Non-
      generators shut down during outages, so M S = E S = 0. The first-order condition for materials
                                   ∂πitτ
      during non-outage periods,   ∂Mitτ   = 0, yields

                                   αM ΩK αK [M G ]αM −1 LαL [E G ]αE = pM .                        (24)




                                                   72
Online Appendix                                                             Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


                                                     ∂πitτ
     Analogously, the FOC for electricity,           ∂Eitτ   = 0, yields

                                     αE ΩK αK [M G ]αM LαL [E G ]αE −1 = pE,G .                                             (25)

                                         ∂πit
     Finally, the FOC for labor,         ∂Lit   = 0 yields

                                αL (1 − δ)ΩK αK [M G ]αM LαL −1 [E G ]αE = pL .                                             (26)


     Rearranging these three equations, we obtain:
                          "                     1−αL −αE                  αL           αE # 1−αL −α1 M −αE
                                         αM                   (1 − δ)αL              αE
                                     
                    ∗G          αK
                M        = ΩK
                                         pM                       pL                pE,G
                                   pM αL ∗G                                                                                 (27)
                    L∗ = (1 − δ)         M
                                   pL αM
                          pM αE ∗G
                E ∗G =           M
                          p E αM

     Annual revenue is thus:

                                   R = (1 − δ)ΩK αK [M ∗G ]αM [L∗ ]αL [E ∗G ]αE


     Notice that if there are no shortages; δ = 0, the same equations can also be used to determine
     optimal input bundles for all plants (assuming that pE,G < pE,S ).

  2. Plants with generators
                                                    ∂πitτ           ∂πitτ          ∂πitτ          ∂πitτ              ∂πit
     There are five first-order conditions,            S
                                                    ∂Mitτ
                                                             = 0,      G
                                                                    ∂Mitτ
                                                                            = 0,     S
                                                                                   ∂Eitτ
                                                                                           = 0,     G
                                                                                                  ∂Eitτ
                                                                                                          = 0, and   ∂Lit   = 0.
     These yield



                                          αM ΩK αK [M G ]αM −1 LαL [E G ]αE = pM
                                           αM ΩK αK [M S ]αM −1 LαL [E S ]αE = pM
                                           αM ΩK αK [M S ]αM LαL [E S ]αE −1 = pE,S
                                                                                                                            (28)
                                          αM ΩK αK [M G ]αM LαL [E G ]αE −1 = pE,G
                                αL (1 − δ)ΩK αK [M G ]αM LαL −1 [E G ]αE
                                     +αL δpΩK αK [M S ]αM LαL −1 [E S ]αE = pL

     The set of equations in system (28) are solved numerically in MATLAB using the fsolve rou-
     tine. Rather than solving for L∗ , E ∗G , E ∗,S , M ∗G , and M ∗S in levels, we solve in logarithms,
     since these values can differ by several orders of magnitude for different plants in the data.


                                                             73
Online Appendix                                                             Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


      The starting values for L∗ , E ∗G , E ∗S , M ∗G , and M ∗S are given by the analytic values from
      equation (27), the no-shortage values.
      Annual revenue is:

                                           R =(1 − δ)ΩK αK [M ∗G ]αM [L∗ ]αL [E ∗G ]αE
                                               + δΩK αK [M ∗S ]αM [L∗ ]αL [E ∗S ]αE

F.C     Exogenous Generators: Leontief in Electricity
Our original working paper used production functions that were Leontief in electricity and a Cobb-
Douglas aggregate of capital, labor, and materials. For comparison, we include this below.
    Denoting physical productivity as A, the physical production function is:

                                                                    1
                                            Q = min{AK αK LαL M αM , E}                                       (29)
                                                                    λ
                                                                                                                 1
    The Leontief production function dictates that electricity is used in constant proportion                    λ
with output. Electricity intensity λ varies across industries. Having A inside the Cobb-Douglas
aggregator ensures that electricity is used in fixed proportion to output instead of to the bundle of
other inputs.
    Since we will observe total revenues rather than physical quantities produced, we need to relate
revenues to our production function in equation (29). We assume that plants sell into a perfectly
competitive output market with price p, and denote Ω ≡ pA.
    Firms have the following daily profit function Πitτ :

                                                                    αM 1
                                       Πitτ =p min{Ait KitαK LαitL Mitτ , Eitτ }
                                                                         λ                                    (30)
                                                 L        M            E
                                             − p Lit − p Mitτ − p Eitτ ,

where pL pM are the prices of labor and materials, respectively. Capital is excluded, as it is sunk
before the plant makes any production decisions.
    Given the Leontief-in-electricity structure of production, cost minimization implies that for any
desired level of output Q, the firm produces at a “corner” of the isoquant where:

                                                                        1
                                               Ait KitαK LαitL Mitτ
                                                                αM
                                                                    =     Eitτ ,                              (31)
                                                                        λ

    Given this, one can rewrite the profit function, substituting in Ωit and the optimized value of
electricity:

                                            λpE
                           Πitτ = (1 −          )Ωit Ait KitαK LαitL Mitτ
                                                                      αM
                                                                          − pL Lit − pM Mitτ                  (32)
                                             p

               λpE,G       pE,G Eitτ       pE,G Eit
    Let γ ≡      p     =    pQitτ      =     Rit ,    the electricity revenue share if a firm only uses electricity

                                                              74
Online Appendix                                                            Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


purchased from the grid. Notice that if (1 − γ) < 0, then the firm will choose not to produce.
         There are three cases that can occur, depending on electricity intensity and the relative price
of electricity:

     1. If p > λpE,S , the plant always produces, regardless of power outages.

     2. If λpE,S > p > λpE,G , the plant does not produce during power outages, but does produce
           otherwise.

     3. If p < λpE,G , the plant never produces.

We ignore case (3): if plants never produce, they never appear in the data. Plants without genera-
tors effectively have pE,S = ∞, so case (1) cannot arise. Of the plants with generators, those with
higher λ will be in case (2). In other words, higher-electricity intensity plants will be more likely
to shut down during grid power outages.41
         The first-order condition with respect to materials yields:

                                                              Ritτ
                                               αM (1 − γ)          − pM = 0.                                           (33)
                                                              Mitτ

         The marginal revenue product of materials is:
                                                
                                                αM (1 − γ) Ritτ          if grid power
                                                               Mitτ
                                  M RP M =                                                                             (34)
                                                T α (1 −         Ritτ
                                                    M          γ) M itτ
                                                                          if power outage

         When setting labor, the firm begins with its yearly profit function, which is simply the weighted
average of Equation (32) over grid power and outage periods. If a plant is in case (1), meaning
that it self-generates during power outages, then the first-order condition is given by:
                                                          "                         #
                                                             RG      RS
                                  M RP L = αL (1 − γ) (1 − δ) it + δT it = pL ,                                        (35)
                                                             Lit     Lit

       S and RG indicate revenues during outage and grid power periods, respectively.
where Rit     it
                                                                                           λpE,G               λpE,S
         We now solve for profit-maximizing inputs and output. Define γ G ≡                  p     and γ S ≡     p     .

     1. If in Case 3:
           The plant never produces. Thus L∗ = M ∗G = M ∗S = E ∗G = E ∗S = R∗ = 0.

     2. If in Case 2 (including non-generators with γ G < 1):
           The plant operates when there is grid power, but not during an outage. The optimal input
           bundles can be found analytically, using the first-order conditions. Clearly, M ∗S = 0. The
    41
         While a firm would not invest in a generator if it expected to be in case (2), unexpected changes in p, pE,S , or
    E,G
p         could cause firms with generators to not use them.



                                                               75
Online Appendix                                                           Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


                                                                 ∂πitτ
     FOC for materials during grid power periods,                ∂Mitτ   = 0, yields

                                       αM (1 − γ G )ΩK αK [M G ]αM −1 LαL = pM .                           (36)

                             ∂πit
     The FOC for labor,      ∂Lit     = 0 yields

                                  αL (1 − γ G )(1 − δ)ΩK αK [M G ]αM LαL −1 = pL .                         (37)


     Rearranging these first-order equation, we obtain
                                  "                           1−αL                 αL # 1−αL1−αM
                                                         αM              (1 − δ)αL
                                                     
                       M ∗G = (1 − γ)ΩK αK
                                                         pM                  pL
                                                                                                      .    (38)
                                       pM αL ∗G
                           L∗ = (1 − δ) L   M
                                       p αM

     Given labor and material choices, it is straightforward to compute revenue:

                                              R = ΩK αK [M ∗G ]αM [L∗ ]αL .

     Electricity consumption is:
                                                         E ∗G = γ S R

     Notice that if there are no shortages; δ = 0, the same equations can also be used to get
     optimal input bundles and revenue for all plants.

  3. If in Case 1 (plants with generators only):
     The plant always operates, running its generator during outages. There are three first-order
                   ∂πitτ          ∂πitτ              ∂πit
     conditions,      S
                   ∂Mitτ
                           = 0,      G
                                  ∂Mitτ
                                          = 0, and   ∂Lit   = 0.



                                          αM (1 − γ G )pΩK αK [M G ]αM −1 LαL = pM
                                          αM (1 − γ S )pΩK αK [M S ]αM −1 LαL = pM
                                                                                                           (39)
                                  αL (1 − γ G )(1 − δ)pΩK αK [M G ]αM LαL −1
                                        +αL δ(1 − γ S )pΩK αK [M S ]αM LαL −1 = pL

     The system of equations in (39) is solved numerically in MATLAB using the fsolve routine.
     Finally, electricity usage is

                                       E ∗G = (1 − δ)γ G ΩK αK [M ∗G ]αM [L∗ ]αL
                                        E ∗S = δγ S ΩK αK [M ∗G ]αM [L∗ ]αL .


                                                            76
Online Appendix                                                                    Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


      Annual revenue is:

                                       R =(1 − δ)ΩK αK [M ∗G ]αM [L∗ ]αL
                                                 + δΩK αK [M ∗S ]αM [L∗ ]αL

F.D     Exogenous Generators: Constant Elasticity of Substitution
One issue with the production functions that we have considered is that there is no direct intertem-
poral substitution in production. Suppose instead that we consider a CES aggregator with constant
elasticity of substitution σ between days given by:

                                                     ˆ                       1
                                                                               σ
                                                                        σ
                                             Rit =           (Ritτ ) dτ
                                                         τ

Notice that this is a CES type aggregator, so there is symmetric substitution across all days of
the year. If σ = 1, we have the process considered in the paper. If σ < 1, outputs are interday
complements, and if σ > 1, then there is inter-day substitution.
   Given that in the daily production function, only materials and electricity can be varied, we
can think of the daily production function as being written as:

                                                         ˆ                                     1
                                                                                                 σ
                           Rit =     Ωit KitαK LαitL             Eitτ   σαE
                                                                              Mitτ   σαM
                                                                                           dτ
                                                             τ

   Notice that the daily returns to scale in the production function will be given by σ(αM + αE ),
an issue we return to below.

F.D.1    First-Order Conditions for Non-Generators

For firms that do not have generators, revenue is:


                                ˆ                 1
                                                     σ
                                             σ
                        Rit =        (Ritτ ) dτ
                                 τ
                                                                                    1
                                      σαM σαE σαL σαK σ
                           = [(1 − δ)Mitτ Eitτ Lit Kit ]
                                         1
                                        αM αL αE αK
                           = (1 − δ) σ Mitτ Lit Eitτ Kit                                                            (40)
                                                           αM                     αE
                                                   Mit                    Eit
                                             
                                         1
                           = (1 − δ) σ                                                     LαitL KitαK
                                                 (1 − δ)                (1 − δ)
                                         1
                           = (1 − δ) σ −αM −αE MitαM EitαE LαitL KitαK

   where we have assumed that the same input choice will be optimal across days to go from
the first to the second line of this equation. Notice that shortages can cause anything between a
zero and infinite decrease in revenues by changing σ, holding inputs fixed. Thus, our predictions
are not robust to a range of σ. Moreover, the only difference between this setup and the setup


                                                             77
Online Appendix                                                                          Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


                                                                                                                      1
without intertemporal substitution is that the plant’s revenue decreases by (1 − δ) σ −αM −αE instead
of (1 − δ)1−αM −αE .

F.D.2       First-Order Conditions for Generators

The profit function is:
                                               ˆ                           ˆ                           ˆ
                          Πit = Rit − pM            Mitτ dτ − pE                   Eitτ dτ − pL             Litτ dτ         (41)
                                                τ                              τ                        τ

                                                                                                       ∂Πit
       For plants with generators, the materials first-order condition,                               ∂Mitτ   = 0, yields

                                                     1
                                                     σ −1
                                               1     1    Rσ
                                                 Rit σ σαM itτ = pM .                                                       (42)
                                               σ          Mitτ

       The electricity FOC is similar:
                                                      1
                                                      σ −1
                                                   1     1   Rσ
                                                     Rit σ αE itτ = pE .                                                    (43)
                                                   σ         Eitτ
                         ∂Πit
       The labor FOC,    ∂Lit   = 0, yields:

                                    1
                                                                                             
                                    σ −1
                                               
                                                                  G
                                                                 Rit       σ              S
                                                                                         Rit     σ
                                1     1
                                                                                                      = pL ,
                                  R   σ
                                           σαL (1 − δ)                        +δ                                           (44)
                                σ it                             Litτ                    LSitτ

              G = ΩLαL (M G )αM (E G )αE K αK and RS = ΩLαL (M S )αM (E S )αE K αK . The set of the
       where Rit                                   it
equations (42,43,44) are solved numerically in MATLAB using the fsolve routine. Rather than
solving for L∗ , E ∗G , E ∗,S , M ∗G , and M ∗S in levels, we solve in logarithms.

F.E       Comparing Predictions from Cobb-Douglas, Leontief, and CES Models
Table A19 presents the simulated effects of the 2005 assessed Shortage levels Ss2005 relative to zero
shortage. Indeed, Table A19 replicates Panel A of Table 9. Column 1 shows the Cobb-Douglas
production function used in the body of the paper. Column 2 presents the Leontief model, while
columns 3 and 4 present results of the CES model with σ = 0.9 and σ = 0.5, respectively.42 The
predictions from the Cobb-Douglas and Leontief model are virtually identical, despite the different
functional forms and different approaches to production function estimation. In the CES model,
simulated losses are almost identical for plants with generators, but much larger for non-generators.
  42
     Using a higher value of σ such as σ = 1.5 yields the implication that a firm will have increasing returns at the
daily level, since the returns to scale in the daily production function are σ(αM + αE ), so σ(αM + αE ) > 1 means that
it is optimal to produce all output on a single day of the year. For the CES simulation, we use production function
coefficients αE , αL , αM , αK , and Ω, estimated from the Cobb-Douglas model. However, for non-generators, the CES
α coefficients can be estimated using the same equations as in the Cobb-Douglas model, and recall that there is little
difference in the estimates for generators and non-generators.


                                                                 78
Online Appendix                                                         Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


               Table A19: Predictions from Different Production Function Models

                                                Cobb-Douglas      Leontief    CES σ = 0.9     CES σ = 0.5
                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)             (3)
            Revenue Loss: Average                   5.6%           5.7%          7.5%            18%
            Revenue Loss: Non-Generators           10.0%           9.8%          13%             32%
            Revenue Loss: Generators                0.4%           0.6%          0.4%            0.4%

         TFPR Loss: Average                     1.5%          1.3%         1.9%             5.8%
         TFPR Loss: Non-Generators              2.6%          2.4%         3.5%            10.6%
         TFPR Loss: Generators                  0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%
Notes: This table presents the effects of the 2005 assessed Shortage levels relative to zero Shortage. Cobb-
Douglas, Leontief, and CES, refer to the production functions used for estimation and prediction, and are
described in text.


F.F        Endogenous Generators
For the model with endogenous generators, the equations given in Online Appendix F.B above are
used to obtain the optimal input bundle, conditional on the presence of a generator at the plant.
In this model, however, we also endogenously solve for generator adoption.
       Plant i purchases a generator if and only if ΠGit −CitG > ΠN G , where ΠG and ΠN G are profitability
with and without generators, respectively, and CitG is the annualized generator cost.
       Profits ΠG and ΠN G are both
                                                                  
               Πit = Rit − pL L∗ − pM δM ∗G + (1 − δ)M ∗S − δpE,S E ∗S − (1 − δ)pE,G E ∗G ,                      (45)

       where optimal inputs are according to the equations in Online Appendix F.B above.

F.F.1        Estimating Generator Costs

We parametrize the generator cost as ln CitG = σ0 + σ1 ln(cit ), where σ1 is the economy of scale
parameter, and cit is the generator capacity in kilowatts. We estimate σ0 and σ1 using GMM,
matching the mean generator adoption rate and the covariance between generator adoption and
log generator capacity. We use the identity matrix as a weighting matrix, since the two moments
that we match are of comparable scales. Column 1 of Table A20 presents GMM estimates of the
generator cost function.
       For comparison, we collected generator purchase price data from the United States. To compare
to the estimated C G , we must first convert the purchase prices into yearly rental prices. First,
we convert generators rated in KVA into KW using a 0.8 conversion ratio. Second, we convert
US dollars into Rupees using a 50 to 1 exchange rate. Finally, we convert the purchase price of a
generator into an annual rental price assuming a 30 percent discount rate, a ten percent depreciation
rate, and a ten-year generator lifespan.43 This gives a 1.6:1 ratio between generator costs and rental
  43
       This 30 percent discount rate is high by U.S. standards, but as Banerjee and Duflo (2014) discuss, Indian firms


                                                           79
Online Appendix                                                           Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


                                  Table A20: Generator Cost Estimates

                                                                  (1)                    (2)
                                                             GMM Estimates         Observed Prices
                    σ0                                          10.67                   11.14
                                                                (0.18)                 (0.25)
                    σ1                                           0.83                   0.79
                    (economy of scale)                          (0.01)                 (0.05)

                 Observations                              33,871               223
                 Predicted Generator Takeup Rate             0.53               0.47
                 Covariance: Generator Takeup
                 and Generator Size                          0.63               0.72
Note: Column 1 shows estimates of generator cost using generator adoption decisions via GMM as described
in text. Column 2 shows a regression of log generator rental rate on log generator capacity.


rates. Column 2 presents a regression of the natural logs of these observed prices on natural log of
capacity.
    The estimates of σ1 are close to 0.8 in both columns of Table A20. The estimates of σ0 are also
comparable (10.67 vs. 11.14), although the point estimate in column 1 is smaller. This gives us
some confidence that the estimated generator costs are approximately reasonable and that generator
costs can explain the fact that many manufacturing plants in the ASI do not have generators.




pay far higher interest rates - on the order of 30 to 60 percent, if they have access to capital at all.


                                                           80
Online Appendix                                  Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


F.G   Additional Simulation Figures and Tables




                                     81
Online Appendix                                                     Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




               Figure A8: Predicted Average Revenue Loss by Simulation Year



                                     10
              Percent Revenue Loss




                                      8


                                      6


                                      4


                                      2


                                      0
                                          1990   1995        2000          2005             2010
                                                             year


Notes: In the body of the paper, we simulate effects of moving from δ = 0 to δ = Ss2005 for all plants in the
data in 2005. This figure presents revenue effects from the same simulations for each year of the 1992-2010
sample, i.e. taking the sample of plants in year t and changing δ from δ = 0 to δ = Sst .




                                                        82
Online Appendix                                                   Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




                 Figure A9: Generator Adoption Under Varying Shortage Levels

                                 1



                                 .8
              Generator Uptake




                                 .6



                                 .4



                                 .2



                                 0
                                      0   .05             .1               .15               .2
                                                     Shortage


Note: These figures show the simulated generator adoption rate when the δ on the x-axis is assigned to all
plants in the 2005 ASI, using the generator adoption model in Section VI.A.1. Note that generator takeup
exceeds 90 percent at a seven percent δ, which may seem puzzling given that the generator cost estimates
are based on a 44 percent takeup rate in the ASI at a 7.2 percent mean shortage. The reason is that the
distribution of Ss2005 across plants is right skewed; the median of Ss2005 across plants is only 3.5 percent.




                                                     83
Online Appendix                                                   Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell



    Table A21: Effect of Shortages: Semi-elasticities from Model and IV Estimates
                                                          (1)        (2)            (3)
                                                                                  p-Value
                                                                      IV       for Columns
                                                      Simulation Estimate       (1) vs. (2)
                     Self-Generation Share Increase     0.29%        0.44%         (0.33)
                     Materials Reduction                0.91%        1.14%         (0.66)
                     Labor Reduction                    0.91%        0.24%         (0.05)
                     Revenue Loss                       0.91%        1.09%         (0.74)
                     TFPR Loss                          0.19%        0.30%         (0.66)
Note: This table parallels columns 1 and 2 of Panel A of Table 9, except that it presents semi-elasticities,
i.e. the effect of a one percentage point increase in shortages on percent changes in the dependent variable.




                                                     84
Online Appendix                                                     Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell




                 Table A22: Counterfactuals Under Varying Shortage Levels


                                                            (1)    (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)
                 Shortage Percent (δ):                      3%     5%      7%     10%      20%
                 Exogenous Generators
                 Revenue Loss: Average                   2.5%     4.2%    5.8%    8.3%    16%
                 Revenue Loss: Generators                0.2%     0.3%    0.5%    0.6%    1.3%
                 Revenue Loss: Non-Generators            4.5%     7.4%    10%     15%     28%

                 TFPR Loss: Average                      0.5%     0.9%    1.3%    1.9%    3.9%

                 Input Cost Increase: Generators         0.2%     0.3%    0.4%    0.5%    1.0%

                 Variable Profit Loss: Average           2.5%     4.2%    5.8%    8.2%    16%
                 Generator Cost (Percent of Profits)     3.0%     3.0%    3.0%    3.1%    3.2%
                 Total Profit Loss: Average              5.5%     7.2%    8.8%    12%     19%

                 Endogenous Generators
                 Generator Take-up                          66%   85%     91%     94%      98%

                 Revenue Loss: Average                   1.7%     1.4%    1.3%    1.3%    1.7%
                 Revenue Loss: Generators                0.2%     0.3%    0.4%    0.6%    1.2%
                 Revenue Loss: Non-Generators            4.2%     7.1%    10%     15%     29%

                 TFPR Loss: Average                      0.4%     0.2%    0.2%    0.2%    0.1%

                 Input Cost Increase: Generators         0.1%     0.2%    0.3%    0.5%    1.0%

                 Variable Profit Loss: Average           1.7%     1.4%    1.2%    1.2%    1.5%
                 Generator Cost (Percent of Profits)     1.6%     2.7%    3.4%    3.8%    4.6%
                 Total Profit Loss: Average              3.3%     4.1%    4.6%    5.1%    6.1%

Notes: This table presents predictions of the simulation model described in the text. The simulations with
“exogenous” generators hold fixed the generator adoption decision observed in the ASI, while the simulations
with “endogenous” generators use the model’s prediction of which plants will purchase generators at the
different shortage levels. Input Cost Increase is reported as a share of revenues. In this table, the electricity
shortage is uniform across all plants in all states.




                                                       85
Online Appendix                                              Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell


References
 [1] Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2014). “Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Con-
     straints Using a Directed Lending Program.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 81, pp. 572–607.

 [2] MOSPI (Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (2014). “Annual Survey of Industries.”
    Available at:   http://mospi.nic.in/Mospi_New/upload/asi/ASI_main.htm?status=1&menu_id=88.
    Accessed 17 December 2014.




                                                 86
